1
1Q.Define the terms colonization, infestation, infection,
bacteremia, sepsis and septic shock.
/square6Colonization:  It is the simple presence of potentially
pathogenic microbes on a body surface (like on the
skin, mouth, intestines or airway) without causingdisease. However, colonization may progress toinfection.
/square6Infestation:  Refers to presence of parasites inside
or on the host.
/square6Infection:  Invasion and multiplication of patho-
genic microorganisms in a body part or tissue,
which may produce subsequent tissue injury and
progress to overt disease through a variety ofcellular or toxic mechanisms. Infection can belocalized, as in pharyngitis, or widespread as insepsis.
/square6Bacteremia:  Presence of bacteria in the bloodstream
is called bacteremia. It can result from day do dayactivities such as toothbrushing or can be a resultof an infection in the body. Bacteremia usually doesnot cause any symptoms such as fever and often
usually resolves on its own. However, rarely it can
progress to sepsis and septic shock.
/square6Sepsis:  It is presence and multiplication of micro-
organisms in the blood which triggers an immune
response and makes the patient symptomatic.
Sepsis is usually associated with fever, weakness,tachycardia, tachypnea and multiorgan dysfunction.
/square6Septic shock:  Sepsis that causes dangerously low
blood pressure is called septic shock. It carries high
morbidity and mortality.
Q.Discuss the serological (immunological) methods
used in the diagnosis of infectious diseases.
/square6Serological (immunological) methods involve detec-
tion of antigen or antibody of a microorganism in a
given sample. These are as follows.– Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
– Rapid immunochromatographic test– Western blot (immunoblot) test– Immunofluorescence test
– Complement fixation test
– Agglutination test– Immunodiffusion– Immunoelectrophoresis
Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA)
/square6ELISA or the enzyme immunoassay (EIA) makes
use of enzyme-labelled immunoglobulin todetect antigens or antibodies. It is a sensitive andspecific test for the detection and quantification of
antigens or antibodies.
/square6ELISA tests are usually performed in microwell
plates. Microwells in ELISA plates are coated withantibodies to the target proteins (antibodies or
antigens). Clinical sample is added into these
microwells. If a specific antigen or antibody ispresent in the clinical specimen it is captured bythe coated antibodies on the ELISA plate. A secondantibody to the target protein conjugated with anenzyme is then added which is captured by the
target protein. The unbound material is washed out.
A chromogenic substrate (to the enzyme) is thenadded. Development of color by the action ofhydrolyzing enzyme on chromogenic substrateindicates the presence of the specific antigen orantibody. Colour intensity is measured by the
spectrophotometer.
/square6There are many variations of ELISA, but the basic
principle remains the same as described above. Inthe first-generation ELISAs either crude antigen or
single antigen is used for the test. In the second-
and third-generation ELISAs multiple antigens orrecombinant antigen or/and specific peptides areInfectious Diseases

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
12
used, which improves the sensitivity and specificity
of the test.
/square6ELISA is routinely used to detect antibodies againstHIV and hepatitis A virus.
Rapid Immunochromatographic Test
/square6Here, the principle is same as ELISA, but the tech-
nique is embedded in a nitrocellulose membraneof a test strip. This allows rapid detection of antigenor antibodies in patient’s body fluids such as bloodor serum. The presence of specific proteins isindicated by the development of coloured bands
on the strip. These diagnostic strip tests are simple,
rapid, cheap and reliable and can be used at homeand clinics. Such kits have been developed fordengue; malaria, etc. Urine pregnancy test kit is alsoan example of immunochromatographic test whichuses specific antibodies to selectively identify hCG
in urine.
Western Blot (Immunoblot) Test
/square6In Western blot, antibodies to multiple specific
proteins are detected. Hence, it has high specificity.Microbial protein is run on gel electrophoresis to
separate the ligands, which are then transferred onto a nitrocellulose membrane strip. Patient’s serumis added to this nitrocellulose strip. If there areantibodies to a specific microorganism, they bindto antigens present on the strip. Enzymatically
labelled anti-immunoglobulins can be added now
which bind to the antibodies and visualised by theaddition of an enzyme substrate to producecoloured bands. This test is commonly used toconfirm the diagnosis of HIV infection.
Immunofluorescence Test
/square6This test makes use of immunoglobulin (antibody)
labeled with fluorescent dye to detect antigens orantibodies. It requires a fluorescent microscope to
read the signal. It is commonly used to detect infec-
tions with herpes virus, dengue virus and rabiesvirus.
Direct Immunofluorescence
/square6Direct immunofluorescence or direct fluorescent
antibody (DFA) test uses a single antibody labelled
with fluorescent dye to detect the presence of aspecific antigen. If a specific antigen of a micro-
organism is present in patient’s serum, it combines
with the antibody labelled with a fluorescent dyewhich can be detected as a fluorescent signal. This
test is highly sensitive and specific.
Indirect Immunofluorescence
/square6Here two antibodies are used. The first antibody
recognizes the target antigen and binds to it, andthe second antibody, which is labeled with a
fluorescent dye recognises the first antibody and
binds to it.
/square6This test is more complex than the direct immuno-fluorescence test and takes more time but allows
more flexibility. Patient’s serum is incubated
with a specific microbial antigen. If specific anti-bodies are present in the patient serum, they
combine with the antigen. Next, fluorescent-
labelled antisera is added and the fluorescent signalis looked for.
Complement Fixation Test
/square6This test is used to detect presence of specificantibodies to a microorganism. It depends on theantigen antibody reaction which uses complement.
Patient’s serum is heat treated to remove any free
complement. It is then mixed with a specific antigenand sensitized sheep RBCs are added. Complement
is added next. If antibodies are present in the
patient’s blood, there is formation of antigenantibody complex and complement is used up. If
there is no antibody, complement remains unusedFigure 1.1 ELISA


/square6Infectious Diseases3
1and it lyses the sensitized sheep RBCs. Absence of
hemolysis means complement fixation test ispositive which means that specific antibodies are
present. This test has been largely superseded by
other methods such as ELISA and PCR.
Agglutination Test
Direct Agglutination
/square6Here, the patient’s serum is added to a known
antigen. If antibodies are present in the patient’s
serum, it leads to agglutination. Weil-Felix test forscrub typhus and direct agglutination test forvisceral leishmaniasis are examples of this test.
Indirect (Passive) Agglutination Test
/square6Here, carrier particles such as RBCs, latex, or gelatinare coated with a soluble antigen and are mixedwith patient’s serum. These particles agglutinate if
the patient’s serum contains antibodies.
/square6In latex agglutination test, latex particles coated
with specific antibody are mixed with patient’sserum. If there are specific antigens in the patient’s
serum, there is agglutination of antibody coated
latex particles. This test is used to detect toxins ofVibrio cholerae  and staphylococci.
/square6In haemagglutination test, RBCs are coated with
known antigens. If mixed with serum containing
specific antibodies, there is agglutination of RBCs.This is used in the diagnosis of syphilis and herpesvirus infections.
Immunodiffusion
/square6Immunodiffusion is a diagnostic test whichinvolves diffusion through a substance such as agargel. Here a specific antigen or antibody is placed in
one well and patient’s serum or body fluid is placed
in another well and left for 48 hours. The antigenand antibody diffuse through the agarose geltowards each other and a precipitation line isformed between the two wells.
Immunoelectrophoresis
/square6Immunoelectrophoresis is a general name for anumber of biochemical methods where proteins areseparated by electrophoresis and identified usingspecific antibodies. This test is conducted onagarose gel. Four types of immunoelectrophoresis(IEP) have been used: Electroimmunoassay (EIA
also called rocket-immunoelectrophoresis), classical
immunoelectrophoresis (IEP), immunofixationelectrophoresis (IFE) and immunoprecipitation ofproteins after capillary electrophoresis. The proce-dure used in most laboratories is immunofixationelectrophoresis (IFE). IFE is widely used for
identifying Bence Jones proteins seen in multiple
myeloma.Q.Discuss the molecular methods used in the
diagnosis of infectious diseases.
/square6Molecular methods involve detection of RNA or
DNA of a microorganism. These are polymerase
chain reaction (PCR), southern blotting andnorthern blotting.
Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR)
/square6This is the most specific and sensitive test of allmolecular techniques. Here the nucleic acidsequence of a microorganism is amplified so that it
becomes easily detectable. Since each micro-
organism has unique DNA/RNA sequences, it ispossible to select a PCR primer that specificallyidentifies a particular microorganism.
/square6Multiple microorganisms can be identified in singleclinical sample using ‘multiplex’ PCR.
/square6Fluorescent dyes can be attached to differentprimers and the final nucleic acid polymers
examined by light spectroscopy.
/square6Reverse transcriptase (RT)–PCR amplifies very
small amounts of any kind of RNA (mRNA, rRNA)and makes complementary DNA, which is then
amplified with conventional PCR. HIV viral copies
are estimated by this method.
/square6Real-time PCR is used to quantify the organismsand is used in estimation of HIV viral load.
/square6The disadvantages of PCR are its high cost and falsepositive results. False positive results happen ifthere is any contamination from laboratory or othersources.
Southern Blotting
/square6Southern blot is a method for detection of a specificDNA sequence in DNA samples. Southern blotis named after biologist Edwin Southern whodeveloped this technique.
/square6DNA fragments are separated by gel electro-phoresis and transferred on to a blotting paper. ADNA probe (this is a piece of single stranded DNAwith known sequence labeled with a radioactive
isotope or a fluorescent signal) is then added to the
blotting paper. DNA probe will bind to its comple-mentary DNA if present. This is then washed toremove any unbound DNA probe.
/square6Even after washing if there is radioactivity orfluorescence, it means that a specific DNAcomplementary to DNA probe is present. Since eachmicroorganism has specific DNA sequences, itindicates the presence of that particular micro-organism in the clinical specimen.
Northern Blotting
/square6This is same as Southern blotting except that RNAfragments are used here to detect microbial RNAinstead of DNA.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
14Q.Define fever of unknown origin (FUO). Enumerate
the causes of FUO. How do you approach a case
of FUO?
/square6Fever of unknown origin (FUO) or pyrexia ofunknown origin (PUO) is prolonged febrile illnesswithout an established etiology despite intensiveevaluation and diagnostic testing.
Definition of FUO
FUO can be classified into following categories:
1. Classic FUO
2. Nosocomial FUO
3. Neutropenic FUO
4. FUO associated with HIV infection
/square6Classic FUO  is defined as fever of >38.3°C (>101°F)
on several occasions which remains undiagnosedeven after 3 outpatient visits or 3 days of hospitali-zation./square6Hospital associated FUO is defined as a tempera-
ture of ≥38.3°C ( ≥101°F) on several occasions in a
hospitalized patient in whom infection was not
manifest or incubating at the time of admissionwhich remains undiagnosed even after 3 days of
investigation, including at least 2 days incubation
of cultures.
/square6Neutropenic FUO  is defined as a temperature of
≥38.3°C ( ≥101°F) on several occasions in a patient
whose neutrophil count is <500/L that remainsundiagnosed after 3 days of investigation, including
at least 2 days incubation of cultures.
/square6HIV associated FUO refers to HIV positive patient
with fever of ≥38.3°C who have been febrile for
4 weeks or more as an outpatient or 3 days as an
inpatient, in whom the diagnosis remains uncertaineven after 3 days of investigation, including 2 days
incubation of cultures.
Causes of FUO
TABLE 1.1: Causes of FUO
Infections (most common cause of FUO)
Bacterial
• Tuberculosis (very common cause of FUO)• Typhoid
• Brucellosis
• Infective endocarditis• Syphilis• Melioidosis
• Sinusitis
• Osteomyelitis• Prostatitis
• Dental abscesses
• Cholangitis• Intra-abdominal abscesses (subphrenic, renal, retroperitoneal,
and paraspinal abscesses)
Viral
• HIV
• Chronic hepatitis (B, C, D)
• Infectious mononucleosis
Parasitic
• Malaria• Amebiasis
• Leishmaniasis
• Malaria• Strongyloidiasis
• Toxocariasis
• Toxoplasmosis• Trichinellosis
• Babesiosis
Rickettsial infections
• Q fever
• Rickettsialpox• Rocky Mountain spotted fever
• Scrub typhus
Fungal
• Candidiasis
• Histoplasmosis
• Mucormycosis• Blastomycosis
• Cryptococcal disease
Neoplasms (second most common cause of FUO)
• Lymphoma
• Leukaemia and other hematologic malignancies
• Liver involvement with hepatoma or metastases• Renal cell carcinoma
• Colon carcinoma
• Atrial myxoma
Inflammatory and connective tissue disorders
• Rheumatoid arthritis
• Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)• Sarcoidosis
• Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
• Polyarteritis nodosa (PAN)• Giant cell arteritis (common in elderly patients)
• Polymyalgia rheumatica
• Crohn’s disease• Granulomatous hepatitis
• Kikuchi disease
Miscellaneous
• Drug fever
• Factitious fever
• Periodic fever (familial meditarranean fever)
Undiagnosed
• Even after extensive workup some FUOs may remain
undiagnosed. Some of them may resolve spontaneously

/square6Infectious Diseases5
1Approach to a Case of FUO
Clinical History
/square6Get a detailed history of general symptoms (e.g.
fever, weight loss, night sweats, headache, rashes).
/square6Enquire about the pattern of fever [Tertian fever(occurring every third day) in malaria, step ladder
type fever (typhoid), undulant fever (evening fevers
resolving by morning in brucellosis), week-longfever with week-long remission (relapsing fever inborreliosis), week-long high fevers with week-longremissions (known as Pel-Ebstein fever seen inHodgkin disease).
/square6Inquire about symptoms involving all major organsystems.
/square6Itching after a hot bath (lymphoma)
/square6Painful nodules on shins (tuberculosis, fungalinfections, lymphoma)
/square6Contact with infection (tuberculosis) or animals (catscratch disease, brucellosis) or birds (psittacosis).
/square6High risk sexual behaviour (HIV, hepatitis B,
hepatitis C).
/square6Travel history (suspect infections endemic in places
visited).
/square6Drug therapy (suspect drug fever).
/square6Occupation (e.g. farmers prone for leptospirosis,veterinary workers prone for brucellosis).
/square6Recent dental treatment (possibility of endocarditis).
/square6History of immunosuppression such as HIV
infection or steroid therapy (suspect opportunistic
infections).
/square6History of previous abdominal surgery, trauma,endoscopy, or gynecologic procedures increase the
likelihood of an occult intra-abdominal abscess.
Clinical Examination
/square6Do a complete physical examination.
/square6Document the height and pattern of fever. Measure
the fever more than once and in the presence of anurse to exclude factitious fever.
/square6Document BP, pulse, respiratory rate and SPO2. BP
may be low in septic shock and myocarditis. Pulserate usually increases by 10 per degree celsius risein temperature. Relative bradycardia (i.e. pulse rate
does not correspond to the raise in temperature)
may be seen in enteric fever, brucellosis and someviral infections. Relative tachycardia, i.e. pulse ratemore than expected to the raise in temperature maybe seen in myocarditis, sepsis, hypovolemia andthyrotoxicosis. High respiratory rate usually points
to some respiratory pathology such as pneumonia,
empyema, ARDS, etc.
/square6Look for lymphadenopathy (tuberculosis, infectiousmononucleosis, HIV, lymphoma, malignancy), skin
and mucosal lesions (skin rashes in connective
tissue diseases, oral ulcers in behcets disease), pallor(may point to hematological malignancy, or adisseminated process such as TB involving bone
marrow), jaundice (points to hepatobiliary disease),sternal tenderness (hematological malignancy),spinal tenderness (Pott’s spine, epidural abscess),clubbing (TB, chronic suppurative lung disease) andfor signs of meningeal irritation like neck stiffness
and kernigs sign (meningitis).
/square6Carefully examine heart for any murmurs (infectiveendocarditis), abdomen for any tenderness (deep
abdominal infections) hepatosplenomegaly (entericfever, malaria, hepatitis, hemolytic anemia) or spleno-megaly (malaria, hematological malignancies).
/square6Always examine the fundus and retina (papillo-edema in meningitis, retinal lesions in CMVinfection, disseminated candidiasis, tuberculosis).
Investigations
/square6Common things are common. First rule out commondiseases such as enteric fever, tuberculosis, malaria,
UTI, HIV infection, etc. and then only think of rare
illnesses.
/square6Order routine investigations like Hb, total WBCcount, RBC count, differential count, platelet count,ESR and peripheral smear study. Cytopenias may
suggest a pathologic process involving bone marrow
such as disseminated tuberculosis, hematologicalmalignancies, etc. A high leucocyte count is commonin infections. A very high leucocyte count maysuggest leukemia. A very high ESR (>100 byWestergren method) often indicates active tuber-
culosis, collagen vascular disease or malignancy.
/square6Urine microscopy and culture sensitivity (to R/O
UTI).
/square6If there is cough and sputum production send it
for Gram’s stain, fungus stain, AFB, malignant cells
and culture/sensitivity.
/square6Blood culture and sensitivity for both aerobic andanerobic organisms (infecting organism may bepicked up by this).
/square6Complete LFT and RFT to look for any liver andrenal involvement.
/square6Culture and examination of the stool for any ova,parasites and occult blood.
/square6Chest radiograph (tuberculosis, pneumonia,sarcoidosis).
/square6Mantoux test can help in diagnosing TB.
/square6ECG, echocardiogram (to look for signs of infectiveendocarditis).
/square6Ultrasound abdomen and pelvis to R/O any intra-abdominal pathology. Ultrasound can help in manyways. It can document any organomegaly, intra-
abdominal lymphadenopathy or masses, ascites,
any change in the texture of organs, any intra-abdominal collections of pus.
/square6Lumbar puncture and CSF examination if suspect-ing meningitis.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
16 /square6Serological investigations (WIDAL test, ASO titre,
HIV-Elisa, VDRL, TPHA, rheumatoid factor,
antinuclear antibodies, viral antibody titres, Paul-
Bunnell test, brucella agglutination test).
/square6CT/MRI scanning (intra-abdominal lymphadeno-pathy, tumours, abscesses).
/square6Tissue diagnosis (lymph node FNAC/biopsy, liver
biopsy, bone marrow examination).
/square6Diagnostic surgical procedures like laparoscopy,exploratory laparotomy, etc. may be required in
undiagnosed cases.
Treatment
/square6Treatment depends on the underlying cause.
/square6Until a diagnosis is made, it is better to use only
symptomatic treatment. Blind antibiotic therapy
may make diagnosis of an occult infection moredifficult, and empirical steroid therapy may mask
an inflammatory response without treating the
underlying cause.
/square6Sometimes when all the tests are negative and the
cause of fever remains undiagnosed, a therapeutictrial may be indicated. For example, antituberculosis
therapy (ATT) in suspected tuberculosis and steroidtherapy in suspected connective tissue diseases.
/square6Periodic review is very important in cases of FUO
as development of new signs and symptoms may
help in identifying the underlying cause. In somecases a ‘second opinion’ by another physician canalso be very helpful as different people think fromdifferent angles.
/square6Many undiagnosed cases of FUO will sponta-neously resolve.
Q.Chemoprophylaxis.
/square6Chemoprophylaxis  is the administration of drug to
prevent the development of a disease.
/square6For example, antibiotics may be administered toimmunocompromised patients to prevent opportu-
nistic infections. Antibiotics may also be given to
healthy individuals to limit the spread of an epi-demic, or to patients with recurrent infections (suchas urinary tract infections) to prevent recurrence.
Common Situations where Chemoprophylaxis is Used
TABLE 1.2: Common situations where chemoprophylaxis is used
Situation Goal Chemoprophylaxis
Rheumatic fever To prevent recurrence and further cardiac Phenoxymethyl penicillin 250 mg twice daily
damage or inj Benzathine penicillin once a month for
many years as recommended
Meningitis
• Due to meningococci• Due to H. influenzae type b To prevent infection in close contacts Rifampicin 600 BD for 2 days
Alternatives (single dose) ciprofloxacin 500 mg
orally or inj ceftriaxone 250 mg IM
Rifampicin 600 mg daily for 4 days
Tuberculosis To prevent infection in exposed tuberculin- Oral isoniazid 300 mg daily for 6 months
negative individuals, infants of infectedmothers and immunosuppressed patients
Valvular heart disease To prevent infective endocarditis in dental, Amoxicillin, 2 g orally.
Prosthetic heart valves oral, or upper respiratory tract procedures: If allergic to penicllin, clindamycin 600 mg or
cephalexin 2 gm or azithromycin 500 mg can
be used.Antibiotic should be given 1 hour before the
procedure orally.
If patient is unable to take orally any of thesecan be given parenterally.
Malaria Prevention of malaria Chloroquine one double strength tablet per
week or mefloquine 250 mg once a week.
HIV infected patient with CD4 Prevention of Pneumocystis jiroveci Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, one double-
count below 200 cells/mcL pneumonia strength tablet (960 mg) daily
HIV infected patient with toxo- Prevention of toxoplasmosis Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, one double-
plasma IgG antibody positive and strength tablet (960 mg) daily
CD4+ T cell count <100/mcL
HIV infected patient with CD4 Prevention of Mycobacterium avium Azithromycin (1200 mg orally weekly) or
count below 50 cells/mcL complex infection clarithromycin (500 mg orally twice daily)

/square6Infectious Diseases7
1Q.Opportunistic infections (Table 1.3).
/square6Opportunistic infection is an infection by a micro-
organism that normally does not cause disease, but
becomes pathogenic when the body’s immune
system is impaired. Opportunistic infections are
common in following conditions:
– Primary immune deficiency disorders
– HIV infection– Steroid therapy
– Chemotherapy for cancer
– Immunosuppressing agents for organ transplant
recipients
– Malnutrition
– Prolonged antibiotic therapy
/square6Opportunistic infections can be due to bacteria,
viruses, protozoa or fungi.
Figure 1.2 Common opportunistic infectionsTABLE 1.3: Common opportunistic infections
Organism Disease Treatment
Pneumocystis Pneumonia Sulphomethoxazole + trimethoprim
Toxoplasma gondii Encephalitis, pneumonia Sulphadiazine + pyrimethamine
Alternative clindamycin
Cryptosporidium Diarrhea Nitazoxanide
Strongyloidiasis Diarrhoea Thiabendazole
Herpes simplex virus Encephalitis Acyclovir
Varicella zoster virus Disseminated herpes zoster Acyclovir
Cytomegalovirus Retinitis, pneumonia Gancyclovir
Candida Mucocutaneous and esophageal candidiasis Fluconazole, itraconazole, amphotericin B
Cryptococcus Meningitis Amphotericin B + flucytosine

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
18Q.Nosocomial infections (hospital-acquired
infections).
/square6The term nosocomial infection or hospital acquired
infection is a newly acquired infection that is con-
tracted within a hospital environment. Infectionsare considered nosocomial if they first appear48 hours or more after hospital admission or within30 days of discharge.
/square6The most common sites of infection are the blood-stream, lungs, urinary tract, and surgical wounds.
Organisms
Though any organism can cause a nosocomial infec-tion, there is an increasing incidence of multidrug-resistant (MDR) pathogens causing hospital-acquiredinfections. This rise can be explained by indiscriminateuse of antibiotics and lack of hygienic measures amonghealthcare professionals. Some common organisms
causing nosocomial infections are as follows.
/square6Bacteria:  Staphylococcus epidermis  is the most
common organism causing nosocomial infection.It most often causes wound infection. Other bacteria
are Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumonia, Pseudomonas
aeruginosa,  Acinetobacter, methicillin resistant
Staphylococcus aureus  (MRSA).
/square6Viruses:  Hepatitis viruses (A, B, C), cytomegalo-
virus, influenza, respiratory syncytial virus, etc.
/square6Fungi:  Candida, Aspergillus.
Transmission
/square6Transmission usually occurs via health care workers,
patients, hospital equipment, or interventionalprocedures.
Clinical Features
/square6Any new onset fever or any unexplained clinicaldeterioration in a hospitalized patient may be dueto hospital-acquired infection.
/square6Clinical features depend on the site of infection.
/square6Any new infiltrate on chest X-ray may due tohospital-acquired pneumonia.
Investigations
/square6Complete blood count:  Usually shows leukocytosis.
/square6Blood culture and sensitivity: To diagnose blood
stream infection.
/square6Urine examination:  To diagnose urinary tract
infection.
/square6Chest X-ray:  To diagnose pneumonia.
/square6Other tests as per clinical suspicion.
Treatment
/square6Treatment will be based on the type of hospital-
acquired infection. However, pending investigation
reports, broad spectrum antibiotics can be started./square6Intravenous canula should be removed if there is
inflammation at the insertion site.
/square6Indwelling urinary catheter should be removed ifpossible.
/square6Surgical-site infections should be managed with acombination of surgical care and antibiotic therapy.
Prevention
/square6Nosocomial infections increase medical expendi-ture and also cause significant morbidity andmortality. Hence all efforts should be made to
prevent them.
/square6Patients with infections should be isolated.
/square6Aseptic measures should be enforced in wards,
operation theatres and labour rooms, by arrangingclean air, clean linen, adequate airspace, etc. Thereshould be adequate space between beds.
/square6Wound dressings and minor procedures likelumbar puncture, pleural and peritoneal tapping,etc. are better done in a separate procedure roomand not bedside.
/square6Pharmacy should check all intravenous fluidsbefore supplying to wards.
/square6The hospital kitchen staff should observe stricthygienic habits and should have periodic medical
check up to detect and treat any infection.
/square6Every hospital should have an infection control
committee which should monitor and controlinfections in the hospital.
Q.Food poisoning.
/square6Food poisoning is defined as an illness caused by
the consumption of contaminated food or water.
Food or water can be contaminated with bacteria,viruses, parasites, toxins, and chemicals. Greenleafy vegetables are the most common cause of foodpoisoning, followed by dairy items and poultry.
/square6Food poisoning should be suspected when manypeople develop the illness after ingesting the samefood and the illness bears a temporal relationshipto food intake.
Causes
TABLE 1.4: Causes of food poisoning
Infective Non-infective
Toxin mediated Plant toxins (flava beans),
Preformed toxin:  Staphylo- paralytic shellfish toxin,
coccal enterotoxin, bacillus ciguatera fish poisoning,
cereus scombrotoxic fish poisoning,
Toxin produced in the intestine: heavy metals (arsenic,
Clostridial spp. Vibrio cholerae , thallium and cadmium)
enterotoxigenic E. coli
Mucosal involvement
Rotavirus, Norwalk agent, Shigella,
giardiasis, Campylobacter jejuni ,
Yersenia enterocolitica

/square6Infectious Diseases9
1Clinical Features
/square6The commonest manifestation of food poisoning is
a mixture of nausea, vomiting, fever, abdominalpain and diarrhea.
/square6Usually symptoms occur in many persons whoingest the same food.
/square6Symptoms usually develop within 48 hours afteringestion of food. In case of preformed toxins andnoninfective food poisoning symptoms developwithin minutes to hours.
/square6Specific etiologic agent can be identified by examin-ing the suspected food, vomitus, stool or blood.
Management
/square6Most cases of food poisoning are self limiting.
/square6Intravenous fluids and electrolytes should be givento patients with severe vomiting and diarrhea.
/square6Antidiarrheal agents (codeine phosphate, loper-amide) can be used to control diarrhea. However,they should be avoided in young children, elderly,and patients who have fever and pain abdomen
suggesting infective diarrhea.
/square6Antibiotics are not routinely indicated unless a
specific pathogen is suspected.
Prevention of Food Poisoning
Following precautions can decrease the chances offood poisoning.
/square6Do not drink raw (unpasteurized) milk or foods thatcontain unpasteurized milk.
/square6Wash raw fruits and vegetables thoroughly inrunning water before eating.
/square6Use precooked, perishable, or ready-to-eat food assoon as possible.
/square6Avoid cross contamination; keep raw meat, fish,and poultry separate from other foods.
/square6Thoroughly cook raw food from animal sources.Seafood and shellfish should be cooked thoroughlyto minimize the risk of food poisoning.
/square6Refrigerate foods promptly. Never leave cooked
foods at room temperature for more than two hours.
Q.Staphylococcal food poisoning.
/square6Staph. aureus  is a common commensal of the
anterior nares. Staph. aureus  is coagulase positive
and is the most virulent of all staphylococcal species.
All other staphylococci have been collectively
designated as coagulase negative staphylococci andare less virulent.
/square6Food handlers may transfer the bacteria via hands
to foodstuffs such as dairy products, meats, eggs,
and salads.
/square6After the food is left at room temperature, theorganisms multiply and can produce a substantial
quantity of enterotoxin.Clinical Features
/square6Following ingestion of contaminated food, nausea,
vomiting and abdominal cramps develop within1–6 hours. Fever and/or diarrhea may also occur
in a minority of patients.
/square6Most cases improve rapidly. Rarely severe dehydra-tion can occur which can be fatal.
Management
/square6Fluid replacement and antiemetics (domperidone,
ondansetron) should be given. Suspected foodshould be tested for the presence of enterotoxin andStaphylococcus, if feasible. Public health authoritiesshould be notified if food vending is involved.
Q.Toxic shock syndrome (TSS).
/square6Toxic shock syndrome (TSS) is a toxin-mediated
acute life-threatening illness, usually caused by
infection with either Staphylococcus aureus  or group
A Streptococcus  (GAS, also called Streptococcus
pyogenes).
/square6TSS was first described in a small group of childrenwith acute febrile illness. Subsequently, it wasfound in young, menstruating women who wereusing a highly absorbent tampon that was newly
introduced to the market. This was due to
multiplication of vaginally colonized S. aureus  and
production of an exotoxin known as TSST-I andenterotoxin B. However, tampon associated casesof TSS have come down, and most cases are nowsecondary to S. aureus  infections of skin or other
sites.
Clinical Features
/square6TSS usually begins with nonspecific flu-like
symptoms such as fever and myalgia. In menstrual
cases, the onset is usually 2 or 3 days after the startof menstruation.
/square6As the severity of illness increases, patients developdiffuse erythematous rash, hypotension, andmultiple organ dysfunction. Multiple organ dys-function manifests as vomiting and diarrhea (GITinvolvement), renal failure (kidney involvement),
ARDS (lung involvement), liver enzyme elevation
(hepatitis), thrombocytopenia (hematologicalinvolvement), confusion, drowsiness (CNS involve-ment), conjunctival erythema (mucosal involve-ment), etc.
/square6Desquamation of the skin occurs during convale-scence, usually 1–2 weeks after the onset of illness.
Investigations
/square6Investigations typically show leucocytosis, thrombo-cytopenia, increased urea creatinine, hypoalbumi-
nemia and liver function abnormalities.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
110 /square6Gram staining and culture sensitivity of the infected
specimen.
/square6Blood culture may show causative organism suchas Staphylococcus or Streptococcus.
Treatment
/square6Patient should be admitted immediately to thehospital.
/square6Local measures (e.g. decontamination, debride-ment).
/square6Fluid resuscitation and circulatory support.
/square6Empiric antibiotic therapy (e.g. clindamycin plusvancomycin) pending culture results. In additionto antibacterial effect, clindamycin also reduces thesynthesis of toxin.
/square6For patients with group A Streptococcus  infection, a
combination of penicillin-G (4 million U IV q4h)and clindamycin (600–900 mg IV q8h) is used.Intravenous immune globulin can be considered for
streptococcal toxic shock syndrome (specific anti-
body to streptococcal exotoxins).
/square6Duration of antibiotic treatment is 10 to 14 days.
Q.Enumerate the infections caused by streptococci.
Write briefly on scarlet fever and erysipelas.
Streptococci are Gram-positive bacteria arranged in
chains. They cause a variety of infections in man whichare as follows.
/square6Skin and soft tissue infections; cellulitis, erysipelas,
necrotising fasciitis
/square6Bone and joint infections
/square6Tonsillitis
/square6Scarlet fever
/square6Glomerulonephritis
/square6Rheumatic fever
/square6Puerperal sepsis
/square6Endocarditis
/square6Urinary tract infection
/square6Neonatal infections including meningitis
/square6Female pelvic infections
/square6Peritonitis
/square6Dental infections
/square6Liver abscess.
Scarlet Fever
/square6Scarlet fever is a syndrome characterized by exuda-
tive pharyngitis, fever, and bright-red exanthema(scarlet means bright red ). Scarlet fever is caused by
toxin producing group A beta hemolytic strepto-cocci (GABHS). GABHS is found in secretions and
discharge from the nose, ears, throat, and skin.
/square6Exotoxin-mediated streptococcal infections range
from localized skin infection (e.g. bullous impetigo)to the widespread eruption of scarlet fever to the
highly lethal streptococcal toxic shock syndrome.Clinical Features
/square6Scarlet fever is characterized by exudative pharyn-
gitis, fever, and scarlatiniform rash . Initially patient
develops fever, headache, vomiting and sore throat,
followed within 24 hours by a punctate erythe-
matous rash. Erythematous rash is caused byerythrogenic toxin.
/square6Initially, the exanthem is seen on the tongue which
becomes bright red with prominent red papillae.
This appearance is called strawberry tongue . The rash
then appears on the neck and spreads to trunk andextremities. These rashes enlarge and join togetherto form a generalized erythema. Usually the rashdoes not affect nose, lips, palms and soles. Since
the lips are not affected it remains pale and stands
out against the red background of flushed cheeks.Rash is more prominent in the skin folds and iscalled Pastia’s lines . Usually the rash becomes
maximum by 2 days and fades by 7 days.
Differential Diagnosis
/square6Includes other causes of fever with generalized rash,such as,
– Rubella, measles, and other viral exanthems
– Kawasaki disease
– Toxic shock syndrome
– Systemic allergic reactions (e.g. drug eruptions).
Complications
/square6Otitis media, pneumonia, septicemia, osteomyelitis,
toxic shock syndrome, rheumatic fever, and acute
glomerulonephritis.
Investigations
/square6Complete blood count shows leucocytosis.
/square6Throat culture is the most important test to confirmthe diagnosis.
/square6Direct antigen detecting kits allow immediatediagnosis but have less sensitivity.
/square6Anti-deoxyribonuclease B and antistreptolysin-Otiters (antibodies to streptococcal extracellularproducts).
Treatment
/square6Penicillin is the drug of choice and is given for7–10 days. Cephalosporins can also be used insteadof penicillin. Erythromycin is an alternative forpatients allergic to penicillin.
Erysipelas
/square6It is an infection of skin and soft tissue.
/square6Erysipelas usually involves the face and head butother areas may also be involved.
/square6The skin becomes red, oedematous and firm to hardin consistency due to cuticular lymphangitis. It mayspread to adjacent parts and involve large areas.

/square6Infectious Diseases11
1The margins of the erythematous areas are raised
and sometimes vesicles are also seen. The patientmay appear sick.
/square6Erysipelas of the face has to be differentiated from
cellulitis. Since cellulitis is an infection of sub-
cutaneous tissues, it does not involve the externalear which has no subcutaneous tissue, while facialerysipelas can involve external ear (Millian’s sign).
/square6Penicillin is the drug of choice for erysipelas.
Q.Listeriosis.
/square6Listeriosis is a serious infection caused by Listeria
monocytogenes. Listera monocytogenes  is an aerobic,
gram-positive rod. It is an intracellular organismand is capable of invading several cell types.Listeriosis is a rare infection and primarily affects
pregnant women, newborn infants, elderly, and
immunocompromised patients.
Transmission
/square6The main route of acquisition of Listeria  is through
the ingestion of contaminated food products. Other
modes of transmission are contact with infectedanimals such as rodents or ruminants. Venerealtransmission occurs occasionally. Mother to childtransmission can occur during perinatal period.
Clinical Features
/square6The disease is seen mainly in neonates and youngchildren. Mother can get infected in late pregnancywhich can lead to stillbirth . It presents as a febrile
illness. The mother recovers after delivery but,occasionally, the organism persists in the genitalia
to cause habitual abortions . If the neonate survives,
the picture is one of severe infection. Neonates diein about three days but survivors develop suppura-tive meningitis.
/square6Listeria infection in healthy adults is uncommonbut affects immunocompromised persons like AIDSpatients, diabetics, alcoholics and those withdebilitating diseases. Listeria is an opportunisticinfection in AIDS. Meningitis  is often the clinical
manifestation.
Investigations
/square6Organism can be isolated by blood culture, andculture of any infected body fluid such as CSF.
Treatment
/square6The treatment of choice is intravenous ampicillin often
in combination with an aminoglycoside. PenicillinG can be used as an alternative to ampicillin.
/square6Trimethoprim-sulphamethoxazole is second linedrug and can be used if the patient is allergic toampicillin or penicillin.
/square6The response to treatment is slow.Q.Discuss the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features
and complications of diphtheria. How do you
investigate and manage a case of diphtheria?
Etiology
/square6Diphtheria is a localized infection of mucous mem-
branes or skin that is caused by Corynebacterium
diphtheriae . It is associated with a characteristic
pseudomembrane  at the site of infection.
/square6C. diphtheriae  is a gram-positive bacillus and
resembles Chinese letter patterns on Albert’s stain .
/square6There are 3 strains of C. diptheriae; mitis, inter-
medius and gravis. Gravis causes the most severedisease.
Epidemiology
/square6Diphtheria affects people all over the world. Butnow it is uncommon due to immunization practices.It is more common during winter. It is mainly a
disease of children.
/square6Humans are the main reservoir of C. diphtheriae .
However, some cases have also occurred due totransmission from livestock.
/square6Spread occurs in close-contact settings throughrespiratory droplets or by direct contact with respi-ratory secretions or skin lesions. Fomite trans-mission can also occur.
Pathogenesis
/square6Diphtheria is initiated by entry of C. diphtheriae into
the nose or pharynx. It multiplies locally without
blood stream invasion.
/square6It produces a powerful exotoxin which causes local
tissue necrosis and formation of a tough, adherentpseudomembrane, composed of a mixture of fibrin,
dead cells, and bacteria. The membrane usually
begins on the tonsils or posterior pharynx and canspread to fauces, soft palate, and into the larynx,which may result in respiratory obstruction. Toxinentering the blood stream causes tissue damage atdistant sites, particularly the heart (myocarditis),
Figure 1.3 Diptheria bacilli


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
112 nerves (demyelination), and kidney (tubular
necrosis).
/square6Nontoxigenic strains may cause mild local respira-tory disease, sometimes including a membrane.
Clinical Features
Respiratory Diphtheria
/square6Nose infection presents as a chronic serosangui-neous or seropurulent discharge without fever or
significant toxicity. A whitish membrane may be
observed on the septum.
/square6The faucial (pharyngeal) form is most common.After an incubation period of 1 to 7 days, the illness
begins with sore throat, malaise, and mild to
moderate fever. Grayish membrane may be presentthat is tightly adherent and bleeds on attemptedremoval. In severe cases, the patient appears toxic.Cervical lymphadenopathy and soft tissue edemamay occur, resulting in the typical bull neck appea-
rance  and stridor.
/square6Laryngeal involvement presents as hoarseness,
stridor, and dyspnea.
/square6Myocarditis presents with signs of low cardiacoutput and congestive failure. Conduction distur-bances, ST-T wave abnormalities, arrhythmias, andheart block can occur.
/square6Neurologic involvement manifests as cranial nervepalsies and peripheral neuritis. Palatal and/orpharyngeal paralysis occurs during the acute phase.
Cutaneous Diphtheria
/square6Cutaneous diphtheria lesions are classicallyindolent, deep, punched-out ulcers, which mayhave a grayish white membrane.
Invasive Disease
/square6This is rare and may cause endocarditis, osteo-
myelitis, septic arthritis, and meningitis. Frequently,
these patients have underlying immunosuppression.
Investigations
/square6Gram’s stain: A presumptive diagnosis of C.
diphtheriae  can be made by identifying gram-
positive rods in a “Chinese letter” distribution on
Gram’s stain.
/square6Cultures from beneath the membrane, from the
nasopharynx, and from suspicious skin lesions.Cultures may be negative if the patient has received
antibiotics.
/square6Toxigenicity testing should be performed on all C.
diphtheriae  isolates.
/square6Polymerase chain reaction test may allow both
detection of the organism and determination oftoxigenicity.
/square6ECG may show ST-T wave changes, heart block,and dysrhythmia.Treatment
/square6The goals of treatment are to neutralize the toxin,eliminate the infecting organism, provide suppor-tive care, and prevent further transmission.
Antitoxin
/square6Diphtheria antitoxin is a hyperimmune antiserum
produced in horses, which binds to and inactivates
the diphtheria toxin.
/square6The antitoxin is only effective before toxin entersthe cell and thus must be administered as early aspossible.
/square6There is risk of allergic reactions to antitoxin sinceit contains horse serum. Hence, a test dose shouldbe given before administration.
/square6The dose of antitoxin depends upon the site andseverity of infection. 20,000 to 40,000 units forpharyngeal/laryngeal disease, 40,000 to 60,000units for nasopharyngeal disease, and 80,000 to
120,000 units for severe disease with “bull-neck”.
The dose should be administered intravenouslyover 60 minutes.
Antibiotics
/square6They decrease toxin production indirectly by killingthe organisms.
/square6Penicillin is the drug of choice. Penicillin G (25,000to 50,000 units/kg IV q12 h until the patient cantake orally) followed by oral penicillin V (250 mgQID) for a total of 14 days.
/square6Erythromycin 500 mg QID for 14 days is analternative.
Diphtheria Toxoid
/square6Patients should be given diphtheria toxoid immuniza-
tion during their convalescence since natural
infection does not induce immunity.
Prevention
/square6Isolate the patient.
/square6Non-immunised contacts should be given bothantibiotics and diphtheria antitoxin.
/square6Immunised contacts are given a booster dose ofdiphtheria toxoid.
Q.Describe the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical
features and management of tetanus. Add a note
on prevention of tetanus.
/square6Tetanus is a serious illness caused by Clostridium
tetanus organism. It is characterized by an
acute onset of hypertonia and painful muscle
spasms.
/square6Tetanus has been described by Hippocrates and inthe Indian medical writings of Sushruta.

/square6Infectious Diseases13
1Etiology
/square6Cl. tetanus  is a gram-positive, spore-forming,
anaerobic bacillus. It has a drumstick appearance
due to the presence of terminal spore. It is a normal
commensal of human and animal gastrointestinaltracts and is widely distributed in soil. Its sporescan survive for many years even in adverse condi-tions.
/square6Tetanus can occur in following situations:
– Neonatal tetanus: Occurs when the umbilical
cord is cut with an unsterile instrument or
smeared with cowdung after cutting as is the
practice in some areas.
– After road traffic accidents where wounds may
get contaminated easily with tetanus spores.
Even a seemingly trivial injury may be able to
cause tetanus.
– People with otorrhoea may develop tetanus if
the ear is probed with a wire or match stick which
may carry spores on it.– In women after illegal abortion due to unsterile
handling of the genital tract through whichorganisms gain entry.
– Intramuscular injections given with contamina-
ted needles.
– Necrotic or gangrenous tissues due to peripheral
vascular disease or any other cause.
Pathogenesis
/square6Spores inoculated into the wound develop intobacteria. These bacteria multiply locally and pro-
duce neurotoxin tetanospasmin which is respon-
sible for the clinical manifestations of tetanus.
/square6Toxin released in the wound is disseminatedthroughout the body and binds to motor neuron
terminals in muscles, and ascends up the axon to
reach nerve-cell body in the brainstem and spinalcord. The toxin then migrates across the synapse topresynaptic terminals where it blocks release of theinhibitory neurotransmitters glycine and gama-aminobutyric acid (GABA). As a result, minor
stimuli result in uncontrolled spasms, and reflexes
are exaggerated.
/square6The time taken for the toxin to ascend from nerveendings to CNS depends on the length of nerves.
Since cranial nerves are short, effect is first seen in
cranial nerve territories such as face, head and neck(like lock jaw).
Clinical Features
/square6The incubation period is 4 days to 14 days. It canbe shorter or longer than this in rare cases.
/square6Tetanus can present in one of four clinical patterns:
– Generalized
– LocalizedFigure 1.4 Tetanus bacilli
Figure 1.5 Pathogenesis of tetanus


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
114 – Cephalic
– Neonatal
Generalized Tetanus
/square6This is the most common and most severe form.
/square6The classical clinical triad consists of trismus (lock
jaw), muscle rigidity, and reflex spasms.
/square6Tetanic spasms mainly affect the muscles of thetrunk, back and proximal parts of the limbs, andspare the peripheries.
/square6The patient first notices difficulty in opening thejaw due to increased tone in the masseter muscles(trismus, or lockjaw). Dysphagia or stiffness or painin the neck, shoulder, and back muscles appearsconcurrently or soon thereafter. Abdominal and
limb muscle involvement produces a rigid
abdomen and stiff limbs. Sustained contraction ofthe facial muscles results in a grimace or sneer (risussardonicus), and contraction of the back musclesproduces an arched back (opisthotonus).
/square6Chest muscle spasms impair breathing. Laryngo-spasm may produce asphyxia.
/square6These spasms occur repetitively and may be sponta-
neous or provoked by even the slightest stimulation.
/square6Tetanic spasms cause contraction of both agonist
and antagonist groups of muscles together.
/square6Patient remains fully concsiuos and alert through-out, even during spasms.
/square6Autonomic dysfunction is seen in severe cases and
is characterized by labile or sustained hypertension,
tachycardia, dysrhythmia, hyperpyrexia, profusesweating, peripheral vasoconstriction, andincreased plasma and urinary catecholamine levels.
/square6Due to repetitive muscle spasms and dysphagia,patient may develop many complications likeaspiration pneumonia, fractures, muscle rupture,rhabdomyolysis, deep-vein thrombophlebitis,pulmonary embolism.
/square6Death can occur due to respiratory failure (mostcommon cause) or cardiac arrest due to hypoxia.
Localized Tetanus
/square6Uncommon form in which manifestations are restrictedto muscles near the wound. The prognosis is excellent.
Cephalic Tetanus
/square6Rare form of local tetanus, follows head injury or
ear infection. Trismus and dysfunction of one or
more cranial nerves, often the seventh nerve, arefound. Cephalic tetanus may remain localized ormay progress to generalized tetanus. The incuba-tion period is a few days and the mortality is high.
Neonatal Tetanus
/square6Neonatal tetanus (tetanus neonatorum) is genera-lized tetanus that results from infection of a neonate.Differential Diagnosis
/square6Inflammatory lesions inside the mouth can inducetrismus (lockjaw).
/square6Drug induced dystonic reactions (e.g. phenothia-zines, metoclopramide).
/square6Strychnine poisoning,
/square6Hypocalcemic tetany.
Treatment
/square6The goals of therapy are to eliminate the source oftoxin, neutralize unbound toxin, prevent musclespasms, and support the patient until recovery.Patient should be kept in a quiet room to minimize
stimulation. Patient should be continuously moni-
tored for any signs of deterioration especiallyrespiratory compromise.
Antibiotic Therapy
/square6Antibiotics are given to kill tetanus bacilli so thatfurther production of toxin is prevented.
/square6Penicillin is the drug of choice (10 to 12 million unitsintravenously, in divided doses daily for 10 days).Metronidazole is an alternative. Clindamycin anderythromycin can be used in those allergic to
penicillin.
Antitoxin
/square6Antitoxin is given to neutralize the free circulating
and unbound toxin. It does not have any action onthe bound toxin.
/square6Human antitetanus globulin (ATG) is the choice
and is given in a dose of 3000 to 6000 units intra-
muscularly, usually in divided doses because thevolume is large. Human antitetanus immuno-globulin has a long half life; hence repeated dosesare not required.
/square6Equine antitetanus immunoglobulin can also beused but carries risk of allergic reactions. However,it is cheaper.
/square6The value of injecting antitoxin proximal to thewound or infiltrating around the wound is unclear.Antitoxin does not penetrate the blood–brainbarrier. The value of intrathecal administration isstill not clear.
Control of Muscle Spasms
/square6Benzodiazepines like diazepam, lorazepam andmidazolam can be used to control muscle spasms.
/square6Uncontrolled spasms even after giving benzo-diazepines may require paralysis with a non-depolarizing neuromuscular blocking agent andmechanical ventilation.
/square6General anesthesia with propofol may be requiredfor continuous spasms.
/square6Dantrolene and intrathecal baclofen can also beconsidered in severe spasms.

/square6Infectious Diseases15
1Supportive Measures
/square6Respiratory support with endotracheal intubation
or tracheostomy, and mechanical ventilation, maybe required.
/square6IV fluids should be given to maintain hydration.
/square6Hypertension due to autonomic dysfunction may
be controlled by beta-blockers, clonidine, and
morphine sulfate. Intravenous magnesium sulphatealso has a stabilizing effect and is useful in auto-nomic dysfunction.
/square6Hypotension or bradycardia may require volumeexpansion, use of vasopressors.
/square6Wound should be kept clean by debridement andremoving any necrotic or foreign material.
Prevention of Tetanus
Immunization
/square6All partially immunized and unimmunized adultsshould receive vaccine, as should those recoveringfrom tetanus. The primary series for adults consistsof three doses—the first and second doses are given
4 to 8 weeks apart, and the third dose is given 6 to
12 months after the second. A booster dose isrequired thereafter every 10 years.
/square6For persons with unclean and major wounds, give
tetanus immunoglobulin 250 units IM and also a
dose of tetanus vaccine.
Wound Care
/square6Wounds should be washed thoroughly and anydead tissue and slough should be excised.
Q.Discuss the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features,
diagnosis and treatment of botulism.
/square6Botulism is a paralytic disease caused by botulinum
toxin, which is produced by Clostridium botulinum .
/square6C. botulinum is an anaerobic gram-positive
organism that forms subterminal spores. It is foundin soil and marine environments throughout theworld. Botulinum toxin is the most potent bacterialtoxin known.
Pathogenesis
/square6Under anaerobic conditions, the spores germinate
and the bacteria multiply and release the exotoxin.
Botulinum toxin inhibits release of acetylcholine atthe neuromuscular junction and causes flaccidparalysis. Botulinum toxin is extremely potent andis capable of killing a person even in minutequantities. It can be used as an agent of bioterrorism.
/square6Naturally occurring botulism occurs in one of threeforms: Food-borne botulism, infant botulism, orwound botulism. Food-borne botulism is caused byingestion of preformed toxin present in canned
foods. Infant botulism occurs due to the practice offeeding honey to infants. Honey may contain
botulism organisms which may proliferate in thegut to produce toxin. Wound botulism usuallyoccurs due to contamination of wound withorganisms.
Investigations
/square6Toxin can be identified in serum, stool, vomitus,gastric aspirate, and suspected foods.
/square6C. botulinum  may be grown on selective media from
samples of stool or foods.
/square6Wound cultures that grow C. botulinum  suggest
wound botulism.
Clinical Features
/square6Symmetric descending paralysis is characteristicand usually starts in the extraocular muscles, andspreads to the pharynx, larynx, and respiratorymuscles before inducing a generalised flaccidparalysis. Patient may have symptoms like ptosis,
blurred vision, diplopia, pooling of secretions,
dysphagia and breathlessness.
/square6Nausea, vomiting and diarrhea may occur if thesource of toxin is intestine. Paralytic ileus may
develop due to intestinal muscles paralysis.
/square6Fever is unusual.
/square6Patient is conscious and alert.
/square6Sensory findings are usually absent.
/square6Respiratory paralysis may lead to death in un-
treated cases.
/square6A diagnosis of botulism must be considered inpatients with symmetric descending flaccid
paralysis without sensory deficits, who are afebrile
and mentally intact.
Treatment
/square6Botulinum antitoxin should be given intravenouslyas early as possible.
/square6Antibiotics are recommended for wound botulismalong with incision and thorough debridement ofthe infected wound. Penicillin G or metronidazolecan be used.
/square6The immediate threat to life is respiratory failure.Close monitoring for respiratory failure is impor-tant. If respiratory failure develops, endotracheal
intubation and mechanical ventilation should be
started. Tracheostomy is required if the patientneeds mechanical ventilation for a long time.
Q.Gas gangrene.
/square6Gas gangrene  (also known as clostridial myonecrosis )
is a bacterial infection that produces gas in tissuesin gangrene. It usually occurs as a complication indevitalised and devascularised tissues. It is a medical
emergency.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
116Etiology
/square680% of cases are caused by Clostridium  perfringens ,
while C. novyi, C. septicum , and C. histolyticum cause
the remaining cases. These organisms are true
saprophytes and are ubiquitous in soil and dust.
/square6C. perfringens  grows in anaerobic conditions and
also produces a toxin, and enzymes like collagenasesand hyaluronidases which destroy the connective
tissue and allow the infection to spread.
Clinical Features
/square6The incubation period of gas gangrene is usually
short; less than 3 days.
/square6The first symptom is pain, along with numbness ofthe affected limb. There may be swelling aroundthe wound, with pale surrounding skin. Serosan-guinous foul-smelling discharge may be there fromthe wound. Crepitus can be elicited on palpation
in and around the wound due to gas formation.
/square6Constitutional symptoms are severe with tachy-
cardia and hypotension and the patient may bestuporous. Mild to moderate fever may be there.
/square6Sometimes uterine infection can occur followingcriminal abortion or poor aseptic technique duringlabor.
Laboratory Findings
/square6Gas gangrene is a clinical diagnosis, and empirictherapy should be started if the diagnosis issuspected.
/square6X-rays may show presence of gas in the tissues.
/square6The smear shows the presence of gram-positiverods.
/square6Anaerobic culture confirms the diagnosis.
Treatment
/square6Wounds should be thoroughly cleansed anddebrided.
/square6Traditionally, the antibiotic of choice for clostridial
infection has been penicillin G (4 million units every
four hours IV). Recently clindamycin has beenshown to be superior to penicillin G. Combinationof clindamycin and penicillin is superior topenicillin alone. Metronidazole can be used insteadof clindamycin.
/square6Antitoxin is of doubtful value.
/square6Hyperbaric oxygen may relieve constitutional
symptoms but its effect on mortality is not clear.
Q.Describe the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features
and treatment of pseudomembranous colitis.
Etiology
/square6Pseudomembranous colitis is inflammation of the
colon that occurs in some people who have taken
antibiotics. It is usually caused by Clostridioidesdifficile (formerly called Clostridium difficile).  The name
has been changed after finding out that thisorganism has many characteristics different fromother Clostridium  species.
/square6Broad spectrum antibiotics such as clindamycin and
ampicillin have been implicated most often, buttetracyclines and cephalosporins are other causalagents.
Pathogenesis
/square6C. difficile  colonizes the intestinal tract after the
normal gut flora has been altered by antibiotictherapy.
/square6After colonization, C. difficile  elaborates two large
toxins: Toxin A an enterotoxin, and toxin B a cyto-toxin. These toxins initiate an inflammatory processin the intestinal mucosa resulting in the disruptionof epithelial cell barrier function, diarrhea, andpseudomembrane formation.
Clinical Features
/square6Diarrhea usually begins 5 to 10 days after startingantibiotics. Stools may contain blood.
/square6Fever and abdominal pain may be present.
/square6Signs of dehydration may be there due to diarrhea.
/square6Toxic megacolon and colonic perforation (rigidabdomen and rebound tenderness) can occur invery severe cases.
Investigations
/square6Stool examination may show presence of WBCs and
RBCs.
/square6Culture for C. difficile  is slow and expensive, hence
not recommended.
/square6Stool assay for C difficile  toxins (mostly toxin B). It
is considered positive when cultured cells undergocytopathic changes when exposed to stool whichcontains toxin.
/square6Enzyme-linked immunoabsorbent assay (ELISA)for toxin A.
/square6Sigmoidoscopy may reveal erythematous mucosa
covered by adherent membranes over the colonic
mucosa.
Treatment
/square6All antibiotics should be stopped and this alonemay halt the diarrhoea.
/square6Vancomycin (125 mg orally 4 times daily for14 days) is the drug of choice. Fidaxomicin is analternative (200 mg BD for 10 days). Metronidazoleis no longer the drug of choice but can be used if
vancomycin or fidaxomicin is not available.
/square6Probiotics such as lactobacillus may be considered
but benefit is doubtful.
/square6Surgery may be required for complications such astoxic megacolon, perforation and necrotizing colitis.

/square6Infectious Diseases17
1Q.Anthrax (malignant pustule, woolsorters’ disease,
Siberian ulcer, charbon).
/square6Anthrax is a zoonotic infection caused by Bacillus
anthracis . Anthrax is also known by various names
like malignant pustule, woolsorters’ disease,Siberian ulcer, charbon, etc.
Etiology
/square6B. anthracis  is a spore forming gram-positive rod.
/square6Actually it is a zoonotic infection which affects
sheep, cattle, horses and goats. Humans are affectedwhen spores are ingested or inhaled or inoculated
into broken skin. This can happen either by direct
contact with these animals or contact with theirproducts.
/square6Recently anthrax has attained notoriety because of
its possible use in biological warfare.
Pathology
/square6After entry into the body, the spores germinate into
vegetative bacteria and multiply locally.
/square6Spores entering the lungs are ingested by macro-phages and carried via lymphatics to regionallymph nodes, where they rapidly multiply andcause hemorrhagic lymphadenitis.
/square6Invasion of the bloodstream leads to sepsis, killingthe host.
Clinical Features
/square6The incubation period is from 1 to 5 days.
/square6Depending on the route of entry anthrax occurs inthree forms: Cutaneous, inhalational, and gastro-
intestinal forms.
/square6Cutaneous anthrax is the most common presenta-tion (95%). Spores inoculate a host through skinlacerations, abrasions, or biting flies. This form mostcommonly affects the exposed areas of the upper
extremities. Initially the cutaneous lesion appears
as a small erythematous, maculopapular lesion,which subsequently undergoes vesiculation andulceration to form a black eschar (malignant pustule).Sometimes sloughing of the eschar is associatedwith hematogenous spread, sepsis, and shock.
/square6Respiratory involvement (woolsorters’ disease) isdue to inhalation of spores, resulting in nonproduc-tive cough, fever and retrosternal discomfort.Occasionally initial clinical improvement is follo-
wed by severe dyspnea, stridor, cyanosis and death.
Neck and chest wall edema may develop.
/square6Gastrointestinal infection occurs after ingestion ofspores and presents as diarrhea and vomiting,
which can be bloody.
/square6Cutaneous anthrax may be transmitted from person
to person by direct contact or fomites but gastro-intestinal and inhalation anthrax are not transmitted
from person to person.Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray  may show mediastinal widening in
inhalational anthrax.
/square6Gram stain —gram positive rods seen.
/square6Culture  may grow B-anthracis.
/square6Direct fluorescent antibody (DFA) test and polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) assay may identify anthrax
bacillus.
Treatment
/square6Cutaneous anthrax: It is treated with any one of the
following antibiotics—ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin,doxycycline.
/square6Other forms of anthrax: Require therapy with 2 or
3 antibiotics. Antibiotic choices are ciprofloxacin,levofloxacin, meropenem, vancomycin, penicillinG, and doxycycline.
/square6Monoclonal antibodies and IV anthrax immuneglobulin can also be considered for treatment ofinhalation anthrax along with antibiotics.
Postexposure Prophylaxis
/square6Exposed individuals should be given ciprofloxacinor levofloxacin, or doxycycline and anthrax vaccine.
In addition to these, monoclonal antibodies can be
considered for people exposed to inhalation anthrax.
Q.Gonorrhea; Gonococcal urethritis.
/square6Gonorrhea is a sexually transmitted disease (STD)
characterized by purulent infection of the mucousmembrane surfaces.
/square6It is one of the commonest STD world over.
Etiology
/square6It is caused by a gram-negative diplococcus Neisseria
gonorrhoea which infects the epithelium of the uro-
genital tract, and less frequently of the rectum andthe conjunctivae. Gonococci are kidney shaped, andoccur in pairs, hence the name gonococcus.
Figure 1.6 Gonococci


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
118Clinical Features
/square6The incubation period is 1–5 days. The common age
group affected is 15–30 years.
/square6Asymptomatic infections can occur and more
common in females. Asymptomatic individuals
contribute more to transmission of infection than
actual cases.
/square6Gonococcal infection in males results in acute
urethritis with symptoms of dysuria and purulent
urethral discharge. Some patients may have mucoid
urethral discharge. It may spread and cause
epididymitis and prostatitis.
/square6In females, cervix is infected more often than the
urethra. Vaginal discharge, dyspareunia (painful
intercourse), and dysuria are common symptoms.
Genitourinary infection can progress to pelvic
inflammatory disease and lead to fever and lower
abdominal pain.
/square6Rectal gonorrhoea (proctitis) occurs in homosexual
males and heterosexual females as a result of ano-
genital sex. The symptoms vary from mild anal
pruritus and mucopurulent discharge to symptoms
of severe proctitis with rectal pain and tenesmus.
/square6Pharyngeal gonorrhea (pharyngitis) may occur as
a consequence of oro-genital sex and may be seen
in either sex. This is generally asymptomatic.
/square6Ocular gonorrhea is rare in adults. It occurs in
neonates as a result of contact of eyes with the
infected maternal birth canal. It presents as acute
purulent conjunctivitis that may affect deeper
structures of the eye and may occasionally result
in panophthalmitis.
/square6Disseminated gonococcal infection can occur in
both males and females leading to septic arthritis,
pustular skin lesions, and meningitis. Knee is the
most common site of septic arthritis.
Investigations
/square6Gram stain:  Presence of typical gram-negative
intracellular diplococci establishes a diagnosis of
gonorrhea.
/square6Culture is the most common diagnostic test for
gonorrhea.
/square6DNA probe is a test that uses a probe to detect
gonorrhea DNA in specimens.
/square6Polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
Treatment
/square6Ceftriaxone 250 mg intramuscular (IM) single dose
PLUS azithromycin 1 g PO single dose. Doxycycline
100 mg PO twice a day for 7 days can be used
instead of azithromycin.
/square6Disseminated gonococcal infection should be
treated by parenteral antibiotics (ceftriaxone 1 g IM
or IV OD) initially followed by oral therapy for a
total of 7 days./square6Quinolones like ciprofloxacin (500 mg) or levo-
floxacin (250 mg) are alternatives but resistance is
emerging.
Q.Chancroid.
/square6Chancroid also known as “soft chancre,” is a
sexually transmitted disease (STD) characterized by
painful genital ulcers that may be accompanied by
inguinal lymphadenopathy. It is highly contagious
but curable infection.
Etiopathogenesis
/square6Chancroid is caused by  Haemophilus ducreyi which
is a small gram-negative bacillus. When examined
by Gram stain, organisms from culture often clump
in long parallel strands, producing a so-called
“school of fish” appearance.
/square6It is pathogenic only in humans, with no inter-
mediary host. H. ducreyi  is transmitted sexually by
direct contact with purulent lesions and by
autoinoculation to nonsexual sites, such as the eye
and skin. H. ducreyi  enters the skin through
disrupted mucosa and causes a local inflammatory
reaction. It produces a cytotoxin which plays a role
in epithelial injury and development of an ulcer.
Figure 1.7 School of fish appearance of H. ducreyi
Epidemiology
/square6Chancroid is seen worldwide, and is associated
with low socioeconomic and poor hygienic condi-
tions. It predominantly affects young sexually
active people (20–30 years of age). Chancroid is
most often seen in uncircumcised men. In women
it may be asymptomatic.
Clinical Features
/square6Incubation period is 4–7 days.
/square6The ulcer is seen on the prepuce in men and on the
labia in women. It begins as a papule with
surrounding erythema which ruptures and forms
an ulcer. Ulcers are usually multiple, very painful,
non-indurated and soft, have undermined edges
with a base of granulation tissue and slough.
/square6Tender inguinal lymphadenopathy occurs in about
half the patients. These lymph nodes may become
fluctuant (bubo) and rupture spontaneously.

/square6Infectious Diseases19
1Diagnosis
/square6Gram stain of material from a bubo or biopsy from
ulcer reveals large numbers of gram-negativecoccobacilli, arranged in a ‘school of fish’ pattern.
/square6Culture is the most definitive method of diagnosis,but the organism is fastidious.
/square6Immunofluorescence test and serologic assays forantibodies are newer laboratory tests.
/square6Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) can rapidly detectH. ducreyi  in clinical samples and may supersede
culture in future.
Differential Diagnosis
/square6Chancroid ulcer has to be differentiated from genital
ulcer due to syphilis, lymphogranuloma venereum,herpes simplex virus-2, and granuloma inguinale.
Treatment
/square6A single 1-g oral dose of azithromycin will curemost people.
/square6Alternative regimens include ceftriaxone (250 mgintramuscularly as a single dose), or ciprofloxacin(500 mg orally twice a day for 3 days), orerythromycin (500 mg orally three times a day for
7 days).
/square6Fluctuant lymph nodes may require needleaspiration or incision and drainage.
Q. Pertussis (whooping cough).
/square6Pertussis ( per—intensive, tussis —cough) is an acute
respiratory tract infection caused by Bordetella
pertussis,  a gram-negative coccobacillus.
/square6A severe bout of cough is followed by a deep
inspiration with characteristic sound (whoop).Hence the name “whooping cough.”
/square6The Chinese name for pertussis is “the 100-daycough,” which accurately describes the course ofthe disease.
Epidemiology
/square6Pertussis occurs worldwide but the incidence hascome down due to vaccination. Periodic epidemicshowever continue world over.
/square6The infection is more common and serious ininfancy and early childhood. It is highly comm-unicable.
/square6Even with the decline after vaccination, pertussisstill continues to be a major health hazard.
Pathogenesis
/square6The organism is spread by droplets from patients.
/square6Infection is initiated by attachment of the organismto the ciliated epithelial cells of the nasopharynx.
Attachment is mediated by surface adhesions. Atthe site of attachment, the organism multiplies,
producing a variety of toxins that cause localmucosal damage and systemic effects. There is localcellular invasion, but systemic dissemination doesnot occur. Systemic manifestations are due totoxins.
/square6It is not exactly known what causes the paroxysmalcough that is the hallmark of pertussis. Pertussis
toxin may be responsible for cough. Local mucosal
damage may contribute.
/square6Bronchopneumonia can develop in some persons.
/square6Seizures and encephalopathy can occur and are due
to hypoxia from coughing paroxysms or apnea.
Clinical Features
/square6The incubation period is 7 to 14 days.
/square6Classically, there are three stages: Catarrhal,paroxysmal and convalescent.
The Catarrhal Stage
/square6Lasts 1–2 weeks. It resembles common cold and is
characterised by running nose, fever and mildcough.
The Paroxysmal Stage
/square6Lasts for 2–6 weeks or longer. The cough becomesmore frequent and spasmodic with repetitive burstsof 5 to 10 coughs, often within a single expiration.The episode may be terminated by an audible
whoop, which occurs due to rapid inspiration
against a closed glottis at the end of a paroxysm.Post tussive vomiting is frequent.
/square6During a spasm, there may be impressive neck-veindistension, bulging eyes, tongue protrusion, andcyanosis.
/square6Paroxysms may be precipitated by noise, eating,or physical contact
/square6The whoop may be absent in infants, partiallyimmune older children, and adults, which makesthe diagnosis difficult in them. Most complicationsoccur during the paroxysmal stage
The Convalescent Stage
/square6Decrease in intensity and frequency of the coughover 1–2 weeks.
Differential Diagnosis
/square6Includes conditions with severe cough lasting morethan 2 weeks. These are adenovirus infection, endo-
bronchial tuberculosis, inhaled foreign body, and
hyperreactive airway disease.
Complications
/square6Infants and young children have more complica-tions.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
120 /square6Respiratory complications: Otitis media, pneumonia
due to B. pertussis  itself or secondary bacterial
infection, atelectasis, emphysema, bronchiectasis,pneumothorax and pneumomediastinum.
/square6Neurological complications: Seizures andencephalopathy.
/square6Severe cough leads to marked increase in pressurein various body compartments, which may cause
epistaxis; retinal, subconjunctival and intracranial
hemorrhage; inguinal hernia; rectal prolapse;rupture of the diaphragm; rib fracture.
/square6Malnutrition can occur due to prolonged disease.
Laboratory Findings
/square6Pertussis is mainly a clinical diagnosis.
/square6There may be lymphocytic leucocytosis.
/square6Confirmation of diagnosis depends on culture of
B. pertussis  from a nasopharyngeal swab or cough
plate in Bordet-Gengou medium. Cultures are oftenpositive in the catarrhal and early paroxysmal stage.
/square6Direct fluorescent antibody and counterimmuno-
electrophoresis are other methods for rapid
diagnosis.
/square6Chest X-ray may show lung infiltrates.
Management
/square6Patient should be admitted to hospital if there isrespiratory distress, neurological signs and
dehydration
/square6Antibiotics: Purpose is to eradicate the infecting
bacteria from the nasopharynx. Antibiotics shouldbe given early to reduce the risk of prolonged
disease. Macrolide antibiotics (azithromycin,
clarithromycin) are the drugs of choice for treat-ment of pertussis. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazoleis an alternative for individuals allergic tomacrolides.
/square6Supportive measures: These include providing
adequate nutrition and hydration and avoidingfactors aggravating cough such as excessive crying.Complications are managed as per standard guide-lines.
Prevention
/square6Isolate the patient for 4–5 days after starting
antibiotics to prevent spread to others.
/square6Chemoprophylaxis:  With azithromycin or erythro-
mycin should be given to all household contactswhether they have been vaccinated or not.
/square6Vaccination : All children under 7 years of age should
be vaccinated. Vaccination against pertussis is partof standard childhood vaccination. For adults, asingle booster with Tdap (containing lower doses
of the diphtheria and pertussis components than
the childhood DTaP) is recommended after age19 years.Q.Discuss the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical
features, diagnosis and management of typhoidfever (enteric fever).
Q.Rose spots.
Q.Complications of typhoid fever.
/square6Typhoid is a systemic infection caused by Salmonella
typhi or paratyphi .
/square6The disease was initially called typhoid fever because
of its clinical similarity to typhus. Since the primarysite of infection is intestine, the term enteric feverwas proposed as an alternative name. However, tothis day, both names are used interchangeably.
Etiology
/square6Salmonella are gram-negative motile bacilli. Salmo-nellae are present worldwide but cause disease only
where poor hygiene and overcrowding exist.
Pathogenesis
/square6Humans are the only reservoir of S. typhi.  Organisms
originate from patients with typhoid, or fromcarriers excreting organisms in their stools. Humanhands, flies, or insects then transfer these organismsto food or drink. Since S. typhi  survive freezing and
drying, infection can also occur through ice or
canned food. Shellfish from polluted waters may
transmit the disease. Decreased stomach acidity isa risk factor for infection to occur.
/square6Once salmonellae reach the small intestine, the
bacteria penetrate and traverse through the
intestinal wall through phagocytic cells that residewithin Peyer’s patches. After crossing the epitheliallayer of the small intestine, S. typhi  and S. paratyphi
are phagocytosed by macrophages.
/square6Once phagocytosed, salmonellae disseminatethroughout the body in macrophages via thelymphatics and colonize reticuloendothelial tissues(liver, spleen, lymph nodes, and bone marrow)where they start multiplying. Patients have
relatively few or no symptoms during this initial
incubation stage.
/square6Once the number of bacteria reaches a critical stage,
they invade blood stream and rest of the body. At
this stage, signs and symptoms, such as fever andabdominal pain appear. Peyer’s patches can getenlarged and necrosed due to mononuclear cellinfiltration. Bacteria also reach gallbladder viablood stream and multiply there. From the gall
bladder, bacteria reach the intestine and are
excreted in the stool which can spread to others viacontaminated foods. Some patients become chroniccarriers carrying the bacteria in their gallbladderand are responsible for much of the transmissionof the organism. Carriers remain asymptomatic, but
may shed bacteria in their stool for decades.

/square6Infectious Diseases21
1Clinical Features
/square6The incubation period averages 10 to 14 days.
/square6The onset of the disease is insiduous, with
headache, malaise, anorexia and fever. The fever isremittent (does not touch the baseline) sometimesincreasing in a step-like manner (step ladder fever)to reach a peak towards the end of the first week.Thereafter, it plateaus and remains for two to three
weeks. Accompanying chills are common but frank
rigors are rare. Headache is present and oftendisabling.
/square6With the passing days debility sets in and in some
cases progresses to mental dullness and delirium,
characterized by muttering and picking at bedclothes.
/square6Abdominal discomfort with mild bloating and
constipation usually occurs, but diarrhea can also
occur. Stools may have a ‘pea soup’ appearance.
/square6Hepatosplenomegaly may develop by the end ofthe first week. Mild jaundice may be present.
/square6The typical rash of typhoid (rose spots) developsin the second week but is seldom seen in Indianpatients. “Rose spots” are pink macules, 2–3 mmin size, occur in small crops on the chest and
abdomen, blanch on pressure and last for 2–3 days.
/square6In the absence of complications, typhoid fever
usually subsides.
Complications
/square6Complications are uncommon now due to availa-bility of effective antibiotics.
/square6Bleeding:  Erosion of blood vessels in necrotic Peyer’s
patches or in the intestinal wall can initiatebleeding.
/square6Intestinal perforation:  Typhoid ulcers can perforate.
Usually happens in 3rd week of illness.
/square6Typhoid can affect almost all the organs. Hence,
pneumonia, meningitis, nephritis, cholecystitis,
hepatitis, myocarditis, osteomyelitis, encephalitiscan occur.
/square6Involvement of the central nervous system can
present as stupor, delirium, convulsions, encepha-
litis, cerebellar ataxia, extrapyramidal signs,myopathy and deafness.
/square6Acute renal failure and disseminated intravascular
coagulation are rare complications.
Investigations
/square6The diagnostic “gold standard” for enteric fever is
culture of S. typhi  or S. paratyphi . Blood cultures are
positive in 90% during the first week of infectionbut decrease to 50% by the third week. Cultures ofstool and urine may also be positive. Bone marrowculture is highly (90%) sensitive and may remain
positive even with up to 5 days of antibiotic therapy.
Culture of intestinal secretions (best obtained by anoninvasive duodenal string test) can be positive
despite a negative bone marrow culture. If blood,bone marrow, and intestinal secretions are allcultured, the yield of a positive culture is >90%.Stool cultures, can be positive during the third weekof infection in untreated patients.
/square6The Widal test is very helpful in diagnosis. Therecan be false positive and false negative results. Thetest is positive if O antigen titer is more than 1:160.A four-fold rise in serum agglutinins against the
somatic (O) antigen of the bacillus is diagnostic
rather than a single test. Titres against the flagellar(H) antigen are less specific. Usually it becomespositive after the 1st week of illness. Early anti-microbial therapy may dampen the immunologicresponse.
/square6Typhidot-M test is a new test which detects IgM anti-body against typhoid bacilli. It has high sensitivityand specificity and is better than WIDAL test.
/square6Relative bradycardia and leukopenia may be a clueto diagnosis.
/square6LFT may show mild elevation of AST and ALT.
/square6Polymerase chain reaction tests and DNA probeassays are being developed.
Treatment
/square6Third generation cephalosporins are currently thedrugs of choice. Ofloxacin and levofloxacin are alsoeffective, but quinolone resistance is now emerging.
/square6Ceftriaxone (1 to 2 g intravenously or intramuscu-larly) for 10 to 14 days is the treatment of choice insevere typhoid.
/square6Azithromycin is also an alternative to quinolones(1 g orally once a day for 7 days or 500 mg orallyfor 10 days).
/square6Paracetamol can be used to control fever, headache
and myalgia.
/square6Supportive measures include good nutrition and
hydration. Soft and bland diet should be givenbecause of inflamed bowel. Laxatives and enemas
should be avoided because of the same reason.
/square6In cases of severe typhoid fever (fever, altered
sensorium or septic shock; and a positive culturefor S. typhi  or S. paratyphi A ), dexamethasone
treatment should be considered. One trial showed
that treatment with dexamethasone decreased themortality rate.
/square6About 1 to 4% patients become chronic carriers of
typhoid bacilli. They can be a source of infection to
others (remember Typhoid Mary). Carrier state canbe treated with oral amoxicillin, TMP-SMX,ciprofloxacin, or norfloxacin. Antibiotics should begiven for 6 weeks. However, in cases of anatomicalabnormality (e.g. gallstones or kidney stones),
eradication of the infection often cannot be achieved
by antibiotic therapy alone and requires surgicalcorrection of the abnormalities.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
122Prognosis
/square6The mortality rate of typhoid fever is less than 1%
in treated cases. Elderly or debilitated persons arelikely to do poorly. With complications, the prog-
nosis is poor. Relapses occur in up to 10% of cases.
Q.Typhoid vaccines.
/square6Vaccination against typhoid is recommended for,
– Persons traveling to developing countries
– People who have intimate or household contact
with a case or chronic carrier
– Laboratory workers who frequently work with
S. typhi .
/square6Following typhoid vaccines are currently available.
None of the typhoid vaccines protect againstparatyphoid fever.
1. Ty21a (oral vaccine)
/square6This is an attenuated live S. typhi  vaccine. The
vaccine is supplied as a packet of four enteric-
coated capsules that must be kept refrigerated.It should be given as one capsule every other dayuntil all four capsules have been taken. Boosterdoses are given every 5 years. Vaccine-elicitedimmunity occurs 14 days after receipt of the last
dose, with an efficacy of 50 to 80 percent. It
maintains its efficacy for 4 years. It is well tolera-ted. Ty21a is commonly used vaccine because itcan be given orally and has fewer side effects.
/square6It is contraindicated in
/square6Pregnant women
/square6Children below 6 years.
/square6People with immunodeficiency.
2. ViCPS
/square6It consists of purified Vi polysaccharide from the
bacterial capsule.
/square6It is given as 0.5 ml intramuscularly (single dose)and is well tolerated. It maintains its efficacy for2 years. Booster dose is given after 2 years
/square6It should not be used below 2 years.
3. Typhoid conjugate vaccine (TCV)
/square6This vaccine consists of Vi polysaccharide bound
to a nontoxic protein such as tetanus toxoid or
diphtheria toxoid, etc. Linkage of a proteinmoiety results in T cell dependent differentiationof B cells. Thus, TCVs are highly immunogenicand suitable for use in children below 2 years.
/square6Two injections of the vaccine have to be givenwith 6 weeks interval between the doses.
Q.Typhoid carrier.
/square6A person waho excretes Salmonella organism in
stool or urine for more than 12 months after theacute infection is called chronic carrier./square6About 2–5% of patients become chronic carriersafter Salmonella typhi  infection, and the rate is higher
in patients with cholelithiasis or other biliary tractabnormalities.
/square6Chronic urinary carriage of S. typhi  is rare and is
usually associated urinary tract abnormalities suchas urolithiasis, prostatic hypertrophy or Schistosoma
haematobium  infection.
/square6Chronic carriers do not develop recurrent sympto-
matic disease. They develop high level systemicimmunity so that they and do not develop clinicaldisease but excrete large numbers of organisms inthe stool.
/square6Chronic carriers act as source of infection to others,particularly if involved in food preparation. Hence,eradication of carrier state should be done if suchindividuals are identified.
Diagnosis
/square6Stool culture is the gold standard test to detectcarrier state but has low sensitivity.
/square6Detection of antibodies against Vi antigen is alsoused for carrier diagnosis.
Treatment
/square6Fluoroquinolones are the drugs of choice to eradi-cate carrier state (e.g. ciprofloxacin 500 to 750 mgorally twice daily or ofloxacin 400 mg orally twice
daily for 4 weeks). Cholecystectomy should be
considered if there is any abnormality such ascholelithiasis.
/square6Alternatives antibiotics are ampicillin, trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole, and chloramphenicol.
Q.Shigellosis.
Etiology
/square6Shigellosis refers to infection of the intestinal tract
by Shigella species.
/square6There are 4 species; Shigella dysenteriae, Sh. flexneri,
Sh. sonnei and Sh. boydii.
/square6Shigella dysenteriae  type 1 is the most virulent of
the shigellae. It has been responsible for many
epidemics during war, famine and natural disasters.
Epidemiology
/square6Shigellosis occurs mainly in the developing
countries.
/square6Shigella infection is associated with the ‘gay bowel
syndrome’ of homosexuals, and travellers’ diarrheaof tourists to the developing countries.
/square6The disease spreads by feco-oral route. Infection istransmitted by fingers and flies. Food and watercontamination can cause epidemics as in refugeecamps where population densities are high and
hygienic standards are low.

/square6Infectious Diseases23
1/square6Bacillary dysentery is also a hazard in institutions
where hygiene is difficult to maintain, as in homesfor the mentally handicapped, geriatric nursinghomes, and day-care centres for children.
Pathogenesis and Pathology
/square6Shigella first multiplies in the small intestine andinitially, it may cause a secretory diarrhea. Thereafterit rapidly localizes to the colon, where inflamma-tion with hemorrhage, microabscesses, ulceration,and mucus production results.
Clinical Features
/square6Symptoms usually start 2–3 days after exposure.
/square6The onset is sudden with fever, malaise, abdominalpain and watery diarrhea. This early phase reflectssmall intestinal involvement.
/square6Later when the colon gets involved there will be
dysentery characterized by loose stools mixed with
blood and mucus. There may be tenesmus. Severecramping abdominal pain may be present.
/square6Nausea, vomiting, headache may occur.
/square6In children convulsions may occur due to the effectof neurotoxin.
/square6Sigmoidoscopy reveals hyperaemic and inflammedmucosa, with transversely distributed ulcers withragged undermined edges, a picture which isindistinguishable at times from inflammatorybowel disease.
/square6Reactive arthritis and hemolytic–uremic syndrome(HUS) are rare complications.
Differential Diagnosis
/square6Shigella dysentery has to be differentiated fromother causes of dysentery such as:
– Inflammatory bowel disease
–Entamoeba histolytica
– Salmonella
– Entero invasive E. coli
– Yersinia
–Campylobacter jejuni
–Vibrio parahaemolyticus
–Clostridium difficile
/square6Clinically it is difficult to distinguish between these
and laboratory tests may be needed. Viral gastro-
enteritis is not usually associated with fever and
the stool does not usually contain blood or pus.
Differential diagnosis between Shigella (bacillary)
and amoebic dysentery
Laboratory Findings
/square6Stool shows many WBCs and RBCs.
/square6Stool culture is positive for shigellae in most cases.
/square6Serological tests are used mainly during epi-demics.Treatment
/square6Fluid and electrolyte replacement:  Oral rehydration
salt can be used and if the patient is unable to takeorally use intravenous fluids.
/square6Antibiotics: A  fluoroquinolone (such as ciprofloxacin
500 mg po q 12 h for 5 days), or azithromycin500 mg daily for 4 days, or ceftriaxone 2 g/day IVfor 5 days. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole canalso be used but shigella is likely to be resistant tothis antibiotic. Fluoroquinolones are contraindi-
cated in pregnancy.
/square6Antimotility drugs such as loperamide may worsen
the condition and are better avoided.
Q.Describe the etiology, epidemiology, clinical
features, diagnosis and management of cholera.
Add a note on its prevention.
/square6Cholera is an acute
diarrheal illness caused
by Vibrio cholerae . The
hallmark of the disease
is profuse secretory
diarrhea. Cholera canbe endemic, epidemic,
or pandemic.
Etiology
/square6Vibrio cholerae  is a
comma shaped, motile,gram-negative bacillusthat colonizes the human
small intestine. It has a
single flagellum at oneTABLE 1.5: Differential diagnosis between bacillary dysentery
and amebic dysentery
Bacillary dysentery Amebic dysentery
Ulcers are distributed trans- Ulcers are distributed in the long
versely to long axis of gut. axis of gut; flaskshaped. Shape
Ulcers are serpiginous with is oval with regular edges. Ulcers
ragged undermined edges are deep and involve all layerscommunicating with other of intestine
ulcers
Rarely perforate May perforateMucous membrane is Mucous membrane not inflamed.
inflamed. Bowel wall not inflamed. Bowel wall thickened
thickenedStool scanty in quantity but Stools are lare quantity, mixed
very frequent; bright blood with blood and mucus, dark
red, gelatinous viscid mucus, brown, foul smelling
odourless (red currant jelly
appearance)
Tenesmus common Tenesmus uncommonStool microscopy: RBCs RBCs numerous and in clumps.
numerous and discrete. WBCs scanty. E. histolytica
WBCs plenty. Bacteria may trophozoites containing ingested
be visible red cells present
Figure 1.8 Vibrio cholerae


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
124
end. Its antigenic structure consists of flagellar H
antigen and somatic O antigen. based on the typeof O antigen, Vibrio cholera are divided into various
serogroups. Currently V. cholerae  O1 and V. cholerae
O139 are the principal ones associated with
epidemic cholera. Other serotypes such as non-O1,
non-O139 can cause mild infection.
/square6Serotype O1 exists in two biotypes, classical and
EI Tor, and EI Tor biotype is further divided into
three serotypes, Inaba, Ogawa, and Hikojima.
/square6V. cholerae  can survive in water for up to 3 weeks
and on moist linen for about a week.
Epidemiology
/square6Its natural habitat is salt water.
/square6Cholera has 2 main reservoirs, humans and water.V. cholerae  is rarely isolated from animals, and
animals do not play a role in transmission of disease.
/square6Transmission occurs by the faeco-oral route usuallythrough contaminated food and water.
/square6V. cholerae belonging to O1 serogroup (classical
biotype) has been so far responsible for many
epidemics and pandemics. It has been endemic in
the Ganges Delta of West Bengal and Bangladesh.It has been responsible for several epidemics andpandemics in the world.
/square6In 1991, epidemic EI Tor struck South America.
/square6In 1993 an outbreak of cholera occurred in Indiaand Bangladesh for the first time with a non O1V. cholerae.  This organism is now designated as
O139 Bengal. A close watch is being kept on O139
B, as it has a potential to cause epidemics andpandemics. Mild infection is much more commonwith the currently predominant EI Tor biotype andwith non-O1, non-O139 serogroups of V. cholerae .
/square6In 2010, an outbreak occurred in Haiti which later
spread to the Dominican Republic and Cuba. Casestransported into Europe, Japan, and Australia have
caused localized outbreaks.
Pathogenesis
/square6Cholera is spread by feco-oral route. After inges-
tion, cholera bacilli colonize the small intestine, andproduce an exotoxin which is responsible for thedisease features.
/square6The exotoxin has A and B subunits. The B subunitbinds to the epithelial cell wall. The A subunit is
responsible for actions. A subunit activates intra-
cellular adenylate cyclase, which causes increase incyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). cAMPin turn inhibits sodium absorption and stimulatessecretion of chloride. The net effect is accumulationof sodium chloride in the intestinal lumen. Water
moves passively to maintain osmolality, and when
this volume exceeds the capacity of the gut toreabsorb fluid, watery diarrhea ensues.
/square6Cholera causes bicarbonate loss in stools andincrease in lactate because of diminished perfusionof peripheral tissues which can cause metabolic
acidosis. Hypokalemia results from potassium loss
in the stool.
/square6The organisms themselves do not damage theepithelial cells of the gut. Since the organisms donot invade the intestinal wall, stool does not containblood.
/square6Malnutrition increases susceptibility to cholera.Because gastric acid can quickly inactivate V. cholerae ,
hypochlorhydria or achlorhydria of any cause(including Helicobacter pylori  infection, gastric
surgery, vagotomy, use of H
2 blockers and proton
pump inhibitors) increases susceptibility. For
unknown reasons, incidence of cholera appears to
be twice as high in people with type O blood.


/square6Infectious Diseases25
1Clinical Features
/square6Cholera is predominantly a disease of children with
attack rates highest in the 1 to 5 years age group.Classically there are three disease phases.
/square6Evacuation phase: Occurs after an incubation
period of 1–2 days. There is sudden onset ofpainless, profuse, watery diarrhea. There may bevomiting in severe cases. Stool appears like ‘Rice
water’ because of mucus flecks floating in the
watery stools (resemblance to the water in whichrice has been washed). If treatment is not given atthis stage, the patient passes onto the next stage.
/square6Collapse phase:  This is characterized by severe
dehydration with sunken eyes, hollow cheeks,‘washer woman’s hands’, and decreased urineoutput. Circulatory shock may develop due todehydration, with a cold, clammy skin, tachycardia,
hypotension and peripheral cyanosis. The patientusually remains alert but appears weak. Musclecramps can occur due to dehydration and hypo-natermia. Children may present with convulsionsdue to hypoglycemia. Acute renal failure and
metabolic acidosis may develop due to hypo-
volemic shock. If the patient survives this stage, therecovery phase  sets in.
/square6Recovery phase:  Diarrhea episodes come down and
there is gradual recovery of clinical and biochemicalparameters.
/square6Cholera sicca:  Refers to severe disease in which
massive amount of fluid and electrolytes collect inthe dilated intestinal loops. Diarrhoea and vomitingdo not occur and the mortality is high.
TABLE 1.6: Assessment of dehydration
Normal (No dehydration) Mild to moderate dehydration Severe dehydration (if the
(if the patient has two or more patient has two or more signs,
of the following signs, including at least one sign
including at least one sign marked with star *)
marked with star *)
General condition Well, alert *Restless, irritable* *Lethargic or unconscious;
floppy*
Eyes Normal Sunken Very sunken and dry
Tears Present Absent Absent
Mouth and tongue Moist Dry Very dry
Thirst Drinks normally, not thirsty *Thirsty, drinks eagerly* *Drinks poorly or not able to
drink*
Skin pinch Goesback quickly *Goes back slowly* *Goes back very slowly*Assessment of Dehydration
Investigations
/square6The diagnosis is largely clinical. It should be
suspected in patients with painless diarrhea
without fever and abdominal pain. Stool does not
contain blood.
/square6Gram’s stain of a stool sample may show gram-
negative comma shaped organisms.
/square6Examination of stool under dark field illuminationmay show motile organisms. Inhibition of their
movement with type-specific antisera is diagnostic.
/square6Stool and rectal swabs should be taken for culture.
/square6Serotyping and biotyping: Specific antisera can beused in immobilization tests to identify the sero-
type. This is useful for epidemiologic studies.
/square6Hematocrit and serum proteins are elevated in
dehydrated patients because of hemoconcentration.
Treatment
/square6Cholera is simple to treat. Rapid replacement of
fluid and electrolytes is enough in most of the
cases.ORS (Oral Rehydration Salt)
/square6Replacement of fluid by ORS is highly effective andhas saved countless lives. ORS takes advantage of
a co-transport mechanism not affected by cholera
toxin wherein sodium (Na
+) moves across the gut
mucosa along with actively transported glucose.Sodium loss in stool in cholera is high, so that anoral replacement solution containing 90 mmol/LNa
+ is the WHO recommendation.
/square6Content of WHO ORS in grams (to be added to1 litre of water)
NaCl 3.5
NaHCO32.5
KCI 1.5
Glucose 20
/square6Rice-based ORS is also available. It contains rice
powder instead of glucose. It has less osmolality,
provides more nutritional benefits and may also
reduce the amount of diarrheal stool, an effect notseen with ordinary ORS.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
126 Intravenous Fluids
/square6The ORS is necessary for the severely dehydrated.
Ringer lactate is the best choice as it contains allthe electrolytes. The total fluid deficit, which is
usually estimated as 10% of body weight, can be
infused within 4 hours and half of this within thefirst hour. Oral fluid can usually be substitutedthereafter but patients with continued large-volumediarrhea require intravenous fluid until diarrheastops. Hypokalemia may develop and can be
corrected by potassium supplements. Fluid
replacement is monitored by urine output.
Antibiotics
/square6Although not necessary for cure, the use of anantibiotic to which the organism is susceptible willdiminish the duration and volume of fluid loss andwill hasten clearance of the organism from thestool. Single-dose tetracycline (2 g) or doxycycline
(300 mg) is effective in adults but is not
recommended for children <8 years of age becauseof possible deposition in bone and developing teeth.Antibiotics can be continued for 3 to 5 days, thoughsingle dose is enough for most of the cases. In areaswhere tetracycline resistance is prevalent, cipro-
floxacin or erythromycin can be used for adults. For
children, furazolidone has been the recommendedagent and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole the secondchoice. Erythromycin is also a good choice for children.
Prevention
/square6Hygienic measures should be implemented. Avoidunboiled water, food from street vendors, raw orundercooked seafood, and raw vegetables. Water
can be treated with chlorine or iodine, by filtration,
or by boiling.
Antibiotic Prophylaxis
/square6Not routinely recommended. WHO recommendsprophylaxis only if an average of one householdmember in a family of five becomes ill after the firstcase. Mass chemotherapy of entire communities isnot effective and is not recommended.
Vaccines
/square6Cholera vaccination is no longer officially required
for any international traveler but can be used by
travelers going to endemic areas. WHO hasidentified 3 oral vaccines which can be used.
/square6The first vaccine is a  killed whole-cell V. cholerae O1
with recombinant B subunit of cholera toxoid (rBS-
WC). Two doses have to be taken one week apart.It provides ~70% protection over a 3-year period.It can be used to prevent cholera in populations atrisk of an epidemic.
/square6Other vaccines are SHANCHOL and ORCVAXwhich are bivalent vaccines based on serogroupsO1 and O139. These are administered in 2 doses
14 days apart in adults and children older than1 year. A booster dose is recommended after 2 years.
/square6CVD 103-HgR (VAXCHORA) is a recently FDA
approved cholera vaccine. This vaccine is highly
protective against moderate and severe cholera andis recommended for adults aged 18 to 64 yearstraveling to high risk areas. It is given as single oraldose.
Q.Describe the etiology, epidemiology, pathogenesis,
clinical features, diagnosis and management of
plague.
Etiology
/square6Plague is an acute febrile zoonotic disease caused
by infection with Yersinia pestis . Yersinia  is named
in honor of Alexander Yersin, who first isolated this
bacterium.
/square6Y. pestis  is a gram-negative coccobacillus in the
family Enterobacteriaceae. It has bipolar staining
pattern and appears like a safety pin.
/square6Plague is one of the most virulent and potentially
lethal bacterial diseases known.
Epidemiology
/square6Foci of plague are present on most continents exceptAustralia. Multiple stable foci exist in Africa, Asia,and South America.
/square6Plague has been known for many centuries. It wasdescribed as Mahamari (great destroyer) in India.
The latest outbreak occurred in India in 1994 andaffected Maharashtra (earthquake-affected areas)
and Surat of Gujarat.
/square6Low atmospheric temperature and humidity favor
epidemics, which occur mostly from September toMay.
/square6All the age groups and both sexes are affected.
/square6Plague is a zoonosis primarily affecting rodents.
Humans are accidental hosts who play virtually
no role in the maintenance of Y. pestis  in the eco-
system.
Figure 1.9 Plague bacilli


/square6Infectious Diseases27
1/square6The reservoir of infection is Rattus norvegicus  in
western countries. In India, wild rats like Tateraindica and Bandicota bengalensis varius are thereservoirs of infection. Domestic rats get infectedby coming in contact with wild rats. When domesticrats die or come in contact with the human
population, the disease spreads. The chief vector
of the disease is the flea Xenopsylla cheopis.  Farmers,
rat catchers and those who eat rats may contractplague from the wild reservoir. When fleas feaston dead rats they ingest plague bacilli whichmultiply and block proventricularis. This blocked
flea inoculates the host and thus spreads the
disease. Infection can also take place by the bite ofa rat and by handling infected material. Pneumonicplague spreads from man to man by dropletinfection. Dogs and cats can become infected withY. pestis by eating infected rodents and possibly by
being bitten by infective fleas. Both dogs and cats
may transport infected fleas from rodent-infestedareas to the home environment.
Pathogenesis
/square6Y. pestis  is highly invasive and pathogenic. It
produces many virulence factors and also alipopolysaccharide endotoxin which is importantin sepsis, triggering the systemic inflammatory
response syndrome and its complications.
/square6Y. pestis organisms inoculated through the skin or
mucous membranes are carried to regional lymphnodes via lymphatic channels, although direct
bloodstream inoculation and dissemination may
take place. Phagocytes, which can phagocytizeY. pestis,  may play a role in dissemination of the
infection to distant sites. Plague can involve almostany organ, and untreated plague generally resultsin widespread and massive tissue destruction.
Infected lymph nodes (buboes) contain huge
numbers of infectious plague organisms and showdistorted or obliterated lymph node architecturewith loss of vascular integrity, hemorrhage,necrosis, infiltration of neutrophils, and extensiveserosanguineous effusion. Primary septicemic
plague consists of sepsis in the absence of a bubo;
secondary septicemic plague is a complication ofbubonic or pneumonic plague. DIC can occur insevere cases. Vascular damage may lead to wide-spread ecchymoses and petechiae. Acral ischemiaand gangrene may sometimes develop.
/square6Primary plague pneumonia is lobar or multilobar.Secondary plague pneumonia begins morediffusely. The affected lung tissue is characterized
by edema, hemorrhagic necrosis, and infiltration
by neutrophilic leukocytes.
Clinical Features
/square6Incubation period is 2–8 days./square6There is rapid onset of fever associated withheadache, backache and bodyache. If not treatedearly, plague can follow a toxic course, resulting inshock, multiple-organ failure, and death.
/square6In humans, plague presents mainly as three forms;bubonic, septicemic, and pneumonic. Bubonicplague is most common type and is usually causedby the bite of an infected flea. Septicemic andpneumonic plague can be either primary orsecondary to spread from other sites.
Bubonic Plague
/square6Initially patient experiences fever, chills, headache,myalgia and arthralgia. These symptoms arefollowed usually within 24 hours by pain and
swelling in one or more regional lymph nodes
proximal to the site of inoculation of the plaguebacillus. Since most of the flea bites are on legs,femoral and inguinal nodes are most commonlyinvolved; axillary and cervical nodes are next mostcommonly affected. Within hours, the enlarging
bubo becomes painful and tender. The patient
usually guards against palpation, pressure, stretchand limits movements around the bubo. Thesurrounding tissue often becomes edematous, andthe overlying skin may be erythematous, warm, andtense. At the site of flea bite, there may be a papule,
pustule, or ulcer. The ulcer may be covered by an
eschar.
/square6If treated early, bubonic plague usually respondsquickly, with resolution of fever and other systemic
manifestations. Without treatment, patients become
increasingly toxic, and secondary plague sepsis mayresult in DIC, bleeding, shock, and multiorganfailure.
Septicemic Plague
/square6Here primary septicemia develops in the absenceof a bubo. Septic patients often present with gastro-intestinal symptoms like nausea, vomiting, diarrhea,and abdominal pain, which may be confused withsome abdominal disease. If not treated early with
appropriate antibiotics, septicemic plague can be
fulminant and fatal. DIC may develop which willmanifest as petechiae, ecchymoses, bleeding frompuncture wounds and orifices, and gangrene oflimbs. Shock may develop which manifests asrefractory hypotension, renal shutdown, and
obtundation. Acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS) can occur at any stage of septicemic plague.
Pneumonic Plague
/square6Pneumonic plague is often secondary to bacteremiain bubonic or septicemic plague. However, primarypneumonic plague can occur, being acquired frominhalation of Y. pestis  from another patient or
animal or laboratory specimens.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
128 /square6Pneumonic plague develops more rapidly and is
more fatal than other two forms. Incubation periodis usually 3 to 5 days. The onset is often sudden,with fever, headache, bodyache, and weakness.Pulmonary signs, including tachypnea and dys-pnea, cough with expectoration, and chest pain,
usually start on the second day of illness. Respira-
tory failure may develop. Usually one lobe isinvolved in early stages and later on it may spreadto other lobes and other lung also.
Rare Presentations
/square6Plague meningitis, plague pharyngitis, endophthal-mitis, and lymphadenitis at multiple sites.
Diagnosis
/square6Plague should be suspected in any patient withfever and painful lymphadenopathy. Patient shouldbe questioned about travel to areas of endemicdisease, and potential exposure to animal or rodentvector.
/square6Culture and staining: This will confirm the
diagnosis. Blood, aspirates from buboes, sputumand CSF can all be cultured and stained withWright-Giemsa or Wayson’s stain. Wayson’s staindemonstrates the typical bipolar staining, which
resembles a “closed safety pin.” Gram’s stain shows
small gram-negative coccobacilli.
/square6Serology:  Demonstration of antibodies supports the
diagnosis.
/square6Rapid diagnostic tests: A new rapid diagnostic test
(RDT) capable of detecting F1 antigen of the Y. pestis
within 15 minutes has been developed. This testholds considerable promise for rapid diagnosis of
plague.
/square6Chest X-ray:  May show bronchopneumonia,
consolidation, pleural effusions and hilar ormediastinal lymphadenopathy.
Treatment
/square6Patients should be isolated
/square6Streptomycin is considered the drug of choice.However, gentamicin has been shown to be equallyefficacious, cheaper and easier to administer.Hence, in many places gentamicin has replaced
streptomycin as the drug of choice. Other antibiotics
which are effective include tetracycline, doxycycline(100 mg PO or IV twice daily), chloramphenicol,and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (160/800 mgtwice daily). Antibiotics should be given for10 days.
/square6Antibiotics are given orally but can be givenparenterally in critically ill patients and to patientswho cannot tolerate oral medication. In general,antimicrobial treatment should be continued for
7 to 10 days or for at least 3 days after the patient
has become afebrile and has made a clinicalrecovery. Patients initially given intravenous
antibiotics may be switched to oral regimens uponclinical improvement.
/square6Chloramphenicol may be used to treat plague
meningitis, pleuritis, endophthalmitis, and myo-
carditis because of its superior tissue penetration;it is used alone or in combination with streptomycinor another first-line agent.
/square6Complications like DIC, ARDS, and sepsis requiretreatment as per standard guidelines.
/square6Buboes may require surgical drainage.
Prognosis
/square6If not treated, plague is fatal in >50% of cases ofbubonic disease and in nearly all cases of septicemicand pneumonic disease. Prognosis has improvednow with the availability of antibiotics.
Prevention
/square6Avoid exposure to live or dead rodents and use
insect repellants in endemic areas.
/square6Face to face contacts of patients with known or
suspected pneumonic plague should be providedchemoprophylaxis with doxycycline (100 mg two
times daily for 2 to 3 weeks). In pregnant women
and children under the age of 8, trimethoprimsulfamethoxazole has been recommended for fiveto seven days. Ciprofloxacin is also effective.
/square6Vaccines are being tested.
Q.Describe the etiology, clinical features, diagnosis
and treatment of melioidosis.
Etiology
/square6Melioidosis is an infectious disease caused by
Burkholderia pseudomallei (previously known as
Pseudomonas pseudomallei ). It is a gram-negative
organism showing bipolar staining (safety-pinappearance) like plague bacillus. It is found in thesoil and stagnant waters of the tropical andsubtropical regions of Asia and Australia.
Epidemiology
/square6Melioidosis is found predominantly in Asia,Australia, and China. It is rare in the United States.
/square6The routes of infection are through skin abrasions,by ingestion, and inhalation.
/square6Percutaneous inoculation during exposure to wetseason soil or contaminated water is the predomi-nant mode of acquiring the infection. Hence,majority of melioidosis cases occurs in the monsoonwet season.
Clinical Features
/square6Incubation period ranges from 1 to 20 days.
/square6Most infections are asymptomatic.

/square6Infectious Diseases29
1/square6Immunocompromised states such as diabetes
mellitus, malignancy, chronic renal failure andcirrhosis of the liver predispose to infection.
/square6The most common manifestation is an acute pulmo-
nary infection (pneumonia). Localized suppurative
infection can occur in almost any organ but is mostcommon at the site of inoculation in the skin.Typical metastatic sites of infection include the liver,spleen, kidneys, prostate, bone, and skeletal muscle.Most of the patients have multiple abscesses.
Septicemia may occur in some patients which may
cause death. Acute or chronic fever may be present.
Pathology
/square6Initially lesions begin as granulomas resemblingtuberculosis, with giant cells but without acid-fastbacilli. Later these lesions become microabscesses.Microabscesses enlarge to become big abscesses.
Diagnosis
/square6Melioidosis should be considered in patients withfever and multiple abscesses. Multiple abscesses,
especially those in the liver or spleen, should alert
the physician to the possibility of melioidosis.
/square6Confirmation of the diagnosis is by demonstrationof typical safety pin-shaped organisms in smear and
culture of abscesses. Pus may occasionally be sterile;
hence, repeated samples should be cultured. Insevere cases, blood culture may be positive.
Treatment
/square6The drug of choice is ceftazidime or carbapenemssuch as imipenem or meropenem for a minimumof 2 weeks and preferably for 4 weeks. Thereafter,combination of chloramphenicol, TMP-SMX, and
doxycycline or with the single agent amoxicillin/
clavulanate is recommended for 6 weeks to6 months to eradicate infection.
/square6Abscesses should be drained by surgical procedures.
/square6Untreated, the case fatality may be 90% or more.
Q.Cat-scratch disease.
Etiology
/square6Cat-scratch disease is caused by Bartonella henselae,
a gram-negative bacillus.
/square6It occurs throughout the world and is seen
commonly in children.
Clinical Features
/square6Domestic cat is the animal reservoir of this micro-organism. It is caused by scratch, bite, or lick of a
cat and by close contact.
/square6Usually 3 to 5 days after exposure, patient develops
a papule that later crusts. Still later tender regionallymphadenopathy develops. There may be mild
fever and malaise. The lymphadenopathy persistsfor 3 to 5 weeks. Complications like meningitis,
transverse myelitis, encephalitis, hepatitis andosteomyelitis can occur.
Investigations
/square6Serologic testing or PCR testing.
/square6Lymph node biopsy: Reveals characteristic granulo-matous inflammation with stellate necrosis.
Treatment
/square6Cat-scratch disease is generally benign and self-limiting. Antibiotics are not required except inimmunocompromised patients and patients withencephalitis or other serious manifestations. It canbe treated with azithromycin or doxycycline.
Q.Trench fever.
Etiology
/square6Trench fever, also known as 5-day fever  or quintan
fever , is a febrile illness caused by Bartonella quintana ,
a gram-negative bacillus. It was first reported insoldiers hiding in trenches during World War I.
Hence, it was called trench fever.
Epidemiology
/square6Trench fever is seen worldwide. It is more common
in the United States.
/square6Humans are the only reservoir of this Bartonella
infection. Human body louse is the carrier of B.
quintana  which is transmitted to humans when feces
from infected lice are rubbed into abraded skin orthe conjunctiva.
Clinical Manifestations
/square6Trench fever is characterized by the sudden onsetof fever, headache, bodyache, malaise, weight lossand aseptic meningitis.
/square6Some patients may have minimal symptoms.
Diagnosis
/square6The infection is diagnosed by finding Bartonella
quintana in blood. In cultures, it is slow to grow.
The infection can also be detected serologically bydemonstration of antibodies.
Treatment
/square6Gentamicin for 2 weeks plus doxycycline for6 weeks.
Q.Describe the etiology, epidemiology, pathogenesis,
diagnosis and treatment of brucellosis.
Etiology
/square6Brucellosis is a zoonotic infection transmitted to
human beings from infected animals. It is also

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
130 known as undulant, Mediterranean, Malta or
Gibraltar fever. It is called undulant fever becauseof its remittent character.
/square6It is caused by brucella organisms which are small,
non motile, gram-negative rods.
/square6There are many species of Brucella. Out of these,
Brucella melitensis  is the commonest cause of disease
in humans and is found in sheep, goats, and camels.
B. abortus is usually acquired from cattle or buffalo.
B. suis  is usually acquired from swine. B. canis  is
commonly acquired from dogs.
Epidemiology
/square6Brucellosis occurs worldwide. The disease is morecommon in young persons and six times morecommon in men than in women.
/square6Human brucellosis is usually associated withoccupational or domestic exposure to infectedanimals or their products.
/square6The route of entry is by ingestion or inhalation orthrough mucosal or percutaneous exposure.
/square6Farmers, shepherds, goatherds, veterinarians,workers in slaughterhouses and meat-processing
plants are commonly exposed to infection.
Laboratory workers handling cultures or infectedsamples are also at risk. Others may acquire theinfection through consumption of contaminatedfoods. The most common food items implicated aredairy products like cheese, unpasteurized milk, and
ice cream. Raw meat and cosmetic products have
been reported to spread the infection rarely.
/square6Person-to-person transmission is extremely rare, asis transfer of infection by blood or tissue donation.
Pathology
/square6After gaining entry into human body (via ingestion,
inhalation, percutaneous or mucosal exposure)
organisms are taken up by macrophages and othermononuclear cells and get disseminated to locallymph nodes and different organs. Brucella thenreplicate in the lymph nodes and various organs.Since the organism is intracellular, it is protected
from antibiotics and antibodies. Cell mediated
immunity plays an important role in clearing theinfection. The host response to infection is charac-terized by tissue granulomas with B. abortus and
microabscesses with B. melitensis  and B. suis .
Clinical Features
/square6The incubation period varies from 1 week to several
months.
/square6Acute or insidious onset fever which is low or highgrade, remittent or intermittent, with chills andsweats, without localizing signs in most cases. Fevercan be characteristically undulant, i.e. it may dis-
appear and again appear. Fever can be associated
with a relative bradycardia./square6Constitutional symptoms include anorexia, asthenia,fatigue, weakness, and malaise, and weight loss.
/square6Lymphadenopathy and splenomegaly are seen in50% of the cases
/square6Brucellosis is a multisystem disease and affects
almost all the organs. Clinical features depend on
the system involved (Table 1.7).
/square6Prolonged fever with a history of contact withanimals or animal products and without any
specific diagnosis should arouse a suspicion of
brucellosis.
Investigations
/square6The diagnosis of brucellosis is difficult to confirmbecause the organism is difficult to culture andsecondly, even casual contact with infected animalsmay induce positive serological tests in personseven without disease.
/square6Routine biochemical tests are usually within normallimits, although sometimes LFTs may be abnormal.WBC count is usually normal or low (relativeleukopenia). Mild anemia and thrombocytopenia
may be present. ESR can be elevated.
/square6Blood, bone marrow and lymph node culture may
grow organisms.
/square6Serologic tests: May demonstrate antibodies tobrucella. Tube agglutination test is the mostcommon test done to detect antibodies. In endemicareas agglutinin titers of ≥1:320 to 1:640 are
considered diagnostic; in nonendemic areas, a titer
of ≥1:160 is considered significant. Repetition of
tests after 2 to 4 weeks may demonstrate a risingtiter.
/square6Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) shows promise for
the detection and rapid diagnosis of Brucella spp.
in human blood specimens.TABLE 1.7: Clinical features of brucellosis
Organ system Clinical features
Musculoskeletal system Myalgia, arthralgia, low back
pain, spine and joint pain, and,rarely osteomyelitis, suppurative
arthritis
Haematologic Hemolytic anemia, thrombocyto-
penia, pancytopenia
Nervous system Depression, lethargy, dizziness,
tinnitus, meningitis, encephalitis
Eyes Visual disturbances, keratitis,
uveitis, optic neuritis
Respiratory system Cough, pneumonia, chronic
pulmonary granuloma
CVS Palpitations, endocarditis, myo-
carditis, cardiac failure
Genitourinary system Epididymitis, orchitis
GIT Hepatosplenomegaly, diarrhea,
cholecystitis, sub-diaphragmaticabscess

/square6Infectious Diseases31
1Treatment
/square6At least two antibiotics should be used. Mono-
therapy is not recommended. The “gold standard”for the treatment of brucellosis in adults is intra-
muscular streptomycin together with doxycycline.
The alternative regimen (current WHO recommen-dation) is rifampicin plus doxycycline for 6 weeks.For patients in whom tetracyclines are contra-indicated (children, pregnant women) trimethoprimsulphomethoxazole can be used instead of tetra-
cyclines.
/square6There is evidence that other aminoglycosides can
be used instead of streptomycin, e.g. netilmicin orgentamicin.
/square6Surgery in cases of infection of prosthetic heartvalves and prosthetic joints (replacement required).If abscesses develop they need to be drained.
Prevention
/square6Live attenuated vaccine is available for use inanimals but none is available for human beings.
Using gloves and mask while handling animals,
drinking pasteurized milk may protect againstacquiring infection.
Q.Granuloma inguinale (donovanosis) (granuloma
venereum).
/square6Donovanosis is a chronic, progressively destructive
bacterial infection of the genital region. It is asexually transmitted infection.
Etiology
/square6It is caused by a Gram-negative intracellularbacterium, Klebsiella granulomatis. The  organism
responsible for granuloma inguinale was initially
described by Donovan (hence known as dono-vanosis) and subsequently the bacterium wasclassified as Calymmatobacterium granulomatis.  Later,
it was found that the molecular structure of thisorganism was similar to Klebsiella  species and pre-
sently it is named Klebsiella granulomatis . It is an
intracellular bacteria and has a capsule with bipolarstaining, which gives it a ‘safety pin’ appearance.
Clinical Features
/square6Incubation period is 1 to 4 weeks.
/square6Common sites of infection are genitals, and perianal
region.
/square6The primary lesion is a painless nodule which
slowly enlarges and erodes to produce bright-redulcers with pearly rolled edges. Ulcer bleeds easily.
The lesions progress slowly and heal with fibrosis.
There is no lymph node involvement.
/square6Extragenital lesions occur in some cases and mayinvolve oral cavity, lips, and bones. Lesions in the
inguinal region may resemble lymph nodes.Diagnosis
/square6Klebsiella granulomatis  is very difficult to culture
because it is extremely fastidious.
/square6The easiest method to visualize the organism is viasmears from the base of the ulcer. The organismsare seen within the cytoplasm of macrophages.They exhibit bipolar staining with safety-pinappearance, and are referred to as Donovan bodies.
/square6A diagnostic PCR test has been recently developedand can be used for the detection of C. granulo-
matis .
/square6Serologic tests are also available.
Treatment
/square6The recommended antibiotic for granuloma
inguinale is either trimethoprim/sulfameth-oxazoleor doxycycline. Alternatives include cipro-floxacin, erythromycin, or azithromycin. Treatmentis given for 3 to 5 weeks.
Q.Actinomycosis.
/square6Actinomycosis is a chronic suppurative granulo-
matous infection characterised by abscess formationand multiple draining sinuses. The main patho-logical feature is formation of purulent materialcontaining granules with a yellow sulfur likeappearance (termed sulfur granules).
Etiology
/square6The disease is caused by actinomycetes bacteria.Actinomyces israelli  is the commonest pathogen caus-
ing actinomycosis. Though actinomycetes resemblesfungus, actually it is a bacterium. It is Gram-positive,nonmotile, nonsporing, noncapsulated.
Pathogenesis
/square6Actinomyctes are normal commensals in the mouth,colon and vagina.
/square6Entry into tissues happens when there is a breachof the mucous membrane or from aspiration into
the lung.
/square6Infection spreads by direct extension to contiguous
tissues. Hematogenous spread to distant areas,particularly to the bone and brain, can happen.
/square6The organisms form visible microcolonies in thetissues called grains (sulphur granules). Sulphurgranules are in vivo  matrix of bacteria, calcium
phosphate, and host material.
Clinical Features
Cervicofacial Actinomycosis
/square6Most common type. Painful swelling in the angleof jaw is the usual initial symptom. The swellingis purplish, firmly indurated, and feels woody or
lumpy (hence, also known as lumpy jaw). There

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
132 can be multiple such swellings which break to the
surface, forming multiple sinus tracts dischargingpus with yellowish white granules. It may spreadto tongue, salivary glands, thorax, cervical spine,cranial bones and brain.
Thoracic Actinomycosis
/square6Results from aspiration of pharyngeal contents ordental plaques into the lungs or spread from cervico-
facial actinomycosis. Patients usually c/o mild fever
and cough with expectoration. Sputum can be
blood-stained. Multiple abscesses may develop in
the lungs which may break open into the exteriorthrough multiple discharging sinuses. Chest X-rayshows consolidation bilaterally in the lower lung
fields.
Abdominal Actinomycosis
/square6Results from diseased appendix. It can involve anyorgan in the abdomen. The disease usually presentsas an abscess or mass lesion that is often fixed tounderlying tissue and mistaken for a tumor. Sinus
tracts may form in the abdominal wall.
Pelvic Actinomycosis
/square6Involves uterus and cervix. It has become common
with the use of intrauterine contraceptive devices.
CNS Actinomycosis
/square6Rare. Can present as meningitis or multiple brainabscesses.
Musculoskeletal and Soft-Tissue Actinomycosis
/square6Skin, subcutaneous tissue, muscle, and boneinvolved alone or in various combinations.
/square6Multiple cutaneous sinus tracts.
Disseminated Disease
/square6Multiple organ infections.
/square6Lungs and liver most commonly involved.
/square6Presentation: Multiple nodules mimicking dis-seminated cancer.
Diagnosis
/square6Microscopic identification of sulfur granules in pus
or tissues. Sometimes granules may be visible to
the naked eye.
/square6Sulfur granules may also be found in mycetoma. Ifany doubt is there, identification of actinomycetesby microscopy and culture of pus or tissue speci-mens will confirm the diagnosis. However, becausethese organisms are part of the normal flora, theiridentification in the absence of sulfur granules in
sputum, bronchial washings, and cervicovaginal
secretions is of little significance.Treatment
/square6Requires prolonged antibiotic therapy (6–12 months).
/square6Penicillin is the drug of choice; 10 to 20 million unitsintravenously daily for 2–6 weeks followed by oralpenicillin or amoxicillin for 6–12 months.
/square6Erythromycin, tetracycline, and clindamycin are
alternatives.
Q.Nocardiosis.
/square6Nocardiosis is an acute, subacute, or chronic infec-
tious disease that occurs in cutaneous, pulmonary,and disseminated forms.
/square6Members of the genus Nocardia  are ubiquitous
saprophytes in soil, decaying organic matter, andfresh and salt water. Nocardia  organisms are
branching, beaded, filamentous, gram-positivebacteria. They are weakly acid-fast except Nocardia
madurae  which is non acid-fast.
/square6Reproduce by branching.
/square6N. asteroids  and N. Brasiliensis  cause pulmonary
infections, meningitis, and brain abscess. N. madurae
causes mycetoma.
Clinical Features
/square6Cutaneous nocardiosis can present in three clinicalforms: (1) Cutaneous infection, (2) lymphocutaneousinfection and (3) subcutaneous infection. Cutaneousinfection presents as ulceration, abscess, andcellulitis. Lymphocutaneous nocardiosis manifestsas a nodule/ulcer at the site of injury, lymphangitis,
and regional lymphadenopathy. Subcutaneous
infection (also known as mycetoma) presents as pusdischarging sinuses which may contain yellowcoloured granules.
/square6Pulmonary nocardiosis is the most common clinicalpresentation of nocardiosis. It occurs due to inhala-tion of nocardia. Pulmonary nocardiosis is usuallyseen as opportunistic infection in immunocompro-mised patients. Patients present with fever and coughwith expectoration. X-ray shows lung infiltrates.
/square6Extrapulmonary infections commonly involvebrain. Cerebral nocardiosis presents as space-occupying lesion. Purulent meningitis may resultif an abscess ruptures into the ventricles.
Diagnosis
/square6Microscopy
/square6Culture of pus and tissue specimens for Nocardia.
Treatment
/square6Long term antibiotic therapy is required (at least6 months). Sulfonamides are the drugs of choicefor nocardiosis. Sulfadiazine or sulfisoxazole canbe used. Trimethoprim sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMZ)is also effective. Additional or alternative parenteral
therapies include carbapenems (imipenem or

/square6Infectious Diseases33
1meropenem), third-generation cephalosporins
(cefotaxime or ceftriaxone), and amikacin alone orin combination. Combination therapy is recommen-ded for serious infections.
Q.Mycetoma (Madura foot or Maduromycosis).
/square6Mycetoma is a chronic infection of the skin and
subcutaneous tissue characterized by a triad of
tumefaction, sinus tract formation, and grains
(sulfur granules). It is also known as Madura footbecause it was first described in the Indian town ofMadura region in the mid-19th century.
Etiology
/square6Mycetoma is caused by filamentous bacteria and
true fungi.
/square6Mycetoma caused by filamentous bacteria is termed
actinomycetoma. These filamentous bacteria areNocardia  species such as Nocardia brasiliensis,
Nocardia madurae, and Actinomyces israelii .
/square6Mycetoma caused by true fungi is termed eumyce-
toma. Eumycetoma can be caused by Pseudallescheria
boydii, Phialophora jeanselmei, Madurella mycetomi,
Madurella grisea, Cephalosporium falciforme,  and
Cephalosporium recifei .
Clinical Features
/square6Mycetoma commonly affects young adults,
particularly males aged between 20 and 40 years,mostly in developing countries. People of lowsocioeconomic status and manual workers such asagriculturalists, labourers and herdsmen are
commonly affected. Organisms enter the skin
through minor trauma.
/square6Mycetoma is a chronic, deep, progressively destruc-tive, and deforming infection of skin, subcutaneous
tissues, bone, and muscle. Most of the cases involve
foot but any part of the body can be involved. Itmanifests as a tumor like area of localized edemaor massive enlargement, with erythema andmultiple draining sinus tracts. In a typical case, atriad of tumefaction, sinus tract formation, and
grains (sulfur granules) is seen. The color of the
grains varies depending on the pathogen.
/square6Note that mycetoma is different from actinomycosis.Actinomyces israeli  can cause both actinomycosis and
mycetoma.
Investigations
/square6Gram’s stain  of secretions can show filamentous
gram-positive bacteria or gram-negative fungi.
/square6Biopsy: Shows suppurative granulomas surround-ing characteristic grains in the subcutaneous tissue.Causative filamentous bacteria or fungi can be seenin Gram’s stain.
/square6Culture of the secretions or biopsy specimens.Treatment
/square6Differentiation between actinomycetoma caused bybacteria and eumycetoma caused by fungi isimportant because treatment is different for both.
/square6For actinomycetoma (caused by bacteria), surgicaldebridement followed by prolonged antibiotictherapy is required. A combination of antibioticsare used including trimethroprim sulpha-
methoxazole, streptomycin, dapsone and rifampicin.
/square6For eumycetoma (caused by fungi), surgery
followed by antifungal therapy (amphotericin B oritraconazone or ketoconazole) is used.
Q.Discuss the etiology, epidemiology, pathogenesis,
clinical features, diagnosis and treatment of leprosy
(Hansen’s disease).
/square6Leprosy (Hansen’s disease) is a nonfatal, chronicinfectious disease caused by Mycobacterium leprae .
To minimize the prejudice against those with leprosy,the condition is also referred to as Hansen disease,
named after GA Hansen who discovered M. leprae .
/square6First described in ancient Indian texts from the sixth
century BC.
/square6Mainly affects skin, peripheral nervous system,upper respiratory tract, eyes, and testes.
/square6Associated with social stigma.
Etiology
/square6Mycobacterium leprae is the causative agent of
leprosy.
/square6It is an acid-fast and obligate intracellular organism.
/square6The organism grows best at 27–30°C; therefore, skinlesions tend to develop in the cooler areas of thebody, with sparing of the groin, axilla, and scalp.
/square6Cannot be cultured in vitro .
Epidemiology
/square699% of leprosy cases are found in Asia, Africa and
Latin America. Highest number of cases is in
India.
/square6Affects all age groups. Peak onset is in the secondand third decades of life.
/square6Leprosy is associated with poverty and ruralresidence.
/square6Its incidence is not increased by AIDS unliketuberculosis.
/square6Recently there has been a dramatic decline in leprosycases because of effective multi-drug therapy.
Pathogenesis
/square6Incubation period is long, 5–10 years.
/square6It spreads by droplet infection when an infectious(lepromatous) patient releases the organisms by
coughing and sneezing. The organism enters the

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
134 body through skin, mucous membranes of the
respiratory tract and possibly the gut. The infecti-vity of the disease is low and large percent of peopleexposed to the infection do not get infected.
/square6Leprosy has 2 classification schemes: The 5-categoryRidley-Jopling system and the simpler 2-categoryWHO system.
/square6Ridley-Jopling system divides leprosy into five
clinical categories (2 polar forms and 3 borderline
forms). Two polar forms are; tuberculoid (TT) andlepromatous leprosy (LL). Tuberculoid leprosyoccurs in people with good immunity. Lepromatousleprosy occurs in people with low immunity.Between these forms lies a large group of patients
described as the borderline group. In this group,
patients showing features closer to lepromatousleprosy are designated borderline lepromatous (BL)leprosy and those with features closer totuberculoid form are designated as borderlinetuberculoid (BT) leprosy; patients with features
lying midway between the two are classified as
borderline (BB) leprosy.
/square6WHO classifies leprosy into two types, i.e.paucibacillary and multibacillary types. This
classification is important for treatment purpose.
Clinical Features
Tuberculoid (TT) Leprosy
/square6Occurs in people who possess a high degree of cell
mediated immunity.
/square6More often affects brown and black people.
/square6The skin lesions of tuberculoid leprosy are only oneor few hypopigmented macules or plaques that are
sharply demarcated and hypoaesthetic. Lesions
usually have erythematous or raised borders, andare devoid of sweat glands and hair follicles andthus are dry, scaly, and anhidrotic.
/square6The regional or local nerve is thickened and maybe tender. Most commonly affected nerves areulnar, posterior auricular, peroneal, and posteriortibial nerves.
/square6Histology of the lesions shows granulomatousinfiltrate consisting of macrophages, lymphocytesand giant cells. The infiltrate is more prominentaround the nerves and the skin appendages.
/square6Smears from lesions show absent or very few AFB.
/square6Lepromin test is positive in TT leprosy.
Lepromatosus (LL) Leprosy
/square6Occurs in people who have less cell mediatedimmunity.
/square6It more often affects white people.
/square6The skin lesions are multiple, bilaterally symme-trical, hypopigmented macules, plaques, nodules
or diffuse skin infiltration. The margins are ill
defined, and diffuse. Diffuse infiltration of facialskin gives rise to convoluted folds, which give the
face a lion-like appearance (hence called ‘leoninefacies’).
/square6Infiltration of eyebrows leads to loss of eyebrows,
initially lateral third.
/square6Nose can get involved which can cause nasal bridge
collapse and epistaxis. Nasal septum can getperforated.
/square6Patients with LL leprosy have late involvement ofnerves which presents as distal symmetric peripheralneuropathy. Neural involvement predisposes topainless burns and trophic ulcers, deformities and
resorbed digits of the hands and feet.
/square6Systemic involvement causes lymphadenopathy,
hepatosplenomegaly, testicular involvement andgynecomastia, and bacillemia. Smears from lesions
show large number of bacilli. Lepromin test is
negative in LL leprosy.
/square6The disease runs a slow and progressive course.Patients may die of intercurrent infections, renal
failure or amyloidosis all of which are complica-
tions of leprosy.
Borderline Group
/square6In the BT form, the lesions show features closer totuberculoid form of the disease. Lesions may bemore or a tuberculoid lesion may have a satellitelesion close to it. In BL form, the lesions showfeatures closer to the lepromatous form. Genuine
borderline (BB) cases have features midway
between tuberculoid and lepromatous leprosy.
Primary Neuritic Leprosy
/square6Here nerve involvement is seen without any skin
lesions. Nerves are thickened and may be tender
with associated loss of sensations. Facial palsy canalso be a presentation.
Indeterminate Leprosy
/square6This is often a single hypopigmented macule whichmay be atrophic and may be hypoasthetic. Acid-fast bacilli may or may not be seen. At this stage itis difficult to tell which way the lesion will progresswhether towards the lepromatous end or tuber-culoid end.
Differences between tuberculoid and lepromatous
leprosy are given in Table 1.8.
Diagnosis
/square6Currently, the diagnosis of leprosy is based onclinical features. Examination of skin smears and/or biopsy can confirm the diagnosis.
Clinical Features
/square6In an endemic country or area, an individual should
be regarded as having leprosy if he or she has one
of the following features:

/square6Infectious Diseases35
1/square6Hypopigmented or reddish skin lesion(s) with
definite loss of sensation.
/square6Involvement of peripheral nerves, as demonstratedby loss of sensation and weakness of the musclesof hands, feet or face.
/square6Skin smear positive for acid-fast bacilli.
Skin Smears and Biopsy
/square6Skin smears may be taken from lesions on the ears,
elbows, and/or knees. A biopsy should be taken
from entirely within a lesion.
Other Diagnostic Tests
/square6Measurement of anti-phenolic glycolipid-1 (PGL-1) anti-bodies:  This is a specific serologic test based on the
detection of antibodies to phenolic glycolipid-1.This test yields a sensitivity of 95% for the detec-tion of lepromatous leprosy but only 30% sensitive
for tuberculoid leprosy.
/square6Polymerase chain reaction (PCR):  This can be used to
identify the Mycobacterium in biopsy samples, skinand nasal smears, and blood and tissue sections.
/square6Lymphocyte migration inhibition test (LMIT):  As
determined by a lymphocyte transformation andLMIT, cell-mediated immunity to M. leprae  is absent
in patients with lepromatous leprosy but present
in those with tuberculoid leprosy.
Treatment of Leprosy
/square6There are 3 main drugs for the treatment of leprosy.
These are dapsone, clofazimine, and rifampicin. Ofthese drugs, only rifampicin is bactericidal butdapsone is the most important.
/square6Other agents which are effective against leprosy areminocycline, ofloxacin and clarithromycin.
/square6WHO has made recommendations for the treatmentof leprosy. For treatment purposes, the WHOclassifies leprosy patients as paucibacillary andmultibacillary. Previously, patients without demon-
strable AFB in the dermis were classified as pauci-
bacillary and those with AFB as multibacillary./square6Currently, most leprosy programmes classify andchoose the appropriate regimen for a particularpatient using clinical criteria, which uses thenumber of skin lesions and nerves involved to
classify leprosy patients into paucibacillary single-
lesion leprosy (one skin lesion), paucibacillaryleprosy (2–5 skin lesions) and multibacillary leprosy(more than five skin lesions).
/square6When skin smears are available and reliable, anypatient with a positive skin smear, irrespective ofthe clinical picture, must be classified as multi-bacillary leprosy and treated with the regimen formultibacillary leprosy.
/square6The WHO recommends that paucibacillary adultsbe treated with 100 mg of dapsone daily and600 mg of rifampicin monthly (supervised) for6 months. For patients with single-lesion pauci-bacillary leprosy, the WHO recommends as an
alternative a single dose of ROM (rifampin 600 mg,
ofloxacin 400 mg, and minocycline 100 mg).
/square6Multibacillary adults should be treated with 100 mgof dapsone plus 50 mg of clofazimine daily
(unsupervised) and with 600 mg of rifampicin plus
300 mg of clofazimine monthly (supervised).Originally, the WHO recommended that multi-bacillary patients be treated for 2 years or untilsmears became negative (generally in ~5 years).However, current WHO recommendation of dura-
tion of therapy is 1 year. While 1 year of treatment
is enough for most cases, concern has beenexpressed that it is not sufficient for higher bacterialindex (BI) cases.TABLE 1.8: Differences between tuberculoid leprosy and lepromatous leprosy
Feature Tuberculoid leprosy (TT) Lepromatous leprosy (LL)
Skin Lesions Up to 3 in number; sharply defined asymmetric M ultiple symmetric lesions with ill-defined
macules or plaques with elevated borders and margins, multiple infiltrated nodules and
a tendency toward central clearing. Hypo- plaques or diffuse infiltration; leonine facies
esthesia an early sign and loss of eyebrows. Hypoesthesia a late sign
Nerve lesions Peripheral nerves involved early. Only few nerves Nerves are involved late in the disease. Symme-
are involved. Nerves are thickened and may be tric involvement common
tender
Acid-fast bacilli (bacterial 0 to 1+ 4 to 6+
index)
Lymphocytes 3+ 0 to 1+
Lepromin skin test Positive Negative
IgM antibodies to PGL-1 Found most often Found less often
TABLE 1.9: WHO treatment of leprosy
Form of leprosy WHO recommended regimen (1982)
Paucibacillary Dapsone (100 mg daily, unsupervised)
(tuberculoid) plus Rifampicin (600 mg/month, super-
vised) for 6 months
Multibacillary D apsone ( 100 mg/d) plus Clo fazimine
(lepromatous) (50 mg/d), unsupervised; and R ifampicin
(600 mg) plus Clofazimine (300 mg)
monthly (supervised) for 1–2 years

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
136Complications of leprosy
/square6Extremities:  Distal myopathy, claw hand, loss of
digits, foot drop, trophic ulcers.
/square6Nose:  Destruction of nasal cartilage with resultant
saddle nose deformity and anosmia, epistaxis.
/square6Eye:  Corneal ulcerations and development of
opacities due to loss of sensation of cornea. Uveitisdue to direct bacterial invasion with consequent
cataracts and glaucoma./square6Testes:  M. leprae  can invade testes and cause
aspermia or hypospermia. Erythema nodosum
leprosum can also cause orchitis.
/square6Amyloidosis:  Secondary amyloidosis is a complica-
tion of LL leprosy.
/square6Nerve abscesses:  Seen in TT and BT forms of leprosy
and can cause rapid nerve destruction which maybe permanent.
Q.Write briefly about antileprosy drugs (Table 1.10) .
TABLE 1.10: Antileprosy drugs
Drug Mechanism of action Features Dosage Side effects
Dapsone Inhibition of folic acid Bacteriostatic. Inexpensive 100 mg daily Agran ulocytosis hemolytic
synthesis and relatively non-toxic anemia in patients with
G6PD deficiency
Rifampicin Rifampicin binds the Most bactericidal drug 600 mg monthly Renal failure, bone marrow
DNA-dependent RNA available for the treatment suppression, “flu-like” syn-
polymerase complex of leprosy drome, hepatitisuncoupling transcription
Clofazimine Binds preferentially to Weakly bactericidal against 50 mg daily Skin pigmentation
mycobacterial DNA and M. leprae
inhibits Mycobacterium
leprae growth
Ofloxacin Interferes with bacterial Bactericidal 400 mg single dose Nausea, diarrhea and other
DNA replication by as part of ROM single gastrointestinal complaints
inhibiting DNA gyrase dose regimen CNS effects such as insomnia,
headache, dizziness, nervous-ness, and hallucinations
Clarithromycin Inhibits bacterial protein Bactericidal for M. leprae 500 mg daily Gastrointestinal irritation,
synthesis by binding to nausea, vomiting, and50S ribosomal subunit diarrhea
Minocycline Inhibits protein synthesis Bactericidal for M. leprae 100 mg daily Discoloration of teeth in
by binding to 30S infants or childrenribosomal subunit
Q.Lepra reactions.
/square6Lepra reactions are immunologically mediated
inflammatory states. They occur due to abruptchange in immunological response of the body
against M. leprae .
/square6They can cause considerable suffering to the patient
and sometimes can be life threatening.
/square6Two types of lepra reactions are usually seen.
Type I reaction (reversal reaction)
/square6Type I reactions occur in borderline forms of
leprosy as a result of increased activity of the body’simmune system against M. leprae . Usually the BL
form changes to BT form with treatment due toincrease in immunity, hence this type of reaction is
also known as reversal reaction. Cell mediated
immunity plays a major role here. It occurs both inpaucibacillary and multibacillary leprosy.
/square6Manifestations include signs of inflammation in
pre-existing lesions, appearance of new skin lesions,neuritis, and rarely fever. Ulnar nerve is usually
affected at elbow, which may be painful andexquisitely tender. Foot drop may result due toperoneal nerve involvement. If patients withaffected nerves are not treated promptly withsteroids, irreversible nerve damage may occur.
Type 2 lepra reaction (erythema nodosum leprosum,
ENL)
/square6Type 2 lepra reaction occurs in patients with highload of leprosy bacilli as in multibacillary/infiltra-tive type of leprosy. Type 2 reaction can involvemultiple organs and systems, causing generalizedsymptoms.
/square6It occurs when large number of leprosy bacilli arekilled with release of their antigens. These antigensprovoke an arthus type allergic reaction producingantigen antibody immune complex reaction (typeIII hypersensitivity) in the presence of complement
system. Immune complexes are deposited in the
tissues (skin, eyes, joints, lymph nodes, kidneys,

/square6Infectious Diseases37
1liver, spleen, bone marrow, endothelium and testes)
as well as in the circulation.
/square6Most cases of ENL follow the initiation of chemo-
therapy, usually within 2 years. Rarely it may occur
even before the diagnosis of leprosy and may in
fact point towards leprosy diagnosis.
/square6Patients usually present with multiple painful
erythematous papules that resolve spontaneously
in a few days but may recur. Patients may also have
fever, arthritis, myalgia and epididymo-orchitis,
iridocyclitis and lymphadenopathy. There can be
anemia, leukocytosis, and abnormal liver function
tests. Skin biopsy of erythematous papules reveals
vasculitis or panniculitis. Rarely severe ENL can
result in death.
Differences between type 1 and type 2 lepra
reactions are given in Table 1.11.Treatment of Lepra Reactions
/square6For mild type 1 lepra reaction, analgesics, such as
acetylsalicylic acid or paracetamol are enough. For
severe type 1 lepra reactions with evidence of
neuritis (pain, loss of sensation or function), steroids
such as oral prednisolone should be used. The usual
dose of prednisolone is 40–60 mg daily (1 mg/kg)
initially followed by a gradual tapering. The
duration of steroid therapy is 3 months.
/square6Therapy for type 2 reaction includes analgesics,
such as acetylsalicylic acid or paracetamol, and
steroids (oral prednisolone). In patients with severe
type 2 reactions, who do not respond to steroids or
in whom steroids are contraindicated, clofazimine
at high doses or thalidomide  may be used under close
medical supervision. Clofazimine often requires
4–6 weeks before an effect is seen, and, therefore,
initially it should be combined with steroids.
Q.Syphilis.
/square6Syphilis is an infectious venereal disease caused by
the spirochete Treponema pallidum.
/square6It is characterized by episodes of active disease
interrupted by periods of latency.
Etiology
/square6Syphilis is caused by pallidum subspecies of
Treponema which belongs to spirochete group.
/square6It is spiral in shape. Live organisms can only be seen
under dark-ground illumination because of poor
resolution with conventional light microscopy.
Treponema organisms have characteristic to-and-
fro, undulating, corkscrew-like and angulating
movements.
/square6Syphilis is becoming a rare disease now after the
discovery of penicillin. However, efforts to
eradicate this disease have been unsuccessful.TABLE 1.11: Differences between type 1 and type 2 lepra
reactions
Type 1 reaction Type 2 reaction
It occurs both in paucibacillary Occurs mainly in multi baci-
and multibacillary leprosy llary (lepromatous) leprosy
Occurs due to increase in cell Occurs due to antigen anti-
mediated immunity (delayed body (immune complex)  de-
type hypersensitivity) position
Localised More generalized
Skin lesions: Inflammation in Existing skin lesions remain
pre-existing lesions, appea- unchanged and new red,
rance of new skin lesions painful, tender, cutaneous/
subcutaneous nodules appear
(ENL)
Nerve involvement common Uncommon
Little or no fever and other Prominent fever and other
constitutional symptoms constitutional symptoms
Eye involvement in the form Internal eye disease (iritis,
of weakness of eyelid muscles irido-cyclitis) occurs, lepro-
leading to incomplete closure matous nodules are seen
may occur (nerve involved)
Other organs not affected Multiple organs may be
affected
Lucio’s Phenomenon
/square6This rare reaction is seen exclusively in patients of
Caribbean and Mexican origins.
/square6It is seen with lepromatous leprosy. It affects most
often those who are untreated.
/square6Patients develop recurrent, large, ulcerative
lesions—particularly on the lower extremities.
Ulcers may develop all over the body. Secondary
infection and consequent sepsis can be fatal. Ulcers
happen due to ischemic necrosis of skin, which in
turn is due to thrombus formation in blood vessels
supplying skin due to heavy parasitism of endo-
thelial cells with AFB, and endothelial proliferation.
Immune complex deposition may also play a role
in thrombus formation. Figure 1.10 Treponema pallidum


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
138Pathophysiology
/square6The only known natural host for T. pallidum  is
man.
/square6Almost all cases of syphilis are acquired by sexualcontact. Less commonly it is acquired by nonsexualpersonal contact, infection in utero  (congenital
syphilis), and blood transfusion. 1 in 2 personsexposed to infection gets infected.
/square6Syphilis is usually classified into 4 stages: primary,secondary, latent, and tertiary. It can be acquiredor congenital.
/square6Primary syphilis:  In acquired syphilis, after exposure,
T. pallidum  penetrates intact mucous membranes or
microscopic dermal abrasions and enters thelymphatics and blood to produce systemicinfection. At the site of entry, a painless ulcer
develops which is called chancre. Histologically, the
chancre is characterized by local inflammation withinfiltration by macrophages and lymphocytes. Inthis stage, the spirochete can be isolated from thesurface of the ulceration or the overlying exudate.Whether treated or not, healing occurs with residual
fibrosis.
/square6Secondary syphilis  develops several weeks or months
after the appearance of the primary lesion. Duringthis stage, the spirochetes multiply and spread
throughout the body. Secondary syphilis has
numerous clinical manifestations. Commonmanifestations include malaise, fever, myalgias,arthralgias, lymphadenopathy, and rash.
/square6Latent syphilis  is characterized by resolution of skin
lesions and other clinical manifestations. However,serologic tests are positive for T. pallidum .
/square6Tertiary or late syphilis  develops years after the initial
infection (5–10 years later) and can involve any
organ system. The most dreaded complications areneurosyphilis and involvement of the aortic valveand root. Initially syphilis mainly involvesmeninges and vasculature of CNS (meningo-vascular syphilis), later the parenchyma of brain
and spinal cord is involved.
/square6Regardless of the stage of disease and location of
lesions, histopathologic hallmarks of syphilis areendarteritis and a plasma cell-rich infiltrate. The
syphilitic infiltrate is actually a delayed-type hyper-
sensitivity response to T. pallidum , and can result
in gummatous ulcerations and necrosis seen intertiary syphilis. Antigens of T. pallidum induce
treponemal antibodies and nonspecific reaginantibodies.
Clinical Features
/square6Acquired syphilis has predictable stages thoughthere may not be clear cut demarcation between
the stages. Four stages can usually be recognized
and include: (1) Primary, (2) secondary, (3) latent, and
(4) tertiary  syphilis.Primary Syphilis
/square6Primary syphilis is characterized by the develop-
ment of a painless chancre at the site of entry afteran incubation period of 3–6 weeks. The lesion has
a punched-out base and rolled edges and is highly
infectious. It has a firm consistency. In heterosexualmen the chancre is usually located on the penis,whereas in homosexual men it is often found in theanal canal or rectum, in the mouth, or on theexternal genitalia. In women, it is usually found on
the cervix and labia. Regional lymphadenopathy
is usually seen. Lymph nodes are firm, non-suppurative, and painless.
Secondary Syphilis
/square6Secondary syphilis has protean manifestations.These include skin and mucous membrane lesionsand generalized painless lymphadenopathy. Thehealing primary chancre may be still present in
some cases. The skin lesions are macular, papular,
papulosquamous rashes, and occasionally pustules.The rahes may be very subtle and may be missed.Initial lesions are bilaterally symmetric, pale red orpink, nonpruritic, discrete, round macules thatmeasure 5 to 10 mm in diameter and are distributed
on the trunk and proximal extremities. After many
days or weeks, red papular lesions appear. Theselesions may progress to pustular lesions.
/square6In warm and moist areas like perianal area, vulva,
scrotum, etc. papules can enlarge and become
eroded to produce moist, pink or gray-white, highlyinfectious lesions called condylomata lata. Mucosallesions include erosions, called mucous patches andoccur on lips, oral mucosa, tongue, palate, pharynx,vulva and vagina, glans penis. The mucous patch
is painless with a red periphery.
/square6Constitutional symptoms may accompany secon-
dary syphilis and include fever, weight loss, malaise,anorexia and headache. Meningitis can occur rarely.
/square6Less commonly there can be hepatitis, nephropathy,arthritis, periostitis, iritis and uveitis.
Latent Syphilis
/square6In latent syphilis serologic tests for syphilis arepositive but there are no clinical manifestations. Inlatent syphilis T. pallidum  is present in the body.
Latent syphilis can get transmitted to the fetus in
utero and to others through blood transfusion.
Tertiary Syphilis
/square6Tertiary syphilis is characterized by a persistentlow-level burden of pathogens, against which apotent and self-destructive immune response ismounted. It is usually very slowly progressive andnoninfectious. Any organ of the body may be
involved, but three main types are: Neurosyphilis,
cardiovascular syphilis and gummatous (late) syphilis.

/square6Infectious Diseases39
1Neurosyphilis
/square6Traditionally, neurosyphilis was considered to be
a late manifestation of syphilis, but this not trueand CNS can get affected anytime. CNS involve-
ment can be asymptomatic or symptomatic.
Asymptomatic neurosyphilis refers to patientswithout any neurological signs and symptoms buthave CSF abnormalities or a positive VDRL test.Such asymptomatic patients should be treatedbecause untreated patients may progress to
symptomatic neurosyphilis.
/square6Neurosyphilis can be meningeal, meningovascular,
and parenchymatous syphilis . Meningeal syphilis
occurs usually within 1 year after infection,
meningovascular syphilis occurs 5 to 10 years afterinfection, general paresis after 20 years, and tabesdorsalis after 25 to 30 years.
/square6Meningeal syphilis  presents with typical signs and
symptoms of meningitis like headache, nausea,vomiting, neck stiffness, and alteration of mentalstatus.
/square6Meningovascular syphilis  involves meninges and also
blood vessels leading to stroke.
/square6Parenchymatous syphilis  involves brain and spinal
cord and manifests as General paresis and tabesdorsalis. General paresis happens due to wide-spread brain parenchymal damage and includesabnormalities corresponding to the mnemonic
PARESIS: Personality disturbances, Affect abnor-
malities, Reflex hyperactivity, Eye abnormality
(Argyll Robertson pupils), Sensorium changes,
Intellectual impairment and Slurred speech. In
tabes dorsalis there is demyelination of the posteriorcolumns, dorsal roots, and dorsal root ganglia.
Symptoms include ataxia, paresthesia, bladder
disturbances, impotence, areflexia and loss of jointposition, deep pain, and temperature sensations.Argyll Robertson pupil can be seen in both tabesdorsalis and general paresis. It reacts toaccommodation but not to light. Optic atrophy also
occurs frequently in tabes.
Cardiovascular syphilis
/square6Cardiovascular manifestations are due to end-
arteritis obliterans of the vasa vasorum, whichprovide blood supply to large vessels. This resultsin weakening of tunica media and formation of
aneurysm, aortitis (with linear calcification of the
ascending aorta on chest X-ray), aortic regurgita-tion, or coronary ostial stenosis. Symptoms usuallyappear 10 to 40 years after infection. The mostcommon finding on cardiovascular examination isa diastolic murmur with a tambour quality, secon-
dary to aortic dilation with valvular insufficiency.
Gummatous syphilis (late syphilis)
/square6Gummas are nothing but areas of granulomatous
inflammation with a central area of necrosis.Gummas may be single or multiple and size varies
from microscopic to many centimeters. The mostcommonly involved sites are skin, mucousmembranes and skeletal system. Gummas of theskin produce painless and indurated nodularlesions which may breakdown to form punched-
out ulcers with vertical edges. The ulcer heals in
the middle with an atrophic tissue-paper scar andspreads peripherally. The base of the lesion is dullred and appears like ‘wash-leather’. Nocturnal bonepain may occur due to bone involvement.
Congenital syphilis
/square6Transmission of T. pallidum  from a syphilitic woman
to her fetus across the placenta may occur at anystage of pregnancy, but the lesions in fetus developafter the fourth month of gestation.
/square6Treatment of the mother before 4th month ofgestation can prevent fetal damage. Untreated
maternal infection may lead to abortion, stillbirth,
prematurity, neonatal death, or nonfatal congenitalsyphilis.
/square6Among infants born alive, congenital syphilis mayor may not be clinically apparent.
/square6All women should be screened for syphilis in earlypregnancy. In areas of high prevalence serologicscreening should be repeated in the third trimesterand at delivery.
/square6The manifestations of congenital syphilis can bedivided into three types:
–Early manifestations:  Appear within the first
2 years of life. These are due to infection ofvarious organs by Treponema pallidum  and
resemble secondary syphilis in the adult. These
include rhinitis (snuffles), bullae (syphiliticpemphigus), vesicles, petechiae, papulosqua-mous lesions, mucous patches, and condylomatalata. The most common early manifestations arebone changes including osteochondritis, osteitis,
and periostitis. Hepatosplenomegaly, lympha-
denopathy and jaundice are also common.
–Late manifestations:  Appear after 2 years and are
noninfectious manifestations. These includeinterstitial keratitis, eighth-nerve deafness,recurrent arthropathy and bilateral knee effusionknown as Clutton’s joints. Neurosyphilis andgummatous periostitis can also occur.
–Residual stigmata: These include Hutchinson’s
teeth (centrally notched, widely spaced, peg-
shaped upper central incisors) and “mulberry”
molars (molars with multiple, poorly developedcusps). There can be abnormal facies like frontalbossing, saddle nose, and poorly developedmaxillae. Saber shins, characterized by anteriortibial bowing, are rare. Rhagades are linear scars
at the angles of the mouth and are caused by
healing of early facial eruption.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
140Diagnosis
/square6The diagnosis of syphilis is suspected based on
history and clinical features. Since the clinicalfeatures are protean, lab confirmation of diagnosis
is required.
Dark Field Microscopy
/square6This is the most specific technique for diagnosing
syphilis and can demonstrate Treponema pallidum
in samples taken from chancre and condylomatalata. But dark-field microscopy is not widely avail-able.
Non-treponemal Tests
/square6These include venereal disease research laboratory(VDRL) test and rapid plasma reagin (RPR) test.
/square6Syphilis leads to the production of non-specific
antibodies that react to cardiolipin. This reaction is
the basis of VDRL and rapid plasma reagin (RPR)test. Nontreponemal tests are widely used forsyphilis screening.
/square6With nontreponemal tests, false-positive reactionscan occur because of pregnancy, autoimmunedisorders, and other infections. In addition, these
tests may show a “prozone” phenomenon in which
large amount of antibody blocks the antibody-antigen reaction, causing a false-negative test in theundiluted sample.
/square6These tests may be negative in early primarysyphilis and late syphilis in up to one-third ofpatients.
/square6After adequate treatment of syphilis, nontrepo-
nemal tests eventually become nonreactive.
/square6Titers are not interchangeable between different test
types. Hence, the same nontreponemal test shouldbe used for follow-up evaluations.
Treponemal-specific Tests
/square6Treponemal-specific tests detect antibodies toantigenic components of T. pallidum . These tests
are used primarily to confirm the diagnosis of
syphilis in patients with a reactive nontreponemal
test.
/square6Treponemal-specific tests include T. pallidum  enzyme
immunoassay (TP-EIA), T. pallidum  hemagglutina-
tion (TPHA) test, microhemagglutination assay forantibodies to T. pallidum  (MHA-TP), fluorescent
treponemal antibody-absorption (FTA-ABS) test,
chemoluminescence immunoassays (CLIA).
/square6Unlike nontreponemal tests which show a declinein titers or become nonreactive with effectivetreatment, treponemal-specific tests usually remainreactive for life. Therefore, treponemal-specific
test titers are not useful for assessing treatment
efficacy.Treatment
/square6The treatment of choice in all stages of syphilis islong acting preparation of penicillin (benzathinepenicillin) except in neurosyphilis where aqueous
penicillin is used.
/square6Benzathine penicillin 2.4 million units IM (1.2 million
units to each buttock) cures primary, secondary,and early (<1 year) latent syphilis. Additional doses
of 2.4 million units should be given 7 and 14 days
later for late (>1 year) latent syphilis.
/square6Neurosyphilis  should be treated with intravenous
aqueous penicillin G (3 to 4 million units IV Q 4h
for 10 to 14 days) followed by benzathine penicillin
2.4 million units deep IM once a week for 3 weeks.
/square6For penicillin allergic patients doxycycline 100 mgBD for 1 month should be given. Doxycycline is
contraindicated in pregnant women and children.
In such cases penicillin should be administered afterdesensitization. Ceftriaxone1 gm daily IM/IV for8 to 10 days is an alternative. At 6 and 12 monthsafter treatment, patients with primary syphilisshould be reexamined and undergo repeat serologic
testing.
/square6Congenital syphilis : Aqueous penicillin 50,000 units/
kg IV q 12 h for the first 7 days of life and q 8 hthereafter for a total of 10 days.
Q.VDRL (Venereal Disease Research Laboratory) test.
/square6VDRL is a nontreponemal antibody test to diagnose
syphilis. It is quite sensitive but not very specific
for syphilis. VDRL is reactive in 78% of patientswith primary syphilis. It becomes positive within4 to 6 weeks after infection or 1 to 3 weeks after theappearance of the primary lesion. Thus, these testscan be negative in early syphilis. VDRL can also be
negative in some untreated patients in late syphilis.
Hence, VDRL cannot be relied on for diagnosis invery early or late stage of syphilis.
/square6False positive VDRL test can occur in infections (TB,HIV, Lyme disease, infectious mononucleosis,malaria), pregnancy, connective tissue diseases,liver disease, and malignancy.
/square6Because of frequent false positive and false negativeVDRL test, all positive tests and all negative testsin patients in whom syphilis is strongly suspectedclinically, should be verified by a specific trepo-
nemal test.
/square6The nontreponemal tests are quite useful formonitoring the patient’s response to treatment,
because the titers reflect disease activity. Whenthese tests are used for this purpose, it is importantto use the same test (either VDRL or RPR) for serialmeasurements because the two tests can differsignificantly in their titers. When possible, it is
also recommended to do the test in the same labora-
tory.

/square6Infectious Diseases41
1Q.Yaws.
/square6Yaws is a chronic, relapsing, nonvenereal infection
caused by Treponema pallidum pertenue. Yaws,
endemic syphilis (bejel), and pinta collectively
constitute the endemic treponematoses.
Clinical Features
/square6The incubation period is 9 to 90 days (average20 days).
/square6It predominantly affects children with peak
incidence between 5 and 9 years of age.
/square6It spreads through close contact and the presence
of minor skin lesions, abrasions and scratches whichfacilitate penetration and infection by the
treponemae.
/square6Initially patient develops constitutional symptoms
like bodyache, malaise and fever with rigors for aweek. Then the initial yaws may start as a maculo-
papular eruption and then may develop into a
papilloma. Initial lesion usually appears on the leg.Several weeks to months later generalised papillo-matous eruptions may appear. Bone and joints canget affected and take the form of periostitis andosteitis. Gondou is a hypertrophic osteitis of the
nasal process of the maxilla. Hyperkeratosis of soles
and palms develops late. In late stages highlydestructive ulcers may develop in the skin, bonesand cartilages.
/square6Gangosa is the result of extensive destruction of
nasal bones and cartilages. In severe cases, the
whole of the palate may be destroyed, so that thenose and the mouth become one space.
Investigations
/square6Dark field microscopy of the specimens from earlylesions may show spirochaetes.
/square6Serological tests are similar to those of syphilis(VDRL, RPR, FTA-ABS, etc.) and become positiveat an early stage of infection, but tend to becomenegative later. Serological tests cannot differentiateyaws from other treponemal infections.
Treatment
/square6Benzathine penicillin is the drug of choice.
/square6The recommended dose is 6 lakh units for thoseunder 10 years of age, and 12 lakh units for those
above 10 years of age.
/square6In patients allergic to penicillin, tetracycline ordoxycycline can be used.
Q.Pinta.
Etiology
/square6Pinta is an endemic treponematosis caused by
Treponema carateum ./square6Pinta is a Spanish word used to describe a spotted
or mottled appearance. The lesions of pinta have apeculiar pigmented appearance on the skin.
/square6Transmission is non-venereal by contact with skin
lesions. Various biting and sucking arthropods have
also been implicated.
Clinical Features
/square6It is predominantly a disease of childhood. Afterinfection, 2–3 weeks later, a primary lesion at thesite of inoculation appears. Secondary lesions appearafter a month or a year. These secondary lesions areerythematous papules which become scaly and
pigmented. These lesions gradually regress and
become depigmented. Lesions are found mainly ondistal extremities. Trunk and face may also beinvolved. The lesions have to be differentiated fromother depigmented lesions like leprosy, yaws,syphilis, psoriasis, tinea versicolor, and vitiligo.
Investigations
/square6Same as those described under yaws.
Management
/square6Penicillin is the drug of choice. Tetracycline or doxy-
cycline are alternatives.
Q. Leptrospirosis.
Q. Weil’s syndrome.
Etiology
/square6Leptospirosis is an infectious disease of humans
and animals that is caused by pathogenic spiro-chetes of the genus Leptospira . It is considered the
most common zoonosis in the world.
/square6Leptospira are coiled, thin, highly motile spiro-chaetes.
Figure 1.11 Leptospira


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
142 /square6Human infection is caused by L. icterohaemorrhagica,
L. canicola  and L. hardjo serotypes .
Epidemiology
/square6It is a zoonosis and the reservoir of infection is rats
(L. icterohaemorrhagica) , dogs ( L. canicola)  and pigs
(L. hardjo) , respectively. These animals shed
spirochaetes in the urine.
/square6Infection occurs by direct contact with urine orblood of an infected animal or by indirect contactwith contaminated water, soil or vegetables.Human-to-human transmission is rare.
/square6The organism enters the body through cuts, mucousmembrane or even unabraded skin.
/square6The disease is more common in veterinary
personnel, agricultural workers, sewers, slaughter
house workers and fisher men.
Pathogenesis
/square6The organism spreads through the blood stream toall organs. Multiplication takes place in blood andtissues.
/square6Leptospires damage the wall of small blood vesselsleading to vasculitis. Vasculitis causes leakage ofplasma, hemorrhage and volume depletion. Vascu-litis is responsible for most of the manifestations ofleptospirosis.
/square6Although any organ may be involved kidneys andliver are involved mainly. Kidney involvementleads to renal failure and oliguria. Liver involve-ment leads to jaundice and liver function abnorma-lities. Muscle involvement leads to prominent
myalgia and elevated CK levels. Lung involvement
can lead to ARDS and pulmonary hemorrhage.
/square6Meningitis can develop when there is rise inantibody titers. This association suggests that an
immunologic mechanism may be responsible for
meningitis.
Clinical Features
/square6The incubation period varies from 2 to 20 days.
/square6More than 90% of patients have mild and anictericform of leptospirosis.
/square6Severe leptospirosis with deep jaundice (Weil’ssyndrome) develops in 5 to 10% of patients.
/square6Leptospirosis is characteristically biphasic and hasan initial septicemic phase followed by immune
phase. The distinction between the first and second
phases is not always clear, and mild cases may nothave the second phase.
Septicemic Phase
/square6It presents as an acute influenza-like illness, withfever, chills, headache, nausea, vomiting, andmyalgias.
/square6Muscle pain is an important clinical feature./square6Headache may be intense.
/square6Physical examination shows fever, conjunctivalsuffusion, muscle tenderness, and hepatospleno-megaly. Mild jaundice may be present. Sometimes
a rash also may be noted.
Immune Phase (Second Phase)
/square6After a gap of 1 to 3 days, fever reccurs in many cases.
This second phase coincides with the developmentof antibodies. Fever and myalgias may be less severein the second phase. Aseptic meningitis, iridocyclitisand uveitis may develop during second phase. Mostpatients become asymptomatic within a week.
Severe Leptospirosis (Weil’s Syndrome)
/square6Weil’s syndrome, the most severe form of lepto-
spirosis, is characterized by jaundice, renal failure,
hemorrhagic tendency, and a high mortality rate.
/square6It is most often caused by leptospira icterohaemorr-
hagica serogroup.
/square6Initially symptoms are same as that of uncompli-
cated leptospirosis. However, later, jaundice, renal
and vascular dysfunction develop. Jaundice is very
deep and gives an orange tinge to the skin. Tenderhepatomegaly is usually present. Splenomegalymay also be present.
/square6Dialysis may be required for renal failure. Renalfunction usually recovers completely with treat-ment.
/square6Pulmonary involvement occurs frequently andresults in cough, dyspnea, hemoptysis and rarelyrespiratory failure.
/square6Hemorrhagic manifestations include epistaxis,petechiae, purpura, and ecchymoses. Severe GIbleeding and adrenal or subarachnoid hemorrhageoccur rarely.
/square6Complications of Weil’s disease include rhabdo-myolysis, myocarditis, pericarditis, congestiveheart failure, cardiogenic shock, ARDS, necrotizingpancreatitis, septic shock and multiorgan failure.
Laboratory Features
Presumptive Diagnosis
/square6A positive result of a rapid screening test such asIgM ELISA, latex agglutination test, lateral flow,dipstick, etc.
Confirmatory Diagnosis
/square6Isolation of pathogenic leptospires through cultureof blood or other clinical samples.
/square6A positive PCR result (for blood in the early stagesof infection).
/square6Fourfold or greater rise in titre or seroconversionin microscopic agglutination test (MAT) on pairedsamples obtained at least 2 weeks apart.

/square6Infectious Diseases43
1Other Tests
/square6Blood examination shows anemia, increased WBCs,
decreased platelet count, and high ESR.
/square6LFT shows elevated direct bilirubin, elevated ASTand ALT and prolonged prothrombin time.
/square6Renal function tests (RFT) show elevated blood urea
and creatinine.
/square6CK levels are high due to muscle damage.
/square6Urine examination may show proteinuria, RBCs,
and cellular and granular casts.
/square6ECG may show low voltage, prolonged QT andnonspecific ST and T wave changes.
/square6Chest X-ray may show patchy bronchopneumoniaor ARDS.
Differential Diagnosis
/square6Leptospirosis should be differentiated from otherfebrile illnesses associated with headache, musclepain and jaundice, such as dengue, severe malaria,
enteric fever, viral hepatitis, hantavirus infections,
sepsis and rickettsial diseases.
Treatment
/square6Crystalline penicillin  1.5 million units IV 6th hourly
daily for 7 days OR ceftriaxone  1 gm IV BD for 5 to
7 days is the drug of choice for severe cases. Mildcases can be treated with oral antibiotics such as
ampicillin or amoxicillin or erythromycin or doxy-
cycline.
/square6Fluid and electrolyte balance should be maintainedand supportive measures provided.
/square6Dialysis may be required for renal failure.
Q.Relapsing fever.
/square6The condition is so named because it is characterized
by recurring fever separated by afebrile periods.
/square6Relapsing fever is endemic in Africa, India, MiddleEast and South America.
Etiology
/square6The infection is caused by several species of the
spirochete Borrelia .
/square6Relapsing fever is an arthropod-borne infection
spread by lice ( Pediculus humanus ) and ticks
(Ornithodoros  species). Two main forms of this
infection exist: Tick-borne relapsing fever (TBRF)
and louse-borne relapsing fever (LBRF).
/square6TBRF is caused by many Borrelia  species (e.g. Borrelia
hermsii , Borrelia duttonii, etc. ), while LBRF is caused
solely by Borrelia recurrentis .
Clinical Features
/square6After an incubation period of 7–10 days, the illness
starts with high grade fever with chills and rigors,
headache, body ache and joint pain. There can benausea, vomiting, and sleeplessness. Patients may
also develop a generalized petechial or ecchymoticrash, hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, hemorrhagictendency and hemoptysis. Meningitis can occurrarely.
/square6Although patients can completely recover from theinitial stage, majority will develop one or morerelapses. Louse-borne fever has more chances ofrelapse than tick borne fever. Relapses result fromantigenic variation of the spirochete’s outer-surface
proteins.
/square6Untreated, one-third of patients may die.
Diagnosis
/square6Diagnosis can be confirmed by direct observation
of spirochetes in peripheral blood smears duringepisodes of fever.
/square6Direct or immunofluorescence staining may also beused to visualize spirochetes using a fluorescencemicroscope.
/square6Motile spirochetes can be seen when specimens are
examined by dark-field microscopy.
Treatment
/square6Treatment with doxycycline (or tetracycline), or
erythromycin, or chloramphenicol is effective. For
children <8 years of age and for pregnant women,
erythromycin or penicillin is preferred, because ofside effects of tetracyclines.
/square6A severe Jarish-Herxheimer reaction may occur
after antibiotics are given and should be carefully
watched for.
/square6Public health measures are needed to control thelouse and tick populations.
Q.Rat-bite fever.
/square6Two organisms, Spirillum minus and Streptobacillus
moniliformis  can cause rat bite fever. Both are
spirochetes.
/square6Human cases occur as a result of a bite or scratch
(direct contact) from an infected rat. Infection mayalso occur from exposure to infected rat urine or
by eating food or water contaminated with rat feces.
/square6Patient develops fever, inflammation, ulceration at
the bite site, and regional lymphadenopathy. Arthritisand periodic fever can occur for several weeks.
/square6Diagnosis is by demonstration of spirochaete influid from the ulcer, lymph node, or joint effusion.
/square6Treatment is by penicillin or tetracycline.
Q.Lyme disease (lyme borreliosis).
Q. Erythema migrans.
Etiology
/square6Lyme disease is a zoonosis caused by the spiro-
chaete Borrelia burgdorferi.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
144Epidemiology
/square6The disease is transmitted by the bite of the Ixodes
tick which normally infects dogs, deer and sheep.
/square6The disease is seen mainly in western countries.
/square6Most cases occur in summer months in rural areas.Children and women are affected more commonly.
Clinical Features
Localized Infection (Stage 1)
/square6Borrelia organisms are injected into the skin whena tick bites.
/square6From the injected site, the spirochaete migratesoutwards, producing a red macule or papule thatexpands slowly to form a large annular lesion callederythema migrans (EM) which is the characteristic
rash of Lyme disease. As the lesion increases in size,it develops a bright red outer border and central
clearing. Without therapy, EM typically fades
within 3–4 weeks. EM usually is round or oval, butcan be triangular or linear. Often, a central punctumis present at the bite site. EM enlarges by a fewcentimeters per day; single lesions typically achievea diameter of approximately 5–6 inches. Since ticks
tend to bite the areas where natural barriers impede
their forward motion, rash location is usually on thepopliteal fossa, axillary or gluteal folds, areas nearelastic bands in bra straps or underwear. In children,the scalp, face, and hairline are especially commonlocations. Some patients with EM may have
secondary EM lesions due to hematogenous spread.
These lesions generally are smaller than the primaryone, lack the central punctum, and tend to be moreuniform in morphology than the primary lesion.Location of secondary lesions can be anywhere.
/square6Fever, chills, and malaise are also present in thisstage.
Disseminated Infection (Stage 2)
/square6From the local site, organisms spread hemato-genously to many sites within days or weeks afterthe onset of erythema migrans. Patients have severe
headache, neck stiffness, fever with chills,
arthralgias, and fatigue.
/square6One or more organ systems become involved ashematologic or lymphatic spread disseminates
spirochetes to distant sites. Musculoskeletal
(arthritis) and neurologic symptoms are the mostcommon. Neurologic manifestations include cranialnerve palsy especially facial nerve palsy (Bell’spalsy), meningitis and encephalopathy. Cardiacinvolvement presents as dizziness, syncope,
dyspnea, chest pain, and palpitations.
Persistent Infection (Stage 3)
/square6After months or years of latency the articular
(oligoarticular arthritis in large joints), neurological(polyneuropathy, encephalopathy) or dermato-
logical (acrodermatitis chronica atrophica)symptoms occur. Lyme arthritis is the hallmark ofstage 3 Lyme disease. It tends to involve large joints(knee is involved in 90% of cases).
Investigations
/square6Lyme disease is usually diagnosed by the clinicalfeatures with serologic confirmation by testing forserum antibodies. The most frequently used test isthe enzyme immunoassay (EIA) or enzyme-linkedimmunosorbent assay (ELISA). Positive results can
be confirmed by Western blot test. However, there
are many limitations to serological tests. Thirtypercent (30%) of acute cases are seronegative;positive tests may reflect past rather than currentinfection.
/square6PCR testing of joint fluid is helpful in arthritis.
/square6More sophisticated immunological tests are beingdeveloped.
Management
/square6B. burgdorferi  is sensitive to beta-lactam antibiotics
(penicillins and cephalosporins) and to the tetra-cyclines. For severe cases, IV benzylpenicillin orceftriaxone is given. For less severe cases oral
doxycycline or amoxycillin for 3 weeks is effective.
Q.Epidemic typhus fever.
/square6Typhus refers to a group of infectious diseases that
are caused by rickettsial organisms that result inacute febrile illness. Arthropod vectors transmit therickettsial organisms to humans. The main diseasesof this group are epidemic typhus, murine typhus,and scrub typhus.
/square6Epidemic typhus is the prototypical infection ofthe typhus group of diseases, and the pathophysio-logy of this illness is representative of all typhusfevers.
/square6Epidemic typhus is caused by the organismRickettsia prowazekii.
Transmission
/square6It is spread by the vector Pediculus corporis (body
louse) .
/square6Organisms enter through abraded skin or mucous
membrane when an infected louse is crushed onthe body surface.
Clinical Features
/square6Incubation period is ~1 week.
/square6Typhus is a multisystem vasculitis and may causea wide array of clinical manifestations.
/square6Main features are high fever, severe headache, andmaculopapular rash. Cough is noted frequently.
There is severe generalized myalgia.

/square6Infectious Diseases45
1/square6Rash begins on the upper trunk, usually on the fifth
day, and then becomes generalized, involving allof the body except the face, palms, and soles.Initially, rash is macular, then it becomes maculo-papular, petechial, and confluent.
/square6Photophobia and conjunctival congestion arefrequently present. The tongue may be dry andcoated. Confusion and coma are common. Skinnecrosis and digital gangrene may be seen in severecases.
/square6Patients may also develop hemodynamic collapse,multiorgan involvement including renal failure.
/square6Brill-Zinsser disease, a mild recrudescence ofepidemic typhus, can occur years after the initialinfection if host defenses falter.
Investigations
/square6Indirect immunofluorescence assay (IFA) orenzyme immunoassay (EIA) testing can be used toevaluate for a rise in the immunoglobulin M (IgM)antibody titer, which indicates an acute primary
disease.
/square6The complement fixation (CF) test is a serological
test that can be used to demonstrate which specificrickettsial organism is causing disease by detection
of specific antibodies.
Treatment
/square6Doxycycline is the drug of choice. It is given as
200 mg once followed by 100 mg bid for at least7 days. Alternative is chloramphenicol 500 mg qidorally for 7–15 days. Intravenous administrationof antibiotics is indicated in very sick patients.Supportive treatment is provided as needed.
Q.Scrub typhus.
Etiology
/square6Scrub typhus is a mite-borne infectious disease
caused by Orientia tsutsugamushi  (previously called
Rickettsia tsutsugamushi ), an intracellular gram-
negative bacterium.
Transmission of Infection
/square6Scrub typhus is found in areas with heavy scrubvegetation, e.g. where the forest is regrowing afterbeing cleared and along riverbanks. Hence, it is
called scrub typhus.
/square6Seen in India, Asia, Australia, New Guinea, and
Pacific Islands.
/square6Orientia tsutsugamushi is present in trombiculid
mites. The organism is transmitted to humansthrough the bite of larval stage of mite calledchiggers. Infected chiggers feeds on animal hosts,mainly rodents and infect them. Human infection
is acquired by accident.Clinical Features
/square6The site of chigger bite is marked by an eschar and
is accompanied by regional lymphadenopathy,which may later become generalized. Other clinical
features are high fever, intense headache, diffuse
myalgias, and, sometimes a rash. Severe infectionmay be complicated by interstitial pneumonia,pulmonary edema, congestive heart failure, circula-tory collapse, and signs and symptoms of CNS dys-function, including delirium, confusion, and seizures.
Death may occur as a result of these complications,
usually late in the second week of illness.
Investigations
/square6Weil-Felix OX-K strain agglutination test is theoldest test available. It is inexpensive, but lacksspecificity and sensitivity.
/square6Demonstration of antibodies against Orientia
tsutsugamushi using indirect fluorescent antibody
(IFA) test or indirect immunoperoxidase (IIP) test.IFA is the gold standard test. These tests are moresensitive and specific than Weil-Felix.
/square6Molecular detection using polymerase chainreaction (PCR) is possible from skin rash biopsies,lymph node biopsies or blood.
Treatment
/square6Drug of choice is doxycycline (100 mg bid PO for7–15 days). Alternative is chloramphenicol 500 mgqid PO for 7–15 days.
Q.Q fever.
/square6Q-fever is so named because when an outbreak
occurred in Australia, it was unknown what type
of fever it was. Hence, it was named Q (for query)fever. But later the micro-organism responsible forQ fever was isolated.
/square6Q fever is caused by infection with Coxiella burnetii ,
a small gram-negative bacillus.
/square6Q fever is a zoonotic disease found in wild(mammals, birds, and ticks) and domestic animals
(cattle, sheep, and goats).
/square6It is transmitted among animals by ticks. Infected
animals shed it through their milk and conceptionalproducts during delivery into soil.
/square6Human disease is acquired by inhalation of infecteddust, handling infected animals, and by drinkingcontaminated milk. Veterinarians are at increasedrisk of infection. It can also be acquired through
blood transfusion.
Clinical Features
/square6Incubation period is 3 to 30 days.
/square6It presents as flu like illness with moderate fever,headache, myalgia, malaise and anorexia.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
146 /square6Multiorgan involvement leads to pneumonia,
hepatitis, pericarditis, myocarditis, endocarditisand meningoencephalitis. Endocarditis commonlyaffects aortic valve.
Diagnosis
/square6Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)  on a blood sample
can be used for rapid diagnosis.
/square6Serologic methods:  Indirect immunofluorescence (IIF)
(method of choice), complement fixation andenzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). A
fourfold increase in IgG antibody titer by immuno-
fluorescent assay (IFA) of paired acute and convale-scent specimens is the diagnostic gold standard toconfirm the diagnosis of Q fever.
/square6Immunohistochemistry or culture  of affected tissue can
provide definitive confirmation of infection byCoxiella burnetii.
Treatment
/square6Chloramphenicol and tetracyclines (doxycycline)are effective against Q fever.
/square6In pregnancy, trimethoprim sulfamethoxazole isrecommended for treatment.
/square6Quinolones are also effective.
Q.Psittacosis (parrot fever).
/square6Psittacosis, also known as parrot fever, is caused
by Chlamydia psittaaci  which is an intracellular
bacterium.
/square6Many birds are known to harbour the organisms,
but psittacine species (parrots), poultry, and
pigeons are the main sources of human infection.
/square6Organisms are transmitted to humans through contactwith infected animals or birds or their faecal materials.
Organisms enter human body through inhalation. It is
common among pet bird (pigeon and parrot)owners and poultry (chicken and duck) farmers.
Clinical Features
/square6History of bird contact present. Incubation period is1 to 2 weeks. It presents as atypical  pneumonia with
fever and tachypnea. Examination may show
relative bradycardia. Chest examination may showcrepitations and signs of consolidation. Lunglesions are more extensive than the clinical featuressuggest. Respiratory failure can occur.
/square6Rarely e xtrapulmonary complications can occur and
include myocarditis, encephalitis, meningitis,pancreatitis, glomerulonephritis, and disseminatedintravascular coagulation.
Diagnosis
/square6Serological methods are preferred. These includecomplement fixation (CF) and microimmuno-
fluorescent antibody test (MIF)./square6Molecular methods such as real time PCR have high
sensitivity and specificity and can be used for rapiddiagnosis.
/square6Culture is difficult and hazardous to laboratory
personnel.
/square6X-ray reveals patchy shadows, most often in the lower
lobes.
Treatment
/square6Oral doxycycline 100 mg twice daily for 21 days iscurative.
/square6Erythromycin is the second line therapy whentetracyclines are contraindicated.
Q.Lymphogranuloma venereum (LGV).
/square6LGV is a sexually transmitted disease caused by
certain L1, L2, and L3 serotypes of Chlamydia tracho-
matis. These serotypes can invade and reproduce
in regional lymph nodes.
Clinical Features
/square6The peak incidence of LGV corresponds to the ageof greatest sexual activity: The second and thirddecades of life.
/square6It is characterized by a painless genital lesion withbilateral inguinal lymphadenopathy (buboes).
/square6These buboes may break down to form multipledischarging sinuses with extensive scarring.
/square6Anal intercourse may lead to hemorrhagic proctitiswith regional lymphadenopathy.
/square6Systemic symptoms like fever and leukocytosis areseen. Meningoencephalitis can develop rarely.
/square6Genital elephantiasis (due to lymphatic obstruc-
tion), strictures, urethral and rectal fistulas may
occur as a late complication.
Diagnosis
/square6Direct microscopic examination of tissue scrapingsshows typical intracytoplasmic inclusions orelementary bodies.
/square6Detection of chlamydial antigens or antibody inserum or in local secretions.
/square6Nucleic acid amplification testing (NAAT) ofspecimens.
Treatment
/square6Recommended treatment is doxycycline 100 mg bdfor 21 days. Macrolides (erythromycin or azithro-mycin) are alternatives.
/square6Surgical drainage for suppurative bubo may berequired.
Q.Influenza.
/square6Influenza is an acute respiratory illness caused by
influenza viruses. Influenza viruses are encapsula-

/square6Infectious Diseases47
1ted, single-stranded RNA viruses of the family
Orthomyxoviridae.
Epidemiology
/square6There are 3 influenza viruses; A, B and C. Influenza-A viruses are further subdivided (subtyped) on thebasis of the surface hemagglutinin (H) andneuraminidase (N) antigens. H1N1 is a type ofinfluenza A virus.
/square6In addition to humans, influenza also infects avariety of animal species. More than 100 types ofinfluenza A infect most species of birds, pigs,horses, dogs, and seals. Influenza B has also been
reported in seals. In this context, the term avian
influenza (or “bird flu”) refers to zoonotic humaninfection with an influenza strain that primarilyaffects birds. Swine influenza refers to infectionfrom strains derived from pigs.
/square6Type A is responsible for major epidemics and Bfor localized outbreaks. Epidemics usually occurduring the winter months. Influenza A pandemicsalso occur and cause considerable school and workabsenteeism. Influenza B causes less severe
outbreaks mostly in schools and military camps.
Influenza C rarely causes human disease.
/square6A remarkable feature of influenza virus A is it canundergo periodic antigenic variations. Major
antigenic variations, called antigenic shifts, are
associated with pandemics and are seen withinfluenza A viruses only. Minor variations arecalled antigenic drifts. Antigenic shift happens dueto re-assortment of gene segments between viralstrains and ‘antigenic drift’ from point mutations.
Pathogenesis
/square6The disease is acquired by inhalation of dropletsgenerated by coughs and sneezes.
/square6It can also spread through hand-to-hand contact,personal contact, and fomites.
/square6The infection involves the ciliated columnar
epithelial cells, but can also involve alveolar cells,
mucous gland cells and macrophages. The infectedcells of the tracheobronchial tree eventually becomenecrotic and desquamate.
/square6The host response to influenza involves both cellmediated and humoral immunity.
/square6Systemic symptoms in influenza such as fever andmyalgia are due to the induction of cytokines.
Clinical Manifestations
/square6The incubation period varies from 18 to 72 hours.
/square6Initially respiratory symptoms like dry cough andrhinorrhea are present but are later overshadowedby systemic symptoms.
/square6Systemic symptoms include fever, chills, headache,
myalgia, arthralgia and loss of appetite. Rigors are
rare. Fever may last for as long as a week./square6Systemic examination is usually normal.
/square6Most patients recover in 1 week, although coughmay persist for 1 to 2 weeks longer. In some patientsweakness may persist for several weeks.
/square6Complications include secondary bacterial pneumonia,Reye’s syndrome, myocarditis, encephalitis, trans-verse myelitis and, rarely, Guillain-Barré syndrome.
Diagnosis
/square6Laboratory diagnosis is accomplished by thedetection of virus or viral antigen in throat swabs,
nasal washes, or sputum.
/square6Rapid diagnostic tests: These employ immuno-
logical and molecular techniques. Options includeimmunofluorescence (IF) assays, enzyme immuno-
assays (EIA), and polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-
based testing.
/square6Serology: Diagnosis can be established retrospecti-vely by serologic methods such as hemagglutination-
inhibition.
Treatment
/square6Most cases of influenza resolve spontaneously
without any complications. Symptomatic therapywith paracetamol for fever and myalgia, codeinesyrup for dry cough are enough for such cases.Aspirin should be avoided because of the risk ofReye’s syndrome. Patients should be advised to rest
and maintain hydration during acute illness.
/square6Antiviral drugs are available to treat influenza:
amantadine and rimantadine for influenza A and theneuraminidase inhibitors zanamivir and oseltamivir
for both influenza A and influenza B. Antiviral
drugs are recommended for high-risk patients.
/square6Antibiotics are indicated for secondary bacterialinfections.
Prevention
/square6Influenza vaccine is recommended for all personsaged 6 months or older every year if there are nocontraindications.
/square6Inactivated influenza vaccine (IIV): This is given as
0.5 mL intramuscularly.
/square6Live-attenuated influenza vaccine (LAIV): This is
administered as intranasal spray.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, diagnosis and
management of H1N1 influenza (Swine Flu).
/square6Swine influenza is a highly contagious respiratory
disease in pigs caused by one of several swineinfluenza A viruses. In addition, influenza C virusesmay also cause illness in swine. The current virusis a novel influenza A (H1N1) virus not previouslyidentified in humans (H = hemagglutinin, N =
neuraminidase). Outbreaks of H1N1 influenza
(swine flu) are common in pigs year-round.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
148 /square6Transmission of swine influenza viruses to humans
is uncommon. However, transmission can occur tohumans via contact with infected pigs or environ-ments contaminated with swine influenza viruses.Once a human becomes infected, he or she can thenspread the virus to other humans.
/square6In 2009, cases of influenza like illness were firstreported in Mexico on March 18; the outbreak wasconfirmed as H1N1 influenza A. During thisoutbreak, nearly 100,000 were hospitalized, and
about 3,900 died. On June 11, 2009, WHO raised
the pandemic alert level to phase 6 (indicating aglobal pandemic) because of widespread infectionbeyond North America to Australia, the UnitedKingdom, Argentina, Chile, Spain, and Japan.Currently WHO and Centre for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) are monitoring the situation all
over the world.
Clinical Features
/square6Manifestations of H1N1 influenza (swine flu) aresimilar to those of seasonal influenza. Patientspresent with symptoms of acute respiratory illness,such as fever, chills, fatigue, cough, sore throat,body aches, and headache. In addition, diarrhea
and vomiting may occur.
/square6Clinical deterioration is characterized by primary
viral pneumonia, which destroys the lung tissueand does not respond to antibiotics, and multi-
organ dysfunction including the heart, kidneys, and
liver. Patients with severe disease have dyspnea,cyanosis, dehydration, and altered mental status.
Diagnosis
/square6Clinicians should consider the possibility of H1N1infection in patients who present with febrilerespiratory illness. The CDC criteria for suspectedH1N1 influenza are as follows:
– Onset of acute febrile respiratory illness within
7 days of close contact with a person who has aconfirmed c ase of H1N1 influenza A virus
infection, or
– Onset of acute febrile respiratory illness within
7 days of travel to a community (within theUnited States or internationally) where one ormore H1N1 influenza A cases have been
confirmed, or
– Acute febrile respiratory illness in a person who
resides in a community where at least one H1N1influenza case has been confirmed.
If H1N1 is suspected, the clinician should obtain
a respiratory swab and send it for H1N1 testing.
Laboratory Confirmation of Diagnosis
/square6Real-time RT-PCR is the recommended test for
confirmation of H1N1 cases. This is done on swab
sample from the nose or throat.Management
Supportive Therapy
/square6Patients should be isolated to prevent spread of infec-tion to others. Bedrest, increased fluid intake, coughsuppressants, antipyretics and analgesics (e.g aceta-minophen, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs)for fever and myalgias. Severe cases may requireintravenous hydration and ventilator support.
Antiviral Agents
/square6Serious patients should be treated with antiviral
agents. Drugs of choice are oseltamivir (Tamiflu)
or zanamivir. These two drugs inhibit neuramini-dase on the surface of influenza virus that destroysan infected cell’s receptor for viral hemagglutinin.By inhibiting viral neuraminidase, these agentsdecrease the release of viruses from infected cells
and, thus, viral spread.
/square6Antiviral drugs reduce the risk of pneumonia a
leading cause of death in H1N1 and the need forhospitalization. Oseltamivir should be started as
early as possible (preferably within 48 hours) in a
dose of 75 mg BD for 5 days. Where oseltamivir isunavailable or cannot be used for any reason,zanamivir may be given. Zanamivir is given byinhalation in a dose of 10 mg BD for 5 days.Pregnant women and patients with underlying
medical conditions are at higher risk of developing
complications and should be given antivirals assoon as H1N1 is suspected even before laboratoryconfirmation.
Reducing the Spread of Infection
/square6Patients who develop flulike illness (i.e. fever witheither cough or sore throat) should be stronglyencouraged to self-isolate in their home for 7 days
after the onset of illness or at least 24 hours after
symptoms have resolved, whichever is longer.
/square6While in home isolation, patients and other
household members should be given infection
control instructions, including frequent handwashing with soap and water. Patients with H1N1influenza should wear a face mask when within6 feet of others at home.
/square6If the patient must go into the community (e.g. toseek medical care), he or she should wear a facemask.
/square6Patients should call the physician before meetingand should avoid mixing with other OPD patientsat clinic or hospital.
/square6Prophylaxis with antiviral agents should be consi-dered for close household contacts of a confirmedor suspected case who are at high risk for complica-tions (e.g. chronic medical conditions, persons
>65 years or <5 years, pregnant women), school
children at high risk for complications who have

/square6Infectious Diseases49
1been in close contact with a confirmed or suspected
case, health care providers who were not usingappropriate personal protective equipment duringclose contact with a confirmed or suspected case.Antivirals should not be used for postexposurechemoprophylaxis in healthy children or adults.
/square6School closure should be considered upon aconfirmed case of H1N1.
/square6Public gatherings should be avoided in a placewhere there has been a confirmed case of H1N1.
Vaccine
/square6Vaccine stimulates active immunity to influenzavirus infection by inducing production of specificantibodies. H1N1 vaccine is available as an IMinjection and as an intranasal product.
/square6Intramuscular vaccine contains monovalent,inactivated influenza A virus. It is given as 0.5 mLIM in deltoid muscle. Two doses are required forchildren younger than 10 years (initial dosefollowed by a booster several weeks later). Single
dose is recommended for adults and children
10 years and older. Intranasal vaccine is given as0.2 mL/dose (0.1 mL per nostril) intranasally(1 dose). A quadrivalent vaccine containing fourstrains of influenza viruses including H1N1 isavailable now which can be used.
/square6Vaccination is recommended for all pregnantwomen, adults, and children over 6 months of age.
Prognosis
/square6H1N1 influenza tends to cause high morbidity butlow mortality rates (1–4%). Complications are morelikely in children, elderly, pregnant women and
people with other co-morbid illness.
Q.Varicella (chickenpox) (HHV-3).
Etiology
/square6The causative agent of varicella or chickenpox is
Varicella-zoster virus (VZV; human herpes virus-3).
It is a DNA virus belonging to herpes viridaefamily.
/square6It produces two clinical entities: Varicella (chicken-
pox) and herpes zoster (shingles).
/square6Chickenpox is the primary infection, and usually
occurs in childhood. Chickenpox rarely occurstwice but the virus remains latent in the dorsal root
ganglia and cranial nerve ganglia. Years later it may
be reactivated to cause vesicular eruption in therelevant sensory dermatomes which is known asherpes zoster (shingles).
Clinical Features
/square6Chickenpox affects children commonly.
/square6Incubation period is 10 to 21 days./square6There may be a prodrome of low grade fever,headache and malaise lasting 1–2 days before theonset of rash.
/square6Rash appears first on the face and trunk and thenspreads to other parts of the body. Lesions can alsobe found on the mucosa of the pharynx and vagina.
Rashes may be pruritic and centripetal with relative
sparing of the peripheries. To start with rashes aremaculopapular and in a few hours become vesicles.Vesicles become pustules which later form crusts.New lesions continue to appear for 2 to 4 days sothat all stages of the eruption are present simulta-
neously (pleomorphic rash). Rashes usually heal
without scarring. Lesions can get secondarilyinfected with bacteria, usually Streptococcus pyogenes
or Staphylococcus aureus .
Diagnosis
/square6Diagnosis is mainly based on clinical features.
/square6Diagnosis can be confirmed where necessary by
isolation of virus in tissue culture, demonstrations
of high titres of antibodies or the detection of VZV
DNA by PCR. Tzanck smear made by scraping ofthe base of the lesions may show multinucleatedgiant cells.
Treatment
/square6Most people recover with supportive treatment.
/square6Antiviral agents like acyclovir, famciclovir andvalacyclovir are recommended for adolescents and
adults with chickenpox of ≥24 hours duration.
/square6Antibiotics may be used for secondary bacterial
infection of skin lesions.
Complications
/square6CNS involvement in the form of cerebellar ataxia,meningitis, encephalitis, transverse myelitis, andGuillain-Barré syndrome
/square6Involvement of other organ systems can produce
varicella pneumonia, myocarditis, nephritis,
hepatitis and arthritis.
/square6Reye’s syndrome (hepatic encephalopathy),another complication, is associated with aspirintherapy.
Q.Herpes zoster (shingles).
Etiology
/square6Etiologic agent is varicella-zoster virus (VZV) which
is the same virus causing chickenpox. After anattack of chickenpox VZV remains latent in thedorsal root ganglia and cranial nerve ganglia. Yearslater it may be reactivated to cause vesiculareruption in the relevant sensory dermatomes which
is known as herpes zoster (shingles).

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
150Clinical Features
/square6The first symptom is severe burning or shooting
pain in the affected dermatome followed byerythematous maculopapular eruption in 2 to
3 days. These eruptions turn into vesicles and start
crusting. The skin eruption is usually unilateral.
/square6The total duration of disease is generally between7 and 10 days.
/square6Local skin hyperalgesia is a clue to the neural originof pain.
/square6The dermatomes from T3 to L3 are commonlyaffected.
/square6In ophthalmic herpes the gasserian ganglion(trigeminal ganglion) is affected and the ophthalmic
branch of the trigeminal nerve is involved. Lesions
develop on the nose, conjunctiva and cornea of theaffected side. Corneal lesions heal leaving behindopacities causing blindness.
Treatment
/square6Antiviral drugs are indicated for the treatment ofshingles. Drugs used are same as for varicella(aciclovir or famciclovir or valacyclovir).
/square6Herpes zoster causes severe pain which may be
difficult to control. NSAIDs and opioid analgesics
can be used along with neuron modulator drugssuch as carbamazepine, gabapentin, amitriptylineand lidocaine patches to control pain.
Complications
/square6Postherpetic neuralgia: In postherpetic neuralgiapain persists even after the lesions have healed. Painof postherpetic neuralgia may be sharp and
intermittent or constant and may be debilitating. It
may persist for months or years or permanently.Treatments for postherpetic neuralgia includegabapentin, pregabalin, cyclic antidepressants,topical capsaicin or lidocaine ointment, andbotulinum toxin injection.
/square6CNS complications include meningoencephalitis
and transverse myelitis. Sometimes weakness and
wasting in segments supplied by the nerve root mayoccur due to motor neuritis.
/square6Immunocompromised patients can develop severedisease with multiorgan involvement.
Q.Infectious mononucleosis (glandular fever).
Etiology
/square6Infectious mononucleosis (IM) is a disease caused
by Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). EBV is a DNA virusbelonging to the family Herpesviridae. EBV alsocauses many tumors in human beings like naso-pharyngeal carcinoma, Burkitt lymphoma, and
Hodgkin lymphoma./square6Infectious mononucleosis (IM) is also known as
glandular fever  or kissing disease . Later it was called
infectious mononucleosis because it is characterizedby absolute lymphocytosis and atypical mono-nuclear cells in the blood.
/square6It is characterized by a triad of fever, pharyngitis,and lymphadenopathy.
Pathogenesis
/square6In humans it spreads commonly through saliva
(‘the kissing disease’) and rarely by blood
transfusion.
/square6After entry into the body the virus multipliesprimarily in B lymphocytes but also may replicatein the epithelial cells of the pharynx and parotidduct. Infected B cells are responsible for the
dissemination of infection throughout the lympho-
reticular system, i.e, liver, spleen, and peripherallymph nodes. Infected B lymphocytes produceantibodies against the virus. Cytotoxic T cells arealso produced by the body against the EBV-infectedB lymphocytes.
Clinical Features
/square6Incubation period is 4–8 weeks. Infectious mono-
nucleosis is a disease of childhood, adolescence and
low socioeconomic groups.
/square6Initially there is a prodrome of fatigue, malaise, andmyalgia.
/square6Prodrome is followed by typical features such asfever, sore throat, and lymphadenopathy.
/square6Fever is usually low grade. Lymphadenopathymost often affects the posterior cervical nodes butmay be generalized. Rarely hepatosplenomegalymay be found.
/square6A generalized maculopapular rash is occasionallyseen. Rash may develop if ampicillin is taken.
/square6IM should be suspected in an adolescent or youngadult with fever, sore throat and lymphadenopathy(especially posterior cervical lymphadenopathy).
/square6The illness usually lasts 2–4 weeks but weaknesscan persist for a long time.
/square6Complications include splenic rupture, thrombo-
cytopenia, autoimmune hemolytic anemia,
meningitis, encephalitis, and GB-syndrome.
Investigations
/square6Blood tests show raised leukocyte count withatypical lymphocytosis.
/square6Liver enzymes may be raised but jaundice is rare.
/square6Paul Bunnell test and Monospot test (detectheterophile antibodies) are usually positive.
/square6Demonstration of antibodies to viral capsid antigen(i.e. VCA-IgG and VCA-IgM).

/square6Infectious Diseases51
1Differential Diagnosis
/square6Other infections which produce fever and lympha-
denopathy: Streptococcal pharyngitis, cytomegalo-virus, acute HIV, or toxoplasma.
/square6Lymphoma.
Treatment
/square6There is no specific treatment for infectious
mononucleosis. Antiviral drugs do not have much
benefit.
/square6Supportive measures, rest and antipyretics aregiven as required.
/square6Ampicillin should be avoided in suspectedinfectious mononucleosis because it causes rash.
/square6Corticosteroids can be helpful for complicationssuch as impending airway obstruction, severethrombocytopenia, and hemolytic anemia.
Q.Chronic fatigue syndrome.
/square6Chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) is a disorder
characterized by unexplained, persistent, andsometimes debilitating fatigue.
/square6It can be difficult to diagnose because there are noobjective clinical or laboratory findings associatedwith this disorder.
Etiology
/square6The exact etiology of CFS is unknown and is likelyto be multifactorial including a genetic pre-disposition, and exposure to microbes, toxins, and
other physical and/or emotional trauma.
/square6Various immunologic abnormalities have been
reported in CFS patients. These include low levelsof IgG, abnormal IgG, decreased lymphocyticproliferation, circulating autoantibodies andimmune complexes, etc. Relatives of patients withCFS have an increased risk of developing the
disease, suggesting a genetic component.
Clinical Features
/square6CFS is more common in young and middle-aged
adults, in women and in Caucasians.
/square6Persistent fatigue is the hallmark of CFS. Fatigue
often follows an infection such as upper respiratory
infection or infectious mononucleosis. Patient is leftwith overwhelming fatigue even after he recoversfrom the initial illness. Physical activity worsensfatigue. Many patients with CFS also have othersymptoms such as feeling feverish, muscle and joint
aches, intermittent tenderness or swelling in the
lymph nodes. Physical examination is normal, withno objective signs of muscle weakness, arthritis,neuropathy, or organomegaly.
/square6Many patients have underlying depression.Diagnostic Criteria for Chronic Fatigue Syndrome
/square6Severe fatigue lasting >6 months.
/square6Postexertional malaise.
/square6Unrefreshing sleep.
/square6Cognitive impairment or orthostatic intolerance.
Treatment
/square6There is no specific therapy.
/square6Cognitive behavioral therapy and graded exerciseprograms have been shown to be beneficial.
/square6Low dose of a tricyclic antidepressant may helpmost patients.
/square6Treatment of co-morbid illness such as depression,
sleep disturbances, etc.
Q.Human papillomavirus infections.
/square6Human papilloma viruses are DNA viruses belong-
ing to the family Papillomaviridae.
/square6They infect the skin and mucous membranes.
Infections produce warts or may be associated with
a variety of benign and malignant neoplasms. SomeHPV infections (such as 16, 18, 31, 33, and 45) causecervical cancer.
/square6Most of the infections are seen in children andyoung adults. Warts can be common warts (verrucavulgaris), plantar warts (verruca plantaris) or ano-genital warts (condyloma acuminatum). Anogenitalwarts are sexually transmitted.
/square6Complications of warts include itching andbleeding with secondary infection. Warts in therespiratory tract may obstruct the airway.
/square6Many HPV lesions resolve spontaneously. Treat-
ment options are cryosurgery, application of caustic
agents, electrodesiccation, surgical excision, andablation with a laser. Topical antimetabolite, suchas 5-fluorouracil is also effective.
Q.Measles (rubeola).
/square6Measles (also known as rubeola) is a highly conta-
gious, acute, viral exanthematous disease.
Etiology
/square6Measles is caused by measles virus which is a RNAvirus belonging to the family of paramyxoviruses.
Epidemiology
/square6It most commonly affects preschool children.
Incidence of measles has come down after the
introduction of measles vaccine.
/square6Measles virus is transmitted by inhalation ofrespiratory droplets. It can also spread through
direct contact with larger droplets.
/square6The virus is present in nasopharyngeal secretions,
blood and urine during the prodromal period andfor a short time after the rash appears.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
152 /square6Patients are contagious from 1 or 2 days before the
onset of symptoms until 4 days after the appearanceof the rash. Infectivity is maximum during theprodromal phase.
Clinical Features
/square6Incubation period is 10 to 14 days.
/square6Measles starts with a prodrome of malaise, cough,lacrimation, nasal discharge, and fever. At this stageit resembles influenza.
/square6Just before the onset of the rash, Koplik’s spots
appear as 1 to 2 mm blue-white spots on a bright
red background. Koplik’s spots are usually seen onthe buccal mucosa alongside the upper secondmolars. They are characteristic of measles becausethey are not seen in any other disease. The spotsdisappear after the onset of rash.
/square6Rash appears 3–4 days after the onset of fever. Rashbegins first at the hairline and behind the ears, andthen spreads to the trunk and limbs. Rashes do notspare the palms and soles, are erythematous, non-
pruritic, and maculopapular. Rash is monomorphic,
i.e. all rashes have similar morphology. Rash beginsto fade by the fourth day, in the order in which itappeared.
/square6The entire illness lasts about 10 days. The diseasetends to be more severe in adults than in children.
Diagnosis
/square6Measles is diagnosed mainly by clinical features.
/square6Diagnosis can be confirmed by detecting serumanti-measles IgM antibody. IgM antibody isdetectable three days after the appearance of rash.Anti-measles IgG antibody appears 7 days after the
appearance of rash.
/square6A quick diagnosis of measles can be made by
demonstration of measles antigen by immuno-fluorescent staining of a smear of respiratory
secretions.
/square6Measles virus can be cultured and isolated from
respiratory secretions or urine.
/square6PCR for measles virus RNA can also diagnosemeasles.
Treatment
/square6There is no specific treatment for measles.
/square6Patient should be isolated.
/square6Most people recover spontaneously and onlysupportive treatment is necessary.
/square6Ribavirin may be considered for use in immuno-compromised individuals.
/square6Administration of vitamin A has been shown toprevent complications especially in malnourishedchildren.
/square6Secondary bacterial complications are treated withappropriate antibiotics.Complications
/square6Respiratory tract complications:  Laryngitis, croup,
or bronchitis, otitis media, pneumonia.
/square6CNS complications:  Encephalitis, transverse
myelitis, subacute sclerosing panencephalitis(SSPE). SSPE is a chronic, rare form of measlesencephalitis. It is common in children who havemeasles before the age of 2 years. SSPE is now rare
due to widespread vaccination against measles.
Clinical features are progressive dementia whichevolves over several months.
/square6Gastrointestinal complications:  Hepatitis, appen-
dicitis, and mesenteric adenitis.
/square6Others:  Myocarditis, glomerulonephritis, postinfec-
tious thrombocytopenic purpura and reactivationof tuberculosis.
Prevention
/square6Immediate protection can be obtained by giving
immunoglobulin within 6 days of exposure to the
disease. Measles vaccine given within 72 hours ofexposure may also protect against disease.
/square6Active immunization with measles vaccine is
included in the national immunization programme.
A single dose of vaccine is given at 8 to 9 months ofage. It provides lifelong immunity. Giving MMRvaccine at 15 to 18 months takes care of occasionalfailure of measles vaccine given at 8 to 9 months ofage. However, if there is an epidemic of measles,
vaccination may be given at 6 months of age
followed by another dose at 15 months of age.
Q.Mumps.
/square6Mumps is an acute, communicable, systemic viral
infection whose most distinctive feature is swellingof parotid glands. It can involve other salivaryglands, meninges, pancreas, and the gonads.
Etiology
/square6Mumps is caused by mumps virus which is amember of the paramyxovirus group. It is a RNA
virus.
Epidemiology
/square6Mumps occurs worldwide but the incidence has
decreased after the introduction of MMR vaccinewhich contains mumps component also.
/square6Mumps occurs mainly during winter and spring.It is mainly a disease of childhood, but nowadaysadults are getting affected more commonly. Both
sexes are affected equally.
/square6Epidemics occur in close populations, such as in
schools and military services.
/square6Mumps is highly infectious and spreads rapidlyamong susceptible people living in close quarters.

/square6Infectious Diseases53
1/square6Mumps virus is transmitted by droplet nuclei,
saliva, and fomites. Fomites contaminated byinfected saliva and possibly also by urine transmitthe infection. Transmission of infection occurs a daybefore the appearance of the parotid swelling andfor about three days after the swelling disappears.
/square6One attack of mumps or vaccination confers lifelongimmunity.
Clinical Features
/square6Incubation period is 2–3 weeks.
/square6Mumps starts with a prodrome of fever, malaise,myalgia, and anorexia.
/square6Parotitis may develop within the next 24 h or maybe delayed up to a week. Parotitis is usually
bilateral, although sometimes only one side is
affected. Parotid glands are involved mostcommonly and submaxillary and sublingual glandsare involved rarely. Parotid gland becomes swollenand tender. Gland swelling increases for a few daysand then gradually subsides within a week.
/square6Other than parotitis, orchitis is the most commonmanifestation. Testis becomes swollen, painful andtender. Testicular atrophy develops in half of theaffected men. However, since orchitis is usually
unilateral and other testes remains unaffected,
sterility is rare. Oophoritis can occur in women butless common than orchitis and does not lead tosterility.
/square6Aseptic meningitis is a common manifestation ofmumps in both children and adults. Mumpsmeningitis is usually self-limiting, although cranialnerve palsies are rarely seen. Rarely, encephalitiscan occur, which presents as high fever with alteredsensorium. Other CNS problems occasionally seen
are cerebellar ataxia, facial palsy, transverse
myelitis, Guillain-Barré syndrome, and aqueductalstenosis leading to hydrocephalus.
/square6Other clinical manifestations are pancreatitis, myo-
carditis, mastitis, thyroiditis, nephritis, arthritis,
and thrombocytopenic purpura.
Differential Diagnosis
/square6Mumps has to be differentiated from other causes
of parotid gland swelling, such as
– Influenza, parainfluenza and coxsackie virus
infections
– Bacterial parotitis due to staphylococcal infection
– Obstruction of Stenson’s duct by a calculus
– Parotid tumor
– Sarcoidosis
– Sjögren’s syndrome.
Diagnosis
/square6Diagnosis is mainly by clinical features.
/square6Serological detection of IgM antibodies./square6Virus isolation by culturing appropriate clinical
specimens.
/square6PCR.
Treatment
/square6Symptomatic treatment; analgesics and antipyreticsfor fever and pain, cold compresses for parotid
swelling.
/square6Patients with meningitis or pancreatitis may require
hospitalization.
/square6Patients with orchitis are also treated symptomati-cally with bedrest, nonsteroidal antiinflammatoryagents, support of the inflamed testis and ice packs.
Prevention
/square6Patients should be isolated to prevent transmissionto others.
/square6Passive immunization using immunoglobulin is noteffective to prevent infection in close contacts andis not recommended.
/square6Active immunization is routinely given as MMRvaccine (measles, mumps, rubella) subcutaneouslyat 15 months of age or later; repeat dose may benecessary after 5–10 years. MMR vaccine is alsorecommended for susceptible older children,adolescents, and adults, particularly adolescent
males who have not had mumps. Vaccine should
not be given to pregnant women, immuno-suppressed patients, or persons with advancedmalignancies.
Q.Rubella (German measles).
/square6Rubella is an acute viral exanthematous disease
caused by rubella virus, a RNA virus.
/square6It is also known as German measles because it was
first recognized to be different from measles in
Germany.
Epidemiology
/square6Humans are the only natural hosts for rubellainfection.
/square6It spreads by respiratory droplets or is maternally
transmitted to the fetus causing congenital infection.
/square6The peak incidence of the disease is in children of
5 to 12 years of age.
Clinical Manifestations
/square6Incubation period is usually 2–3 weeks.
/square6The disease is characterized by fever, rash, andlymphadenopathy.
/square6It is more severe in adults than children.
/square6There is usually a prodrome of low grade fever,malaise, anorexia and sore throat, followed bylymphadenopathy and appearance of skin rash.Rash often begins on the face and spreads down
the body. It is maculopapular but not confluent. It

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
154 disappears in the same order. Lymphadenopathy
usually affects suboccipital, cervical and post-auricular nodes but rarely axillary nodes can alsobe involved. Complications are rare and includearthritis (in women), encephalitis and thrombo-cytopenia.
/square6Congenital rubella : Maternal infection in early
pregnancy can lead to fetal infection, leading toteratogenic effects and congenital rubella.Sensorineural hearing loss is the most common
manifestation of congenital rubella syndrome.
Other signs of congenital rubella are cataract, heartdisease (patent ductus arteriosus), deafness, andmany other defects like mental retardation,microcephaly, and thrombocytopenic purpura.Infection in the first trimester leads to more severe
congenital rubella in the fetus.
Investigations
/square6Most cases are mild and are difficult to diagnose
on clinical grounds.
/square6Rubella can be diagnosed by specific IgM rubellaantibody and also by virus isolation.
Treatment
/square6Isolate the patient for 7 days after the onset of rash
to prevent spread of infection to others.
/square6There is no specific treatment. Most cases recover
spontaneously.
/square6Antipyretics like paracetamol can be used to treatfever.
Prevention
/square6Presently all infants are routinely immunizedagainst rubella by giving MMR vaccine at 12–15months of age. Live rubella virus vaccine containingRA 27/3 strain, and a recombinant DNA vaccine is
now available.
/square6Vaccine is administered in a single dose of 0.5 ml
subcutaneously. Immunity wanes after 10–15 yearsand hence the vaccine may have to be repeated at
10–15 years of age. Rubella vaccine may also be
administered to anyone who is thought to besusceptible to the infection./square6Live rubella vaccine is contraindicated duringpregnancy and it is recommended that pregnancybe avoided for at least 3 months after rubellavaccination.
Q. Discuss the etiology, epidemiology, pathogenesis,
clinical features, diagnosis and treatment of rabies.
Q. Prevention of rabies.
Q. Post-exposure prophylaxis of rabies.
/square6Rabies is an acute lethal viral infection of the central
nervous system caused by rabies virus. It is apreventable zoonotic disease.
/square6Rabies is one of the oldest, best known, and mostfeared human diseases. It has the highest casefatality rate of any infectious disease.
Etiology
/square6Rabies virus is a bullet shaped virus, with a single-stranded ribonucleic acid (RNA) nucleocapsid coreand lipoprotein envelope. It belongs to the familyof Rhabdoviridae and genus Lyssavirus.
Epidemiology
/square6Rabies has a worldwide distribution except
Antarctica, New Zealand, and Japan.
/square6Mammals are the main reservoir of rabies virus.
/square6Rabies exists in two forms: (1) Urban rabies, foundin unimmunized domestic dogs and cats, (2) sylvatic
rabies, found in skunks, foxes, raccoons, mongooses,wolves, and bats.
/square6The main reservoir of rabies throughout the world
is the domestic dog. Domestic animals usually
acquire infection from sylvatic reservoirs of infection.
/square6Human infection occurs through contact withunimmunized domestic animals or from exposure
to wild animals.
/square6Mandatory vaccination of domestic dogs against
rabies has resulted in decreased incidence of rabies.
Pathogenesis
/square6Rabies is a highly neurotropic virus that evadesimmune surveillance by its sequestration in thenervous system.
/square6Rabies is transmitted by the bite of infected animals,
commonly dogs or cats. The saliva of these animals
is the reservoir of infection. Rarely, transmissiontakes place through transplantation of infectedtissues such as cornea or inhalation of aerosolcontaining virus.
/square6After the entry of live virus through saliva followinga bite, viral replication starts in striated muscle cells.The virus then spreads centripetally up the nerveto the CNS, via peripheral nerve axoplasm, at a rateof ~3 mm/h. Once the virus reaches the CNS, it
multiplies there and then passes centrifugally along
Figure 1.12 Rabies virus


/square6Infectious Diseases55
1somatic and autonomic nerves to other tissues—
the salivary glands, adrenal medulla, kidneys,lungs, liver, skeletal muscles, skin, and heart. In thesalivary glands virus can multiply again andsecreted into saliva which is infective to others.
/square6The most characteristic pathologic finding of rabiesin the CNS is the formation of cytoplasmicinclusions called Negri bodies within neurons.Negri body is an eosinophilic mass of fibrillarmatrix and viral particles. Negri bodies are not
found in at least 20% cases of rabies, hence, their
absence does not rule out the diagnosis of rabies.
Clinical Features
Incubation Period
/square6The incubation period of rabies ranges from 10 daysto over 1 year (mean 1–2 months). Rarely, cases of
human rabies with an extended incubation period
(2 to 7 years) have been reported. The incubationperiod depends on the amount of virus introduced,host defense mechanisms, and the distance that thevirus has to travel from the site of inoculation tothe CNS.
/square6Incubation period is less than 50 days if the patientis bitten on the head or neck or if a heavy amountof virus is inoculated. A person with a scratch onthe hand may take longer to develop symptoms of
rabies than a person who receives a bite to the head.
/square6The rabies virus is segregated from the immune
system during this period, and no antibodyresponse is observed.
Prodromal Period
/square6Prodromal stage:  This stage lasts 1–4 days and is
characterized by fever, nausea, vomiting, headache,
myalgia, sore throat and dry cough. There may becomplaint of paresthesia, fasciculations or intenseitching at the site of virus inoculation which ispathognomonic of rabies and occurs in 50% of casesduring this phase. These sensations are due to the
multiplication of virus in the dorsal root ganglion
of the sensory nerve supplying the area. Except forthese sensations/fasciculations, all other symptomsresemble any other viral prodrome.
Acute Neurologic Period
/square6Two acute neurologic forms of rabies are seen inhumans: Encephalitic (furious) in 80% and paralytic(dumb) in 20%.
/square6Encephalitic rabies presents with hydrophobia,aerophobia, pharyngeal spasms, and hyperactivity.This is the most common form. This stage is charac-terized by periods of excessive motor activity,
excitation, agitation, hallucinations, confusion,
muscle spasms, meningismus, opisthotonicposturing, seizures, and focal paralysis. Initiallythey are interspersed with lucid intervals, but as
the disease progresses the lucid periods get shorteruntil the patient lapses into coma. Hyperaesthesia,with excessive irritation to bright light, noise, touch,and breezes are often seen. Abnormalities of theautonomic nervous system include dilated pupils,
increased sweating, lacrimation, salivation and
postural hypotension. There may be fever at thisstage. Evidence of upper motor neuron paralysis,with weakness, exaggerated deep tendon reflexes,and extensor plantar responses, is always found.Paralysis of the vocal cords may produce dysphonia.
Brain stem dysfunction begins shortly after ence-
phalitic phase. Brainstem dysfunction manifests asdiplopia, facial paralysis, and dysphagia withexcessive salivation. The combination of excessivesalivation and difficulty in swallowing give theappearance of “foaming at the mouth.” Attempt to
swallow liquids produces painful, violent, involun-
tary contraction of the diaphragmatic, accessoryrespiratory, pharyngeal, and laryngeal muscles-called hydrophobia . Hydrophobia is seen in only
~50% of rabies cases. Even blowing air can produceviolent spasms ( aerophobia )
/square6Paralytic (dumb) rabies presents as quadriparesis
with sphincter involvement, mimicking Guillain-Barré syndrome. Encephalitis occurs late in thecourse.
Stage of Coma and Death
/square6This begins within 10 days of onset, and the dura-tion varies. The patient soon lapses into coma, anddies of respiratory failure. After the onset of brain-
stem symptoms, patient survives for only 4–5 days
and rarely for 20 days maximum. If artificialsupportive measures are instituted, patient maysurvive longer but many complications may appearlike hypotension, cardiac arrhythmias, ARDS, etc.which can kill the patient.
Diagnosis
/square6Diagnosis is usually made based on clinical features
and history of exposure to rabies source (dog bite).
/square6Routine blood tests are nonspecific.
/square6Detection of rabies antigen: Rabies antigen can be
detected in cutaneous nerves by direct fluorescent
antibody (DFA)  test. Skin biopsy from the nape of
the neck can be obtained for this purpose. Rabiesvirus antigen is detected in cutaneous nerves at thebase of hair follicles. DFA can be done on corneal
smear also but skin biopsy is more sensitive.
/square6Detection of rabies virus RNA: Detection of rabies
virus RNA by RT-PCR (reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction) is highly sensitive and
specific. This technique can detect virus in fresh
saliva and CSF samples. Real time PCR is even moresensitive than RT-PCR.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
156 /square6Virus isolation from infected tissue:  Virus isolation
from infected tissue can be carried out by inoculat-ing the sample into mice (mouse inoculation test)or in cell culture. The specimens collected for thispurpose can be saliva samples, throat swabs, swabsof the nasal mucosa, corneal smears and CSF.
Disadvantage of this test is it is time consuming.
/square6Demonstration of antibodies against rabies virus:
This is not a very useful test because rabies virus–specific antibodies may be found in serum as aresult of previous vaccination against rabies.
However, detection of antibodies in the serum or
CSF of a previously unimmunized patient isdiagnostic of rabies.
/square6After death the diagnosis of rabies can be confirmedby demonstration of Negri bodies in brain.
Treatment
/square6There is no specific treatment for rabies. Medicalmanagement is supportive and palliative. Death isinevitable once clinical signs develop.
/square6The bite wound should be cleaned, debrided andcarefully examined for any foreign body (e.g.broken tooth). Generally, leave wounds to heal bysecondary intention to permit drainage of woundfluids and prevent infection. The following therapy
has been recommended though there is no proof
that they are effective.
– Rabies vaccination to accelerate the immune
response.
– Intramuscular human rabies immune globulin
(HRIG) to promote clearance of the infection.
– Intravenous and intraventricular ribavirin– Intravenous and intraventricular IFN- α
– Intravenous infusion of ketamine, a dissociative
anesthetic agent and a noncompetitive antagonistof the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor has beenshown to inhibit virus replication at high concen-trations.
Prevention of Rabies
/square6Since there is no treatment for rabies, all effortsshould be made to prevent rabies. Prevention ofrabies can be divided into pre exposure prophylaxis
and post-exposure prophylaxis.Pre-exposure Prophylaxis
/square6It should be given to all those at risk of developing
rabies like veterinarians, animal handlers andlaboratory workers.
/square63 doses of vaccine (preferably HDCV: Humandiploid cell vaccine) are administered intramuscu-larly on days 0, 7, and 21 or 28.
Postexposure Prophylaxis
/square6Exposure is considered to be a bite that breaks theskin or any contact between mucous membrane or
broken skin and animal saliva. Persons exposed to
rabies should be given 5 doses of rabies vaccinepreferably HDCV (human diploid cell vaccine).Doses are administered on 0, 3, 7, 14, and 28 days.A booster dose may be given at day 90. Personswho have already received pre-exposure prophyl-
axis need to receive only two doses of rabies vaccine
3 days apart.
/square6In addition to vaccine, human rabies immuneglobulin (20 IU/kg) or equine rabies immuno-
globulin (40 IU/kg) should be given. Out of the total
dose of required immunoglobulin, as much aspossible should be injected at the site of the bite,and the remaining should be injected intramuscu-larly at a distant site, e.g. in the deltoid oppositethe vaccine site. Immunoglobulin can be given up
to day 7 after the exposure. After day 7, it is not
necessary to give rabies immune globulin becauseendogenous antibodies are being produced andexogenous antibodies may actually be counter-productive.
/square6Tetanus toxoid should be given if not given in thelast 5 years.
/square6Wound should be cleaned with water and antiseptic
lotions. Wound should not be sutured.
Q.What are arboviruses? List common arboviruses and
the diseases caused by them.
/square6Arboviruses are a group of viruses transmitted by
arthropods to vertebrate hosts like man. The wordarbovirus is an acronym (arthropod-borne virus).The arthropods which transmit the infection arecalled vectors and include mosquito, tick, sandfly
TABLE 1.12: Common arboviruses and the diseases caused by them
Arbovirus Disease Transmitted by (vector) Clinical manifestations
Chikungunya Chikungunya fever Aedes mosquito Fever, arthritis
Dengue virus Dengue fever Aedes mosquito Fever, rash, hemorrhagic feverYellow fever virus Yellow fever Aedes mosquito Fever, jaundice, hemorrhagic fever
Japanese encephalitis virus Japanese encephalitis Culex mosquito Encephalitis
West Nile virus West Nile fever, encephalitis Culex mosquito Fever, rash, hepatitis, encephalitisKyasanur forest disease virus Kyasanur forest disease Tick Encephalitis, hemorrhagic fever
Colorado tick fever virus Colorado tick fever Tick Fever, myalgia, encephalitis, hemorr-
hagic fever

/square6Infectious Diseases57
1or midge. These infections generally occur during
warm weather months, when mosquitoes and ticksare active.
/square6Clinical manifestations of arbovirus infections
include fever, rash, arthritis, encephalitis, or
hemorrhagic fever.
/square6Identification of infecting virus can be done byisolation of virus from blood, CSF (if there is
encephalitis) or other specimens. Serological
diagnosis can be made by demonstrating risingantibody titres usually by complement fixation orhemagglutination inhibition. IgM capture ELISApermits early diagnosis.
Q.Yellow fever.
Etiology
/square6Yellow fever is a viral hemorrhagic fever caused
by yellow fever virus which is a flavivirus. Thedisease was labeled “yellow” because of profoundjaundice observed in affected individuals. It is a
disease of monkeys found in Africa and South
America. It has not been reported from Asia.
/square6The infection is transmitted by Aedes aegypti
mosquito from monkeys to humans.
/square6Yellow fever is an internationally notifiable disease.
Pathogenesis
/square6The virus is transmitted via the saliva of an infectedmosquito. Local replication of the virus takes placein the skin and regional lymph nodes with subse-quent dissemination to all parts of the body. Liveris the most important organ affected in yellow fever.
Hepatocellular damage is characterized by lobular
steatosis, necrosis, and apoptosis with subsequentformation of Councilman bodies (degenerativeeosinophilic hepatocytes). Other important organsaffected are kidneys, lymph nodes, spleen, brainand bone marrow. The terminal phase is marked
by delirium, stupor, and coma due to cerebral
edema and microscopic perivascular hemorrhage.
Clinical Features
/square6Yellow fever is a hemorrhagic fever with hepaticnecrosis. The incubation period varies from 3 to6 days.
/square6Patients present with high fever, headache,retrobulbar pain, arthralgia, a flushed face andconjunctival suffusion. Relative bradycardia (Faget
sign) is present from the second day onwards. The
patient then makes an apparent recovery and feelswell for many days. Thereafter again patientdevelops increasing fever, jaundice and hapato-megaly. Hemorrhages, hematemesis, melena, andencephalopathy occur due to extensive hepatic
involvement./square6Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC),
induced by liver dysfunction, leads to consumptionof platelets and clotting factors.
/square6Tachypnea and hypoxia with impending respira-
tory failure may develop as a consequence of sepsis
and acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).
/square6In late stages of disease, shock and multiorgandysfunction syndrome (MODS) dominate the
clinical picture.
Diagnosis
/square6LFT shows raised bilirubin, AST, ALT and pro-
longed prothrombin time.
/square6Complete blood count usually shows leucopeniaand thrombocytopenia.
/square6Serology: Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay(ELISA) can identify IgM antibody against yellowfever virus.
/square6Detection of yellow fever antigen using monoclonalenzyme immunoassay in serum specimens.
/square6Detection of viral genome sequences in tissue or in
blood or other body fluid using polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) assay.
/square6Histopathology: Liver biopsy is contraindicateddue to risk of hemorrhage. However, it can be done
for postmortem confirmation of diagnosis. Findings
include mid-zone necrosis, fatty degeneration andintracellular hyaline necrosis (Councilman bodies).
/square6Urine analysis: Usually shows severe albuminuria
which is a constant feature in yellow fever and its
presence helps differentiate yellow fever from othercauses of viral hepatitis.
Treatment
/square6There is no specific treatment. Only supportivetreatment is required. Bedrest, analgesics, andmaintenance of fluid and electrolyte balance areimportant.
/square6Fresh frozen plasma is given to actively bleedingpatients due to prolonged prothrombin time.
/square6A nasogastric or orogastric tube may be requiredto provide nutritional support.
/square6Patients with renal failure or refractory acidosismay require dialysis.
Prevention
/square6It is easily prevented using 17-D chick embryo
vaccine, which provides protection for 10 years. It
is contraindicated in infants of less than 1 year, preg-nant women, and immunocompromised persons.
Q. Describe the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical
features, diagnosis and management of dengue
fever.
Q.Dengue hemorrhagic fever.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
158Etiology
/square6Dengue fever is a viral hemorrhagic fever caused
by dengue virus which belongs to flavivirus family.There are four closely related dengue viruses
(dengue 1–4).
/square6Dengue is the most common arthropod-borne viral
(arboviral) illness in humans.
Epidemiology
/square6It is mainly found in Asia and Africa and is trans-mitted by the daytime-biting Aedes aegypti mosquito.
/square6Occurs mostly during and shortly after the rainy
season.
/square6Most often affects children.
/square6Humans are infective during the viraemic stage
which lasts for 3 days.
/square6Mosquitoes become infective about 2 weeks after
feeding on an infected individual, and remain sofor the rest of their lives.
Pathogenesis
/square6Primary infection leads to classic dengue fever.Dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) and dengueshock syndrome (DSS) are due to reinfection by adifferent serotype of dengue virus. Prior infectionwith a serotype leads to antibody production and
sensitizes the person to reinfection. Reinfection with
a different serotype leads to enhanced antibody-mediated macrophage activation. Macrophagesproduce vasoactive inflammatory mediators whichresult in vascular leak. Severe vascular leak resultsin shock.
/square6Endothelial damage also leads to hemorrhagicmanifestations. Hemorrhage is often widespreadand associated with pleural effusions and ascites.Focal hepatic necrosis, immune complex–mediated
glomerulonephritis, and transient bone marrow
suppression may be seen.
Clinical Features
Clinical manifestations can be of 3 types:
/square6Classic dengue fever
/square6Dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF)
/square6Dengue shock syndrome (DSS)
Classic Dengue Fever
/square6Presents as a nonspecific biphasic (saddle back
fever) febrile illness.
/square6Incubation period is 4–5 days.
/square6Disease is more severe in adults than children.
About 80% of infected infants and children remainasymptomatic.
/square6The disease starts with sudden onset fever, chills,
headache, conjunctival suffusion, myalgia, joint pain,
and severe backache. Because of severe muscle, joint
and bone pains, it is also called “breakbone” fever./square6A maculopapular rash may appear in over 50% ofcases. Rash spares palms and soles. Petechiae mayappear all over the body but more prominent onthe extensor surface of the limbs.
/square6The fever subsides after 3–4 days for a couple ofdays, and returns again in a mild form and subsides.
Dengue Hemorrhagic Fever
/square6Severe form of dengue fever.
/square6It is believed to be due to sequential infection withtwo different dengue serotypes. First infectionsensitizes the person against dengue. Secondinfection in a sensitized person leads to severedengue with hemorrhagic manifestations.
/square6Dengue hemorrhagic fever typically begins likeclassic dengue fever. The initial fever lasts approxi-mately 2–7 days. However, in persons with denguehemorrhagic fever, the fever reappears, giving abiphasic or saddle back fever curve.
/square6The critical feature of dengue hemorrhagic fever isplasma leakage. Plasma leakage is caused byincreased capillary permeability and may manifestas hemoconcentration, as well as pleural effusion
and ascites. Bleeding is caused by capillary fragility
and thrombocytopenia and may manifest in variousforms, ranging from petechial skin hemorrhages tolife-threatening gastrointestinal bleeding. Hypo-tension occurs due to hemorrhages.
Dengue Shock Syndrome
/square6As the term implies, dengue shock syndrome isessentially dengue hemorrhagic fever withprogression into circulatory failure, with ensuinghypotension and shock. This is an even more severeform of the disease.
/square6Aggressive fluid replacement is required to correctthe intravascular fluid deficits.
Investigations
/square6Low WBC counts, thrombocytopenia and alteredLFT. Thrombocytopenia is an important feature.
/square6Isolation of dengue virus from serum, plasma, andleukocytes
/square6Serological tests: Demonstration of IgM and IgGantibodies by ELISA in the serum sample.
/square6Detection of the specific viral protein NS1 (non-structural protein) by ELISA is diagnostic duringthe first few days of infection.
/square6Immunohistochemistry for antigen detection in
tissue samples can also be used.
/square6Detection of viral genomic sequences in serum, or
cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) samples via polymerasechain reaction (PCR).
/square6Chest X-ray may show pleural effusion.
/square6Ultrasound: May show pleural effusion, ascites,
pericardial effusion (polyserositis), and a thickened
gallbladder wall.

/square6Infectious Diseases59
1Treatment
/square6There is no specific treatment for dengue. Treatment
is mainly supportive. Paracetamol is used to treatfever and body aches. IV fluids and blood trans-
fusions are given to replace intravascular volume
loss. Platelet transfusions may be required to correctsevere thrombocytopenia (<20,000/cumm).
Q.Ebola virus disease.
/square6Ebola virus disease (formerly known as Ebola
hemorrhagic fever) is a severe, often fatal illness,with a case fatality rate of up to 90%. It is one of the
world’s most virulent diseases.
Etiology
/square6Ebola is a RNA virus.  It is a member of the family
Filoviridae , taken from the Latin “filum,” meaning
thread-like, based upon their filamentous structure.Marburg virus is also a Filovirus and causes illnesssimilar to ebola virus.
/square6The genus Ebola virus  is currently classified into
5 species: Sudan ebolavirus , Zaire ebolavirus , Tai Forest
(Ivory Coast) ebolavirus , Reston ebolavirus , and
Bundibugyo ebolavirus . The 2014 outbreak of Ebola
virus disease in West Africa is due to Zaire
ebolavirus.
Epidemiology
/square6Ebola virus disease (EVD) first appeared in 1976 in2 simultaneous outbreaks, one in Nzara, Sudan, andthe other in Yambuku, Democratic Republic of
Congo. The latter occurred in a village near the
Ebola River, from which the disease takes its name.In addition to causing human infections, Ebola virushas also spread to wild nonhuman primates, such asmacaques, chimpanzee and gorilla in Central Africa.This has also triggered some human epidemics due
to handling of and/or consumption of sick or dead
animals by local villagers as a source of food.
Transmission
/square6It is thought that fruit bats of the Pteropodidaefamily are natural Ebola virus hosts. Ebola isintroduced into the human population throughclose contact with the blood, secretions, organs orother bodily fluids of infected animals such as
chimpanzees, gorillas, fruit bats, and monkeys.
/square6Human to human transmission occurs through
direct contact (through broken skin or mucousmembranes) with the blood, secretions, organs orother bodily fluids of infected people, and withfomites contaminated with these fluids.
/square6Burial ceremonies in which mourners have directcontact with the body of the deceased person can
also play a role in the transmission of Ebola./square6People remain infectious as long as their blood and
body fluids including semen and breast milkcontain the virus. Men can transmit the virusthrough their semen for up to 7 weeks after recoveryfrom illness.
Pathogenesis
/square6Ebola virus replicates well in virtually all cell types,including endothelial cells, macrophages, andparenchymal cells of multiple organs. Viral replica-tion is associated with cellular necrosis. In addition
to sustaining direct damage from viral infection,
patients infected with Ebola virus have highcirculating levels of proinflammatory cytokines,which contribute to the severity of the illness. Thefinal effect of all this is widespread inflammation,DIC and tissue necrosis.
Clinical Manifestations
/square6Incubation period is approximately 7–10 days.Humans are not infectious until they developsymptoms.
/square6Initial symptoms are sudden onset of fever, fatigue,muscle pain, headache and sore throat. This isfollowed by vomiting, diarrhea, rash, symptoms ofimpaired kidney and liver function, and in some
cases, both internal and external bleeding (e.g.
oozing from the gums, epistaxis, blood in thestools).
/square6Additional findings include edema of the face, neck,
and/or scrotum, hepatomegaly, flushing, conjunc-
tival injection, and pharyngitis.
/square6Patients without any complications may recover10–12 days after the onset of disease.
Investigations
/square6Leukopenia and thrombocytopenia is common.
/square6Liver enzymes and serum amylase level may beelevated.
/square6Antigen-detection by ELISA.
/square6Electron microscopy.
/square6Virus isolation by cell culture.
/square6Real-time PCR is extremely useful for rapiddiagnosis.
/square6The indirect fluorescent antibody test with paired
sera is also an effective diagnostic tool.
Treatment
/square6No virus-specific therapy is available, and at
present treatment is mainly supportive. Supportive
care with oral or intravenous fluids and treatment
of specific symptoms improves survival.
/square6Experimental therapies include inhibitor of factorVIIa/tissue factor or with activated protein C, direct
intervention against viral replication with small
interfering RNA (siRNA), inhibitors of cell entry

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
160 (since the membrane fusion mechanism of Ebola
virus resembles that of retroviruses) andmonoclonal antibodies that have neutralizingcapacity.
Prevention
/square6No vaccine or antiviral drug is currently available.
/square6Reducing the risk of human-to-human transmissionfrom direct or close contact with people with Ebolasymptoms, particularly with their bodily fluids.Barrier nursing precautions should be used whiletreating a patient with Ebola.
/square6Reducing the risk of wildlife-to-human trans-mission from contact with infected fruit bats ormonkeys/apes and the consumption of their rawmeat.
/square6Vaccines are under development.
/square6Avoid visiting endemic areas.
Complications
/square6Death due to multiorgan failure and DIC or hemorr-hage.
/square6Late hepatitis, uveitis, and orchitis have beenreported, with isolation of virus from semen ordetection of PCR products in vaginal secretions forseveral weeks.
Q.Japanese encephalitis.
Etiology
/square6This is encephalitis caused by Japanese encephalitis
(JE) virus which is a flavivirus.
/square6JE virus is the most important global cause ofarboviral encephalitis.
/square6It is found throughout Asia, including Russia,Japan, China, India, Pakistan, and Southeast Asia.
/square6In India it occurs in epidemics, mostly affectingchildren in Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, Bihar andAssam.
Transmission
/square6JE virus is transmitted in an enzootic cycle betweenmosquitoes and vertebrate hosts, primarily pigs andbirds such as herons and egrets. Mosquitoes getinfected when they feed on these animals and then
transfer the virus to humans. It is spread by Culex
mosquitoes (most often by Culex tritaeniorhynchus) .
Vaccination of these animals may reduce thetransmission of the virus.
/square6Humans are considered dead-end hosts in the JEvirus transmission cycle because they do notdevelop a level or duration of viremia sufficient toinfect mosquitoes. JE virus is not spread fromperson to person through direct contact. JE virustransmission through blood transfusion has been
documented in a JE-endemic area.Clinical Features
/square6Japanese encephalitis resembles any other viral
encepahalitis.
/square6Incubation period is 5–15 days.
/square6All ages can be affected though children are affectedmore frequently.
/square6The encephalitis mainly involves the thalamus andthe substantia nigra.
/square6Patient presents with a prodrome of fever, vertigo,sore throat, and respiratory symptoms. Headache,meningeal signs, photophobia, vomiting andaltered mental status follow quickly. Patient maybe disoriented and comatose. Cranial nerve palsies,hemiparesis, monoparesis, difficulty in swallowing,
and frontal lobe signs are all common. Convulsions
and focal signs may appear during the course ofthe disease.
/square6The acute encephalitis usually lasts from a few days
to as long as 2 to 3 weeks. Complete recovery may
take weeks to months.
Investigations
/square6Initial leukocytosis followed by leukopenia.
/square6CSF analysis shows a lymphocytic pleocytosis.
/square6MRI or CT scan: Both show abnormalities in the
thalamus, basal ganglia, midbrain, pons, and
medulla.
/square6EEG (electroencephalography) may show genera-lized slowing, and epileptiform activity.
/square6The diagnosis of Japanese encephalitis can be madeby demonstration of IgM antibody by captureimmunoassay of CSF, a four-fold rise in serumantibody titers against JE virus, or isolation of virusor demonstration of viral antigen or genomicsequences in tissue, blood, or CSF.
Treatment
/square6There is no specific therapy for Japanese encephalitis.
Management is mainly supportive.
/square6Elevated intracranial pressure, respiratory failure,and convulsions should be managed as per stan-
dard protocols.
/square6Nutrition should be maintained by Ryle’s tubefeeds. Bladder should be catheterized, if the patientis in altered sensorium or comatose. Fluid andelectrolyte balance should be maintained.
Prevention
/square6Japanese encephalitis is the most common vaccine-preventable cause of encephalitis in Asia. A vaccineis available for human use. It is given as two
doses administered intramuscularly (IM) on days
0 and 28.
/square6Pig population and mosquitoes should becontrolled.

/square6Infectious Diseases61
1Q.Kyasanur forest disease (KFD).
/square6Kyasanur forest disease (KFD) is an acute febrile
illness caused by KFD virus which is a flavivirus.
It is named Kyasanur forest disease because the
disease was first recognized in the Kyasanur forestof Shivamogga district, Karnataka.
Epidemiology
/square6It is found in Shivamogga, Mangaluru, Udupi,Uttara Kannada and Chikkamagalur districts ofKarnataka state.
/square6Monkeys (black faced langur and bonnet) are thereservoirs of this virus.
/square6Man gets infected when the tick: Haemophysalis
spinigera  bites man after feeding on monkeys . Bites
happen usually during summer when people visitthe forest area to collect wood.
/square6Human is the dead end in natural cycle of the virus.
There is no human to human transmission of KFD.
Clinical Features
/square6Incubation period is 4 to 6 days.
/square6Sudden onset of fever with chills and rigors, severe
headache, bodyache, backache, orbital pain andweakness. Vomiting and diarrhea can also be there.There can be bleeding manifestations like epistaxis,
gum bleeding, hematemesis and melaena.
/square6Examination usually reveals relative bradycardia,
hypotension and conjunctival congestion. Lympha-denopathy may be noted in the neck and axilla.
/square6Fever usually subsides in 10–12 days. However,some patients can have recurrence of fever.
Investigations
/square6Leucopenia and thrombocytopenia.
/square6Diagnosis can be confirmed by isolation of virusfrom the blood during fever.
/square6Detection of IgM antibodies against KFD virus byELISA.
/square6RT-PCR or real time RT-PCR can be used for rapid
diagnosis of KFD.
Treatment
/square6There is no specific treatment. Only symptomatic
and supportive measures are required. The condi-
tion usually resolves without any sequelae. The
mortality is 5 to 10%.
Prevention
/square6A formalin inactivated vaccine is available for use.
/square6People should avoid visiting forests when there isdeath of monkeys. Those visiting the forest areashould wear protective clothing and apply insectrepellants (dimethyl phthalate) and take bath on
return.Q.Chikungunya fever.
/square6Chikungunya is a mosquito-borne viral disease.
Chikungunya virus is an RNA virus that belongs
to the family Togaviridae. The name ‘chikungunya’
derives from a word in the Kimakonde languageof an ethnic group in southeast Tanzania, meaning“to become contorted” and describes the stoopedappearance of sufferers with joint pain (arthralgia).
/square6Chikungunya is found mainly in tropical Africa andAsia.
/square6It is transmitted by the bite of an infected Aedes
mosquito.
/square6A large epidemic occurred in southern India in 2006
due to the emergence of a new viral variant inimmunologically naive population.
Clinical Features
/square6Self-limiting illness.
/square6Incubation period is 2–4 days.
/square6Characterized by sudden onset of fever, headache,
malaise, arthralgias or arthritis, myalgias, and low
back pain.
/square6Joint symptoms can be quite painful and usuallyinvolve small and large joints. Patient may not be
able to walk.
/square6A generalized maculopapular skin rash is seen in
approximately half of cases on the second to fifthday of illness.
/square6Fever subsides within seven days, but joint painmay persist for weeks to months.
Laboratory Features
/square6Leukopenia, anemia, thrombocytopenia, andelevated liver enzymes.
/square6Serological tests, such as enzyme-linked immuno-sorbent assays (ELISA) can detect the presence ofIgM and IgG anti-chikungunya antibodies.
/square6Virus can be isolated from the blood during the first
few days of infection.
/square6Various reverse transcriptase–polymerase chain
reaction (RT–PCR) methods are also available todetect the viral genome.
Treatment
/square6There is no specific antiviral treatment. Only
supportive treatment is required such as NSAIDs
for fever and joint pain.
/square6Mosquito protection should be used to preventspread of disease.
Q.Discuss the transmission, pathogenesis, clinical
features, investigations and management of humanimmunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection.
Q. Enumerate the AIDS indicator conditions.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
162 /square6Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is a single
stranded RNA virus belonging to retroviridaefamily and lentivirus genus. It is spherical in shapeand has a lipid membrane lined by a matrix proteinthat is studded with glycoprotein (gp)120 and gp41spikes surrounding a cone-shaped protein core. The
core contains two copies of the single-stranded
RNA genome and viral enzymes.
/square6HIV infection leads to AIDS (acquired immuno-deficiency syndrome) a condition in which the
immune system begins to fail, leading to life-
threatening opportunistic infections. Immunedeficiency is due to destruction of CD4 lympho-cytes. Most of the AIDS cases are caused by HIV-1.HIV-2 causes a similar illness but is less aggressiveand is seen mainly to Western Africa.
/square6AIDS was first recognized in the United States in1981 in male homosexuals. Since then, it has grownto become a major pandemic in the world. Ithas become the second leading cause of disease
burden worldwide and the leading cause of
death in Africa. In 1983, HIV was isolated from apatient with lymphadenopathy, and by 1984 itwas demonstrated clearly to be the causative agentof AIDS.
/square6Till now more than 25 million deaths have beenattributed to AIDS. The current estimate of world-wide disease prevalence is more than 33 millionHIV infections. Two-thirds of these cases are indeveloping countries, mainly sub-Saharan Africa
and Southeast Asia.
/square6Most AIDS cases occur in adults aged 25–49 years
(70% of cases).
Transmission of HIV
/square6Transmission of HIV occurs through almost anybody fluid such as blood, vaginal fluid, or breast
milk. Within these bodily fluids, HIV is present as
both free virus particles and virus within infectedimmune cells.
/square6The four major routes of transmission are unsafe
sex, contaminated needles, breast milk, and trans-
mission from an infected mother to her baby at birth(vertical transmission). >70% of infections occur
because of unsafe sexual practices. Transmissionthrough blood transfusion has largely beeneliminated by the universal screening of bloodproducts for HIV.
Pathogenesis
/square6HIV infects mainly cells of immune system such ashelper T cells (CD4
+ T cells), macrophages, and
dendritic cells. HIV enters into these cells bybinding to CD4 receptor through its gp-120
molecule. The virus replicates itself by generating
a DNA copy by reverse transcriptase. Viral DNAbecomes incorporated into the host DNA, enablingfurther replication.
/square6HIV infection leads to fall in CD4+ T cells by three
main mechanisms: direct viral killing of infectedcells; increased rates of apoptosis of infected cells;and killing of infected CD4
+ T cells by CD8 cytotoxic
lymphocytes that recognize infected cells. WhenCD4
+ cell count declines below a critical level, cell-
mediated immunity is lost, and the body becomes
more susceptible to opportunistic infections andvarious neoplasms.
/square6Progressive failure of immune system leads to
development of AIDS characterized by develop-
ment of opportunistic infections and malignancies.The speed of progression of HIV infection to AIDSis variable depending on viral load, host, andenvironmental factors. Most will progress to AIDSwithin 10 years of HIV infection.
Clinical Stages and Natural History of HIV Infection
/square6Clinical HIV infection undergoes 3 distinct phases:Acute HIV infection, chronic HIV infection, andAIDS.
Acute HIV infection (Acute seroconversion)
/square6This stage is characterized by rapid viral replication
leading to an abundance of virus in the peripheral
blood with levels commonly approaching severalmillion viruses per mL. There is a marked drop inthe number of circulating CD4
+ T cells. It usually
occurs 2–6 weeks after exposure to HIV and lastsan average of 28 days. The immune system
responds to the replication of virus by activation
of CD8
+ T cells, and antibody production against
the viral antigens. Hence, this phase is also calledseroconversion phase.
/square6Most people develop flu-like illness during thisstage. Common symptoms are fever, lymphadeno-pathy, pharyngitis, rash, myalgia, malaise, apthousulcers, hepatosplenomegaly, oral candidiasis, andweight loss. All these signs and symptoms are notspecific for HIV infection and can be seen in many
other infectious diseases. Hence, diagnosis may be
missed at this stage.
Figure 1.13 HIV virus


/square6Infectious Diseases63
1/square6During the acute HIV infection stage, the level of
HIV in the blood is very high, which greatlyincreases the risk of HIV transmission.
Chronic HIV Infection (Asymptomatic Infection)
/square6During this stage, strong immunity reduces theviral load and patient may remain asymptomaticexcept for the possible presence of persistentgeneralised lymphadenopathy (PGL, defined as
enlarged glands at ≥2 extra-inguinal sites). But HIV
remains active within lymphoid organs, and alsoas free viral particles. Patient remains infectiveduring this stage also. CD4 count decreases usuallyat a rate between 50 and 150 cells/year. Asympto-matic infection lasts for a variable period (can last
from two weeks to ten years or more).
AIDS Stage
/square6This stage (stage 3 in CDC classification) is charac-
terized by signs and symptoms of various opportu-nistic infections. The CD4 count is usually below200/mm
3.
CDC Classification of HIV Infection (2014 Classification)
/square6Category A:  Asymptomatic HIV infection without
a history of symptoms or AIDS-defining conditions.
/square6Category B: HIV infection with symptoms that are
directly attributable to HIV infection (or a defect inT-cell–mediated immunity) or that are complicatedby HIV infection.
/square6Category C:  HIV infection with AIDS-defining
opportunistic infections.
These 3 categories are further subdivided on the basis
of the CD4+ T-cell count, as follows:
/square6>500/μL: Categories A1, B1, C1
/square6200–499/ μL: Categories A2, B2, C2
/square6<200/μL: Categories A3, B3, C3
Clinical Categories of HIV Infection
Category A
/square6Consists of one or more of the conditions listed
below in an adolescent or adult (>13 years) withdocumented HIV infection. Conditions listed incategories B and C must not have occurred.
– Asymptomatic HIV infection
– Persistent generalized lymphadenopathy
– Acute (primary) HIV infection with accom-
panying illness or history of acute HIV infection
Category B
/square6Consists of symptomatic conditions in an HIV-infected adolescent or adult that are not included
among conditions listed in clinical category C
and that meet at least one of the following criteria:(1) The conditions are attributed to HIV infectionor are indicative of a defect in cell-mediated immunity;
or (2) the conditions are considered by physiciansto have a clinical course or to require managementthat is complicated by HIV infection. Examplesinclude, but are not limited to, the following:
– Bacillary angiomatosis
– Oropharyngeal candidiasis (thrush)
– Vulvovaginal candidiasis, persistent or resistant
– Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID)
– Cervical dysplasia (moderate or severe)/cervical
carcinoma in situ
– Hairy leukoplakia, oral
– Herpes zoster (shingles), involving two or more
episodes or at least one dermatome
– Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
– Constitutional symptoms, such as fever (>38.5°C)
or diarrhea lasting >1 month
– Peripheral neuropathy
Category C (AIDS Indicator Conditions)
/square6Candidiasis of bronchi, trachea, or lungs
/square6Candidiasis, esophageal
/square6Cervical cancer, invasive
/square6Coccidioidomycosis, disseminated or extrapulmo-
nary
/square6Cryptococcosis, extrapulmonary
/square6Cryptosporidiosis, chronic intestinal (>1 month’s
duration)
/square6Cytomegalovirus disease (other than liver, spleen,
or nodes)
/square6Cytomegalovirus retinitis (with loss of vision)
/square6Encephalopathy, HIV-related
/square6Herpes simplex: Chronic ulcer(s) (>1 month’sduration); or bronchitis, pneumonia, or esophagitis
/square6Histoplasmosis, disseminated or extrapulmonary
/square6Isosporiasis, chronic intestinal (>1 month’s duration)
/square6Kaposi’s sarcoma
/square6Lymphoma, Burkitt’s (or equivalent term)
/square6Lymphoma, primary, of brain
/square6Mycobacterium avium  complex or M. kansasii ,
disseminated or extrapulmonary
/square6Mycobacterium tuberculosis , any site (pulmonary or
extrapulmonary)
/square6Mycobacterium , other species or unidentified
species, disseminated or extrapulmonary
/square6Pneumocystis jiroveci  pneumonia
/square6Pneumonia, recurrent
/square6Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
/square6Salmonella  septicemia, recurrent
/square6Toxoplasmosis of brain
/square6Wasting syndrome due to HIV
Investigations
/square6HIV ELISA and Western blot test.
/square6CD4 count.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
164 /square6Viral load.
/square6Hepatitis B surface antibody (HBsAg).
/square6Hepatitis C IgG antibody.
/square6Hepatitis A IgG antibody.
/square6Toxoplasma antibody.
/square6Cytomegalovirus (CMV) IgG antibody.
/square6Treponema serology (VDRL and TPHA).
/square6Chest X-ray.
Treatment of the HIV Infection
/square6The aims of HIV treatment are to: Decrease viral
load to an undetectable level (<50 copies/ml) for
as long as possible and improve the CD4 count to
above 200 cells/mm3./square6The availability of antiretroviral agents has drasti-
cally improved the prognosis of HIV infectedpatients. Patients who receive successful ART havestabilization or improvement of their clinicalcondition, improved life expectancy and decreasein AIDS-related complications.
When to Initiate ART (Anti-retroviral Therapy)
/square6Latest guidelines recommend that ART should be
started immediately for all people with a confirmed
HIV diagnosis regardless of CD4 count. This iscalled rapid ARTinitiation and should be startedon the same day of diagnosis or within 3 days ofdiagnosis of HIV.
TABLE 1.13: Antiretroviral drugs
Drug Main side effects
Nucleoside and nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs)
Zidovudine Anemia, neutropenia, myopathy, lactic acidosis, hepatomegaly with steatosis
Lamivudine Rash, peripheral neuropathy
Didanosine Peripheral neuropathy, pancreatitis, hepatitis,  lactic acidosis
Zalcitabine Peripheral neuropathy, pancreatitis, hepatitis, lactic acidosis, hepatomegaly with steatosis
Stavudine Peripheral neuropathy, pancreatitis, hepatitis
Emtricitabine Hepatitis
Abacavir Hypersensitivity reaction (can be fatal), fever, rash
Tenofovir Renal toxicity
Nonnucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs)
Nevirapine Skin rash, hepatotoxicity
Efavirenz Skin rash, hepatitis, drowsiness, abnormal dreams, depression
Delavirdine Skin rash
Protease inhibitors
Indinavir Renal calculi, fat redistribution, lipid abnormalities
Saquinavir Diarrhea, nausea, fat redistribution, lipid abnormalities
Ritonavir Nausea, abdominal pain, hyperglycemia, fat redistribution, lipid abnormalities
Nelfinavir Diarrhea
Atazanavir Hyperbilirubinemia
Entry inhibitors
Enfuvirtide Injection site pain and allergic reaction, increased rate of bacterial pneumonia
Maraviroc Cough, fever, rash
Integrase strand transfer inhibitors (INSTIs)
Raltegravir Diarrhea, nausea, rash
Dolutegravir Hepatotoxicity, insomnia, fatigue, and headache
Elvitegravir Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea,suicidal ideation
CYP3A inhibitor
Cobicistat This drug increases the serum concentration of atazanavir and darunavir by CYP3A enzyme present in liverAntiretroviral Drugs
First-line ART Regimens
/square6Combinations of 2, 3, or 4 drugs from different
classes are usually necessary to fully suppressreplication of HIV.
/square6Recommended ART regimens generally consists oftwo nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors(NRTIs) in combination with a third drug from oneof three drug classes: An integrase strand transfer
inhibitor (INSTI), a non-nucleoside reverse trans-
criptase inhibitor (NNRTI), or a protease inhibitor
(PI) with a pharmacokinetic enhancer (i.e. cobicistator ritonavir).
Some of the popular regimens are as follows:
/square6Dolutegravir/abacavir/lamivudine (DAL)

/square6Infectious Diseases65
1/square6Dolutegravir/tenofovir/emtricitabine (DET)
/square6Darunavir/ritonavir plus tenofovir/emtricitabine
(DRET)
Alternative Regimens
/square6Efavirenz/tenofovir/emtricitabine (ETE)
/square6Atazanavir/cobicistat/tenofovir/emtricitabine(ACTE)
Reduction of HIV Transmission (Mother-to-Child andPerson-to-Person)
Prevention of Mother to Child Transmission
/square6Transmission of HIV from mother to child can occurduring pregnancy, labor and delivery, or breastfeeding. During antenatal period, HIV-infectedwomen who are pregnant should start antiretro-viral treatment with at least three medications.Recommended regimens are tenofovir  plus
lamivudine  plus efavirenz (TEL) . During labor,
intravenous administration of ZDV, 2 mg/kgloading dose, followed by a continuous infusion of1 mg/kg per hour until delivery should be given.
/square6After delivery, the neonate should be given dailynevirapine  from birth for minimum 6 weeks.
/square6Because HIV can be transmitted in breast milk,
women with HIV should not breastfeed theirbabies. Baby milk formula is a safe and healthyalternative to breast milk in such situations.
Prevention of Person to Person Transmission
/square6Precautions regarding sexual practices and injectiondrug use.
/square6Universal screening of donor blood and bloodproducts for HIV.
/square6Infection control practices in the health care setting.
/square6Vaccines are under development.
/square6Postexposure prophylaxis if there is accidentalexposure to a known source of HIV.
Q.Opportunistic infections in AIDS.
/square6Opportunistic infections are those which usually
occur in a person with weakened immune system
such as patients with AIDS./square6Opportunistic infections usually occur when CD4
count is below 200. However, certain opportunisticinfections in HIV infected person indicate that theperson is having AIDS irrespective of the CD4 count.
/square6An opportunistic infection may be caused by variouspathogens—bacteria, viruses, fungi, or protozoa.
Common Opportunistic Infections in HIV
Viral
/square6Cytomegalovirus (CMV): CMV retinitis.
/square6Human herpes virus 8 (HHV-8): Kaposi’s sarcoma.
/square6Human papillomavirus (HPV): Cervical cancer.
/square6Epstein barr virus (EBV): Primary CNS lymphoma.
Bacterial
/square6Mycobacterium tubercrulosis:  Pulmonary or extra-
pulmonary tuberculosis.
/square6Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC):  Disseminated
infection with multi organ involvement.
Fungal
/square6Candida: Oropharyngeal and esophageal candi-diasis.
/square6Pneumocystis jirovecii: Pneumonia.
/square6Cryptococcosis: Usually manifests as meningitis.
/square6Histoplasmosis: Disseminated infection.
/square6Coccidioidomycosis: Disseminated infection.
/square6Microsporidia: Causes diarrhea.
Protozoal
/square6Toxoplasm gondii:  Toxoplasmosis of brain.
/square6Cryptosporidiosis: Intestinal infection leading to
diarrhea.
/square6Isosporiasis: Intestinal infection leading to diarrhea.
Prophylaxis for Common Opportunistic Infections
/square6Every attempt should be made to prevent opportu-nistic infections in HIV infected patients as theycause significant morbidity and mortality.
/square6Prophylaxis of opportunistic infection is usuallybased on the CD4 count. If the CD4 count increasesabove the levels that are used to initiate prophylaxis—prophylactic therapy can be discontinued.
TABLE 1.14: Prophylaxis for opportunistic infections
CD4 count Opportunistic infection against Drugs used for prophylaxis
which prophylaxis is indicated
All HIV-infected patients with positive Mycobacterium tuberculosis Isoniazid, 300 mg daily, plus pyridoxine 50 mg
PPD reactions (defined as >5 mm of orally daily, for 9 months
induration for HIV-infected patients)
CD4 counts ≥200 cells/mcL Pneumocystis jiroveci  pneumonia Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, one double-
strength tablet (960 mg) daily or dapsone
50–100 mg daily
CD4 counts <100 cells/mcL with a Toxoplasmosis Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (one double-
positive IgG toxoplasma serology strength tablet daily)
CD4 counts <50 cells/mcL Mycobacterium avium  complex Azithromycin (1200 mg orally weekly) or
(MAC) infection clarithromycin (500 mg orally twice daily)

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
166Treatment of Opportunistic Infections in HIV  (Table 1.15)
TABLE 1.15: Treatment of opportunistic infections and complications of HIV
Opportunistic infection or complication Treatment
Mycobacterium tuberculosis Standard 4 drug anti-tubercular therapy for 6 to 9 months. ART is delayed for a
period of 2–8 weeks following initiation of antitubercular therapy toprevent IRIS
(Immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome)
Pneumocystis jiroveci  infection Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, 15 mg/kg/d (based on trimethoprim component)
orally or intravenously for 14–21 days OR pentamidine or trimethoprim, 15 mg/kg/d
orally, with dapsone, 100 mg/d orally, for 14–21 days OR Primaquine, 15–30 mg/dorally, and clindamycin, 600 mg every 8 hours orally, for 14–21 days.
Mycobacterium avium  complex infection Clarithromycin, 500 mg orally twice daily with ethambutol, 15 mg/kg/d orally
(maximum, 1 g). Therapy may be stopped when CD4 count is >100/μL for 3–6months.
Toxoplasmosis Sulfadiazine and pyrimethamine combined with leucovorin for 4 to 6 weeks
minimum. Maintenance therapy with same drugs may be required as long as CD4count is <200/μL.
Cryptococcal meningitis Amphotericin B with or without flucytosine intravenoulsy for 2 weeks, followed
by fluconazole orally.
Cytomegalovirus infection Valganciclovir or ganciclovir or foscarnet
Esophageal candidiasis or recurrent vaginal Fluconazole, 100–200 mg orally daily for 10–14 days.
candidiasis
Herpes simplex infection and herpes zoster Aciclovir or famciclovir or valacyclovir or foscarnet.
Q.Post exposure prophylaxis (PEP) for HIV.
/square6Immediate decontamination: Wash the area with
soap and water. Small wounds and punctures maybe cleansed with an antiseptic such as alcohol, iodo-phors, or chlorhexidine. For mucous membrane
exposure, irrigate the area with water or sterile
saline.
/square6Testing of source of exposure: Voluntary testing forHIV antibody, hepatitis C virus antibody, and
hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg); if HIV test is
positive, confirmatory Western blot and CD4 count.If the source patient’s rapid HIV test is negativebut there has been a risk for HIV exposure in theprevious 6 weeks, plasma HIV RNA testing isrecommended
/square6Testing of exposed person: Testing for HIVantibody, HCV antibody, HbsAg, and hepatitis Bsurface antibody (HBsAb); in females of child-bearing age, pregnancy testing.
· Recommended regimen: Three-drug PEP regimens
are now the recommended regimens for allexposures due to the safety and tolerability ofnew HIV drugs. The preferred 3-drug PEP regimen
is as follows:  Tenofovir plus emtricitabine plus
atazanavir  or lopinavir (TEA or TEL) . The duration
of treatment is 1 month. Effect of atazanavir orlopinavir can be boosted by adding ritonavir.
/square6PEP should be initiated as soon as possible, ideallywithin 2 hours of exposure; a first dose of PEPshould be offered to the exposed worker while theevaluation is underway.
/square6Repeat HIV testing should be done at 4 and 12weeks postexposure.Q.Immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome
(IRIS).
/square6The term “immune reconstitution inflammatory
syndrome” (IRIS) refers to a collection of inflamma-tory disorders associated with paradoxical
worsening of pre-existing infectious processes
following the initiation of antiretroviral therapy(ART) in HIV patients. IRIS has been reported in10 to 32% of patients starting ART.
Pathogenesis
/square6As the immunefunction improves following theinitiation of ART, systemic or local inflammatoryreactions may occur at the sites of preexisting
infections. The syndrome appears to result from an
unbalanced immune reconstitution of effector andregulatory T cells in patients receiving ART. Macro-phages and natural killer cells are also suspectedto play a role in IRIS.
/square6Presence of opportunistic infection at the time ofinitiation of ART is a clear risk factor for the develop-ment of IRIS. A variety of mycobacterial, viral, fungal
and parasitic opportunistic infections are associatedwith IRIS. Mycobacterium tuberculosis (TB) is one of
the commonest pathogen known to cause IRIS.
/square6Determining whether clinical deterioration is
caused by treatment failure, IRIS, or both requiresassessment of the persistence of active infections
with cultures and can be difficult.
Clinical Features
/square6Patient usually presents with worsening or
appearance of new clinical or radiological features.

/square6Infectious Diseases67
1Manifestations depend on the underlying opportu-
nistic infection.
/square6Mycobacterium tuberculosis (TB) is among the most
common pathogen associated with IRIS. TB IRIS
presents with worsening of the pulmonary or
extrapulmonary symptoms of TB. There is returnof fever, lymph node enlargement or suppuration.Chest X-ray may show appearance of fresh infil-trates, mediastinal lymphadenopathy, worseningpleural effusion and pericardial effusion. Pre-
existing CNS tuberculosis may worsen due to
inflammation and present with worsening ofheadache and altered mental status.
/square6Pneumocystis jiroveci  associated IRIS may present
as worsening pulmonary symptoms and high
fever. Chest X-ray may show worsening of lunginfiltrates.
Treatment
/square6Opportunistic infections should be optimallytreated. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs(NSAIDS) can be used for milder manifestations ofIRIS and steroids for cases with severe inflamma-
tion. ART should be continued unless there is life
threatening IRIS.
Prognosis
/square6Majority of patients with IRIS have a self-limitingdisease course. However, significant morbidity andmortality may be seen with ARDS and CNSinvolvement.
Prevention
/square6ART should be initiated before the onset of severeimmunodeficiency and after the treatment of oppor-tunistic infections. In the case of HIV-TB co-infection,
WHO recommends that TB should be treated first
and after 2 to 4 weeks, ART to be initiated.
Q.Coronavirus infection.
/square6Coronaviruses are RNA viruses whose name
derives from their characteristic crown-like appea-rance in electron microscope. Coronaviruses areimportant human and animal pathogens. They cancause upper and lower respiratory tract infections
which can be severe.
/square6The coronaviruses are classified into four genera: Alpha,
beta, gamma, and delta coronaviruses. The human
coronaviruses (HCoVs) are in two of these genera:alpha coronaviruses and beta coronaviruses. Betacoronaviruses include Middle East respiratorysyndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), and the severeacute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-
CoV).
/square6A novel coronavirus was identified as the cause ofa cluster of pneumonia cases in Wuhan, a city inChina at the end of 2019. This virus is a beta corona-
virus (same group as SARS virus). This has beennamed SARS-CoV-2 as it is very similar to the onethat caused the SARS outbreak (SARS-CoVs). Thedisease caused by SARS-CoV-2 virus has beendesignated as COVID-19 (which stands for corona-
virus disease 2019). This virus subsequently spread
throughout China and then became a pandemicspreading all over the world, becoming a globalhealth emergency.
/square6The exact origin of SARS-CoV-2 is unknown but itis probably of animal origin from bats. There isspeculation that it has spread from bats to othermammals and then to human beings.
Structure of COVID-19
/square6SARS-CoV-2 is round in shape and has an envelope.Envelope has spike proteins and conjugatedproteins (glycoproteins). Spike proteins play a
crucial role in binding to angiotensin-converting
enzyme 2 (ACE2) receptors of host cells to enterthe cell by endocytosis.
/square6SARS-CoV-2 is a single-strand RNA virus. The
genome contains sequences for proteases, replicases,
helicases, endoribonuclease, and spike proteins.
Figure 1.14 Corona virus
Pathophysiology
/square6The route of transmission of SARS-CoV-2 iscoughing and sneezing via respiratory droplets.The virus enters the lungs through the respiratorytract and attacks alveolar epithelial type 2 (AT2)cells. AT2 produces a surfactant to decrease the
surface tension within alveoli. The virus binds to
ACE2 receptors on alveolar epithelial cells throughits spike protein. ACE2 receptors are also found inkidneys, heart, intestine, pancreas, and endothelialcells. Once inside the host cell, the virus releases itsRNA. The RNA uses the host cell ribosome to
produce viral proteins. It also uses RNA dependent
RNA polymerases to duplicate its RNA.
/square6The virus then leads to an inflammatory responseactivating macrophages and CD
4+ T helper cells
which in turn release cytokines (IL-1, IL-6, and
TNFα) and chemokines into the bloodstream.
Excessive release of these cytokines can lead to

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
168 cytokine storm. The release of these molecules
causes vasodilation and increased capillary permea-bility. The leakage of plasma into the interstitialspaces of the alveoli cells will lead to alveolarcollapse and impaired gaseous exchange. In thelater stages of the disease, all these steps cause
difficulty in breathing, hypoxemia, and respiratory
failure. All these abnormal inflammatory responsescan lead to septic shock and multiorgan failure.
Clinical Features
/square6Incubation period is within 14 days following expo-sure, with most cases occurring approximately fivedays after exposure.
/square6The clinical spectrum of COVID-19 varies fromasymptomatic cases to severe pneumonia charac-terized by respiratory failure requiring mechanicalventilation, to multiorgan failure and death.
/square6Mild disease presents with symptoms of an upperrespiratory tract viral infection, including mildfever, cough (dry), sore throat, nasal congestion,malaise, headache, and muscle pain. New loss oftaste and/or smell, diarrhea, and vomiting are
usually present.
/square6Severe disease manifests as pneumonia charac-
terized by fever, fatigue, dry cough, dyspnea, lowoxygen saturation (SpO
2 <94%), and bilateral
infiltrates on chest imaging. Approximately 20% of
the infected patients develop complications suchas respiratory failure, septic shock, or other organfailure requiring intensive care. Mortality rate isaround 3%. Most of the deaths have occurred inpatients with underlying medical comorbidities.
/square6Children seem to be less affected than adults.
/square6Complications and death rate are more among
elderly people and those with comorbid illness such
as diabetes mellitus, hypertension, heart disease,and pre-existing lung diseases.
Diagnosis
/square6Bilateral infiltrates on chest X-ray.
/square6High-resolution CT (HRCT) of chest is one of themost important test in the diagnosis of COVID-19pneumonia. Most common findings are multifocalbilateral “ground glass opacities” associated with
consolidation areas with patchy distribution,
mainly in the peripheral/subpleural areas.
/square6Lymphopenia or elevated neutrophil-to-lympho-cyte ratio (NLR).
/square6Elevated D-dimer.
/square6Increased liver enzymes and LDH.
/square6RT-PCR (real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerasechain reaction) to detect viral RNA: Specimensshould be collected from both the upper respiratorytract (naso- and oropharyngeal samples) and lower
respiratory tract such as expectorated sputum,
endotracheal aspirate, or bronchoalveolar lavage./square6Antigen test:  Antigen tests provide rapid results but
have a higher chance of missing an active infection.These tests also require a nasal swab or nasopharyn-geal swab.
/square6Antibody test: detection of IgM or IgG antibodiesagainst SARS-CoV-2 indicates Covid-19. But thesetests take time to become positive and hence arenot useful in early diagnosis.
Management
/square6The possibility of COVID-19 should be consideredin patients with fever and/or lower respiratory tractsymptoms who reside in or have recently traveledto China or who have had recent close contact witha confirmed or suspected case of COVID-19.
/square6Patients with suspected or confirmed COVID-19who require hospitalization should be cared for ina facility that can provide an airborne infectionisolation room.
/square6Supportive care for sepsis and acute respiratorydistress syndrome is required
/square6Guidelines recommend dexamethasone (6 mg perday for up to 10 days) for patients who aremechanical ventilator or require oxygen. Othersteroids (methylprednisolone, hydrocortisone) canbe used instead of dexamethasone. Steroids are notrecommended for patients who do not require
oxygen.
/square6Remdesivir injection is recommended for 5 days in
patients who require oxygen (O2 saturation <94%
on room air).
/square6Anticoagulants:  COVID-19 patients have a higher
incidence of thrombotic complications (venousthromboembolism, MI, stroke). Hence anticoagu-lant therapy with heparin or LMWX is recommen-
ded for all admitted patients for 5 to 10 days.
/square6For patients with severe respiratory failure, extra-
corporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) may beconsidered.
/square6There are insufficient data to recommend drugssuch as azithromycin, chloroquine, and ivermectin.
Prevention
/square6Early recognition of suspect cases, immediate isola-tion, and institution of infection control measures.
/square6Individuals with suspected infection in the comm-
unity should be advised to wear a medical mask to
contain their respiratory secretions and seekmedical attention.
/square6WHO advises general measures to reduce trans-
mission of infection, including diligent hand
washing, respiratory hygiene, and avoiding closecontact with ill individuals.
/square6WHO also advises exit screening for international
travelers from areas with ongoing transmission of
COVID-19 virus to identify individuals with fever,cough, or potential high-risk exposure.

/square6Infectious Diseases69
1/square6Quarantine is meant to separate and restrict the
movement of close contacts who were exposed to
COVID-19 case to see, if they become sick. The
recommended duration is based on the incubation
period, which is up to 14 days for the SARS-CoV-2
virus. Quarantine is recommended for 14 days after
their last exposure for asymptomatic close contacts
either testing negative or not tested.
/square6Isolation is meant to separate COVID-19 patients
from others. Isolation is recommended for people
with COVID-19 symptoms and those who are
COVID-19 positive. Isolation is usually recommen-
ded for 10 days from the day of symptom onset or
from the day of positive test for asymptomatic
patients.
/square6Strict adherence to these measures has been success-
ful at controlling the spread of infection in select areas.
Vaccines
/square6The SARS-CoV-2 vaccines can be classified into two
broad categories:  Gene-based and protein-based
/square6Gene-based vaccines include RNA, DNA, virus
vector, and live attenuated SARS-CoV-2 virus
vaccines.
/square6Protein-based vaccines include inactivated SARS-
CoV-2 virus and viral protein or protein fragment
(subunit) vaccines.
/square6The spike protein, which studs the surface of theSARS-CoV-2 virus is responsible for fusion of the
virus to host cell membranes. Antibodies that bind
to the spike protein and block viral entry into host
cells are thought to be most important for protection
from disease. Hence spike protein is a key target
for all COVID-19 vaccines in clinical development.
/square6mRNA vaccines:  SARS-CoV-2 is an RNA virus.
Several COVID-19 vaccines use the gene (in the
form of messenger RNA or mRNA) that encodes
the spike protein and are encapsulated in a lipid
nanoparticle to deliver the viral gene into the
vaccine recipient’s cells. The recipient’s cells then
use this gene to synthesize the spike protein that
stimulates a protective immune response. Two
doses spaced 3 or 4 weeks apart are required. Two
mRNA vaccines are currently being used to
vaccinate people in multiple countries.
/square6DNA vaccines:  One SARS-CoV-2 vaccine uses DNA
plasmids (small circles of double-stranded DNA)
that encode the spike protein, which are introduced
directly into the vaccine recipient’s cells using an
intradermal injection device. The recipient’s cells
then produce the spike protein.
/square6Viral vector vaccines:  In viral vector vaccines, the
SARS-CoV-2 spike protein gene is inserted into a
harmless carrier virus that delivers the gene to the
vaccine recipient’s cells, which in turn read the gene
and assemble the spike. The spike protein is
presented on the surfaces of the recipient’s cells,
provoking an immune response./square6Live, attenuated SARS-CoV-2 vaccines:  Another type
of vaccine consists of live attenuated SARS-CoV-2;the virus is still infectious and can cause an immuneresponse.
/square6Inactivated SARS-CoV-2 vaccines:  These vaccines use
SARS-CoV-2 virus that has been inactivated withheat, radiation, or chemicals, which terminate thepathogen’s ability to replicate.
/square6Protein-based vaccines:  These vaccines contain SARS-
CoV-2 proteins or protein fragments (subunits) thatstimulate a protective immune response. The viralprotein can be produced by recombinant techno-logy, in which genes that encode the viral protein.
/square6Noninjectable vaccines:  Intranasal and inhaled
vaccines are also undergoing clinical trials. Thesevaccines could stimulate local mucosal immunityin the respiratory tract, in addition to systemicimmunity.
Q.Discuss the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features,
diagnosis and management of malaria.
Q.Life cycle of malarial parasite.
Q.Tests to diagnose malaria.
Q.Chemoprophylaxis for malaria.
/square6Malaria is a protozoan disease caused by Plasmodium
species of protozoa.
Etiology
/square6Five species of Plasmodium namely, Plasmodium
vivax, P. falciparum, P. ovale, P. malariae and P. knowlesi
are responsible for almost all human infections. Out
of these, P. falcifarum  causes severe infection and is
responsible for most of the deaths due to malaria.
Epidemiology
/square6Malaria is the most important of the parasitic
diseases of humans. It has been eliminated from
the United States, Canada, Europe, and Russia.
Malaria is very common in tropical countries.  P.
falciparum  predominates in Africa, New Guinea,
and Hispaniola. P. vivax  is more common in Central
America. Both falciparum and vivax are common
in South America, the Indian subcontinent, eastern
Asia, and Oceania. P. malariae  and P. ovale  is mainly
confined to Africa.
/square6P. knowlesi  has been identified on the island of
Borneo and Southeast Asia.
Pathogenesis and Life Cycle of Malarial Parasite
/square6It is transmitted by the bite of infected Anophelesmosquitoes.
/square6Human infection begins when a female anopheles
mosquito bites man and inoculates sporozoites into
the blood. These sporozoites are motile forms of
the malarial parasite and are carried via the
bloodstream to the liver.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
170
/square6In the liver sporozoites invade hepatic parenchymal
cells and start multiplying there to produceschizonts. Schizonts contain merozoites. This initialreplication in the liver is called the exoerythrocyticcycle. In P. vivax and P. ovale  infections, some of
these schizonts may remain dormant (hypnozoites)for up to a year or longer. These dormant formsare the cause of relapses in vivax and ovale.
/square6After 8–14 days, the swollen liver cell containingmerozoites (schizont) bursts, releasing motilemerozoites into the bloodstream. Each merozoitecan invade an RBC and start multiplying there.Attachment to RBC is mediated by a receptor onthe RBC. In the case of P. vivax, this receptor is
related to the Duffy blood group antigen. Thosewho have Duffy-negative blood group (WestAfrican) are resistant to P. vivax  malaria.
/square6Inside the RBCs, the merozoites develop into ring-
stage trophozoites. Some trophozoites mature intoschizonts and some trophozoites differentiate intogametocytes. Schizonts contain many merozoites.When the RBC ruptures, these daughter merozoitesare released, each capable of invading a new RBCand repeating the cycle. Gametocytes (sexual forms)are picked up by mosquitoes when they bite humanbeings. Inside the mosquito’s midgut the male andfemale gametocytes join to form a zygote. Thiszygote becomes an ookinete which penetrates anddevelops in the mosquito’s gut wall to becomeoocyst. Oocyst develops by asexual division andbursts to release motile sporozoites, which migrateto the salivary gland of the mosquito to awaitinoculation into another human at the next feeding.
/square6Malaria can also develop after blood transfusionwithout any incubation period. The hepatic phaseis absent as the erythrocytic infection is directlytransmitted.Clinical Features
/square6The incubation period for vivax, ovale and
falciparum infections is 8–24 days. For P. malariae
it is 15–30 days.
/square6The initial symptoms of malaria are nonspecific andinclude malaise, nausea, vomiting, headache,fatigue, body ache and fever. Some cases may alsohave abdominal pain, arthralgia, or diarrhea.Though myalgia may be prominent, it is not assevere as in dengue fever or leptospirosis. Muscletenderness is absent unlike in leptospirosis or
typhus fever. Classic malarial symptoms with inter-
mittent fever, chills, and rigors are usually seen withP. vivax  or P. ovale  infection but not in all cases.
/square6Fever in vivax and ovale comes once in 3 days
(tertian malaria) and once in 4 days P. malariae
(quartan malaria). However, this time pattern maynot be seen in all cases of malaria. In falciparumfever comes daily and does not follow any pattern.The fever can rise above 40°C.
/square6Children can have febrile convulsions at the timeof fever.
/square6Cerebral malaria should be suspected in any-body with falciparum malaria presenting withseizures.
/square6Physical examination is essentially normal exceptfever, mild anemia, mild jaundice and mild spleno-megaly. Anemia and jaundice are due to destructionof RBCs (hemolysis) by the parasites. Splenomegaly
is common in malaria-endemic areas and reflects
repeated infections. Mild hepatomegaly may alsobe seen particularly in young children.
/square6Severe malaria especially falciparum can presentwith features of sepsis with multiorgan dysfunction.
Patients may present with impaired consciousnessor coma, renal failure, liver impairment, low plateletcounts, and ARDS.Figure 1.15 Malaria life cycle


/square6Infectious Diseases71
1/square6Serious renal damage may occur due to progressive
glomerulonephritis in Plasmodium malariae  infection
due to deposition of immune complexes. The glo-merulonephritis does not respond to antimalarialdrugs or corticosteroids.
Causes of Anemia in Malaria
/square6Destruction of RBCs by parasites.
/square6Enlarged spleen causing sequestration of RBCs andhemolysis.
/square6Dyserythropoiesis.
/square6Folate deficiency due to depletion of stores.
/square6Drug-induced (chloroquine, primaquine) hemolysisin patients with G6PD deficiency.
Investigations
/square6It is difficult to diagnose malaria clinically withaccuracy; hence treatment should be started onclinical grounds pending laboratory confirmation.
Peripheral Smear
/square6The diagnosis of malaria can be easily made bydemonstration of asexual forms of parasites in theperipheral blood smear. If initial smears are
negative, repeat smears should be made preferably
at the time of fever. Thick and thin smears are madeand stained with Giemsa stain. The level of parasi-temia is expressed as the number of parasitizederythrocytes per 1000 RBCs, or per 200 white bloodcells (WBCs), and this figure is converted to the
number of parasitized erythrocytes per microliter.
A parasite index of 2% or more is associated withan increased risk of severe malaria. Thick smear candetect parasites even if there is lower levels ofparasitaemia. Gametocytes may persist for days orweeks after clearance of asexual parasites. Presence
of gametocytes without asexual forms does not
indicate active infection.
Rapid Diagnostic Tests (RDT)
/square6Rapid diagnostic tests for malaria are based on thepresence of certain plasmodium antigens or enzy-matic activities. Assays may involve detection of a
histidine-rich protein 2 (HRP-2) associated with
malaria parasites (especially P. falciparum ) and
detection of plasmodium-associated lactate dehydro-genase (pLDH). These tests are rapid and almostas sensitive as thick smear but do not quantify theseverity of infection and remain positive for weeks
after infection.
/square6HRP-2 based tests:  Histidine-rich protein-2 (HRP-2)
based serologic assays can detect parasite anti-gens in blood from a fingerprick sample. PfHRP2dipstick or card test can detect only falciparum.
/square6Plasmodium LDH based tests:  The pLDH-based
assays specifically detect the parasite lactate de-
hydrogenase enzyme using a panel of monoclonalantibodies. Different species can be identified.Example is OptiMAL test.
Fluorescent Technique (MP-QBC)
/square6The quantitative buffy coat (QBC) is a techniquethat is as sensitive as thick smear.
/square6Blood is collected in a glass micro tube containingacridine orange stain, anticoagulant, and a float.This is centrifuged to concentrate the parasitized
cells around the float. Malarial parasites take up
fluorescent stain and can be easily detected underfluorescence microscopy. This test is ideal forprocessing large numbers of samples rapidly. Butthis test cannot identify the species of malaria.
Other Tests
/square6In addition to the tests listed above, new moleculartechniques, such as PCR assay testing and nucleicacid sequence-based amplification (NASBA) arealso available for diagnosis. They are more sensitivethan thick smears but are expensive and unavailablein most developing countries.
Other Laboratory Findings
/square6There may be normochromic normocytic anemia,
increased WBC count, neutrophilia, and increased
ESR. In severe falciparum malaria there may beTABLE 1.16: Differences in malaria caused by different plasmodium species
P. vivax  P. ovale P. falciparum P. malariae
Incubation period 8–24 days 8–24 days 8–24 days 15–30 days
Fever pattern Tertian Tertian No periodicity Quartan
Exo-erythrocytic cycle Yes Yes No No
Relapses Yes Yes No No
Red cell preference Young RBCs Reticulocytes Young RBCs (but can Older cells
invade cells of all ages)
Morphology Large ring forms and Infected erythrocytes, Small ring forms; banana- Band forms of tropho-
trophozoites; Schüffner’s enlarged and oval with shaped gametocytes zoites
dots tufted ends; Schüffner’s
dots

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
172 metabolic acidosis, increased bilirubin, elevated
liver enzymes, thrombocytopenia, increased ureacreatinine, and hypoglycemia.
Treatment (Refer  to Table 1.17)– Renal failure (serum creatinine >3 mg/dl)
– Jaundice (serum bilirubin >3 mg/dl)
– Severe anaemia (Hb <5 g/dl)
– Pulmonary edema/acute respiratory distress
syndrome
– Hypoglycemia (plasma glucose <40 mg/dl)
– Metabolic acidosis
– Circulatory collapse/shock (systolic BP <80 mm Hg)
– Abnormal bleeding and DIC
– Hemoglobinuria
– Hyperthermia (temperature >104°F)
– Hyperparasitemia (>5% parasitized RBCs in low
endemic and >10% in hyperendemic areas)
Supportive Measures
/square6Include IV fluids, antipyretics, blood transfusionto correct severe anemia, and bedrest.
Relapses
/square6Relapses occur in vivax and ovale malaria due to
hepatic hypnozoites. Since hepatic hypnozoites are
absent in falciparum malaria, relapses do not occurin falciparum malaria.
Prevention of Malaria
Decreasing the Mosquito Population
/square6Spraying of insecticides
/square6Biological methods such as use of mosquito larvaeating fish in water reservoirs.
Personal Protection
/square6Use of clothes extending up to the wrists and ankles
when outdoors and mosquito nets when indoors
to avoid mosquito bites. Application of insect-repellant creams on the exposed body surfaces likelegs and hands.
Chemoprophylaxis
/square6Recommended for nonimmune visitors to endemicareas and to pregnant women living in endemicareas.
/square6Travelers should start taking antimalarial drugs atleast 1 week before visiting the area and continuefor 4 weeks after returning from the endemic area.
/square6Chloroquine 500 mg per week or mefloquine 250 mg
orally per week or doxycycline 100 mg orally once
daily can be used for prophylaxis. Doxycycline iscontraindicated in pregnant women and childrenless than 8 years.
Malaria Vaccine
/square6Malaria vaccines are under development.
Complications of Malaria
/square6Complications usually happen in severe falciparummalaria.TABLE 1.17: Regimens for the treatment of malaria
Chloroquine-sensitive strains Chloroquine (10 mg of base/kg
of all species of malaria stat followed by 5 mg/kg at 12,
(P. vivax, P. falciparum, 24, and 36 h)
P. malariae, P. ovale, OR
P. knowlesi) Amodiaquine od 3 days)
In addition to above, prima-
quine (0.5 mg of base/kg per
day) should be given for 14 daysto prevent relapses in vivax and
ovale. Primaquine kills the
hypnozoites present in liver andprevents relapses. Tafenoquine
300 mg single dose is an alterna-
tive to primaquine in adults ≥16
years. Primaquine should not be
given in severe G6PD deficiency
Chloroquine-resistant un- Quinine sulfate (10 mg/kg 3
complicated Plasmodium times a day for 3 or 7 days) plus
vivax  and falciparum Doxycycline 100 mg twice a day
(suspect this in areas known for 7 daysto harbor resistant strains. OR
Ovale and malraiae are Artemether-lumefantrine (BD for
usually sensitive) 3 days with food)
OR
Atovaquone/proguanil 4 adult
tablets once a day for 3 daysPrimaquine or Tafenoquine
should be given to prevent
relapses as mentioned above.
Severe malaria, all Plasmo- Severe malaria is an emergency
dium species including and parenteral artemisinin
falciparum derivatives or quinine should be
used irrespective of chloroquine
sensitivity.
IV artesunate2.4 mg/kg bodyweight at 0, 12, 24, and 48 hours
followed by one of the following
a. Artemether-lumefantrine (BD
for 3 days with food)  OR
b. Atovaquone/proguanil 4 adult
tablets once a day for 3 daysOR
c. Doxycycline100 mg twice a
day for 7 days
Primaquine or tafenoquine should
be used to prevent relapses if
P. vivax or P. ovale is likely orconfirmed
Criteria for Severe Malaria
/square6Malaria is considered to be severe when patients
have ≥1 of the following. Severe malaria is most
often due to P. falciparum.
– Impaired consciousness/coma– Repeated generalized convulsions

/square6Infectious Diseases73
1• Cerebral malaria
• Severe anemia• Renal failure
• Pulmonary edema
• Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), and respiratory
failure
• Hypoglycemia• Circulatory collapse
• DIC
• Acidosis• Hemoglobinuria
• Jaundice
Q.Cerebral malaria.
/square6Cerebral malaria is the most severe complication
of falciparum malaria with high mortality rate. Itis more common in children, pregnant women,
splenectomised and in non-immune individuals.
/square6The main pathology in cerebral malaria is sequestra-
tion of parasitized red cells in brain micro-vasculature. Inflammatory mediators may also play
a role in the pathogenesis.
Clinical Features
/square6Cerebral malaria manifests as diffuse encephalo-
pathy and presents as impaired state of conscious-ness and/or seizures, and can result in coma anddeath. Focal neurologic signs are unusual. Althoughsome passive resistance to head flexion may bedetected, frank neck rigidity is absent. This featurecan differentiate cerebral malaria from meningitis.
The corneal reflexes are preserved except in deep
coma. Flexor or extensor posturing may be seen.Some patients have retinal hemorrhages,papilledema, and cotton wool spots. Convulsionscan occur and are usually generalized.
/square6Cerebral malaria is universally fatal if untreated,
and even with treatment mortality is high. About
10% of patients who survive cerebral malaria havepersistent neurologic abnormalities even afterrecovery.
Treatment
/square6Same as that of severe malaria ( see above).
Q.Tropical splenomegaly (hyperreactive malarial
splenomegaly syndrome).
/square6Hyperreactive malarial splenomegaly syndrome
(HMSS) is prevalent in native residents of regions
where malaria is endemic and visitors to those regions.
Pathogenesis
/square6Patients with HMS have high levels of antimalarialantibody. Chronic antigenic stimulation may be animportant factor in the development of HMS./square6Although the exact mechanism is uncertain, evidencesuggests that repeated or chronic exposure to malariaelicits exaggerated stimulation of polyclonal Blymphocytes, leading to excessive and partiallyuncontrolled production of immunoglobulin M(IgM) as the initiating event. IgM is polyclonal and
is not specific for any particular malarial species.
/square6By an unclear mechanism, the malarial parasite
causes proliferation of B lymphocytes due todefective control of B lymphocytes by suppressor
or cytotoxic T lymphocytes, T cell infiltration of the
hepatic and splenic sinusoids accompanies thisprocess. There is increase in serum cryoglobulin,autoantibody levels and high-molecular-weightimmune complexes. The result is anemia, deposi-tion of large immune complexes in Kupffer cells in
the liver and spleen, reticuloendothelial cell hyper-
plasia, and hepatosplenomegaly.
/square6In some cases refractory to therapy, clonal lympho-proliferation may develop and then evolve into a
malignant lymphoproliferative disorder.
Clinical Features
/square6Patients with tropical splenomegaly present with
an abdominal mass or a dragging sensation in theabdomen. Occasionally sharp abdominal pain maybe noted due to perisplenitis.
/square6Anemia and pancytopenia are usually present, butmalarial parasites cannot be found in peripheral-blood smears in most cases.
/square6These patients are prone for respiratory and skin
infections and many die due to infection and
secondary sepsis.
Treatment
/square6Chloroquine and proguanil appear to be equallyeffective. Eradication of parasitemia may be theunderlying mechanism. Pyrimethamine may be an
alternative.
Q.Describe the etiology, life cycle, pathogenesis,
clinical features and treatment of amebiasis.
/square6Amebiasis is an infection caused by the intestinal
protozoan Entamoeba histolytica . The diseases pro-
duced by amoeba include dysentery and abscessesin the liver and other organs.
Epidemiology
/square6Amebiasis is found all over the world.
/square6Amebiasis is more common in the developingworld, where overcrowding, poor sanitation andeconomic backwardness are common. In developed
countries, it is an important infection among male
homosexuals, intravenous drug users and patientswith AIDS.
/square690% of infections are asymptomatic and only 10%
produce clinical symptoms.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
174Life Cycle of Ameba and Pathogenesis
/square6The infection is transmitted through the feco-oral
route.
/square6Man is the only reservoir of infection and excretes
the cystic form of the organism in the feces, which
can survive in the environment for several weeks.Man acquires infection by ingestion of viable cysts
from fecally contaminated water, food, or hands.
Less commonly it is acquired through oral and analsexual practices. Once ingested, cysts are able to
resist the acidic gastric juice, and reach small
intestine, where the cysts develop into motiletrophozoites. Trophozoites remain as harmless
commensals in the colon in most patients. However,
in some patients, the trophozoites invade the bowelmucosa, and cause colitis which presents clinically
as dysentery.
/square6There are usually mucosal ulcers which typically have
the shape of a flask in cross-section (wide base andnarrow neck). Amebic ulcers occur most commonly
in the rectum but may occur anywhere in the colon.
/square6Trophozoites can also enter the bloodstream and
get carried to different organs like liver, lungs, orbrain where they may produce abscesses. The
necrotic contents of a liver abscess appear like
“anchovy sauce”. Some trophozoites undergoencystation and produce infectious cysts which are
shed in the stool and the life cycle can get repeated
again.
/square6Trophozoites if ingested cannot cause infectionbecause they are rapidly killed by exposure to air
or stomach acid.
Clinical Features
/square6Amoebic infections are clinically classified as
intestinal and extraintestinal.
Intestinal Amebiasis
/square6Most patients with intestinal amebiasis areasymptomatic. Those who become symptomatic
present with dysentery. Lower abdominal pain,
malaise and mild diarrhea develop gradually.Abdominal pain is usually colicky. Patients may
pass up to 10 to 12 stools per day. The stools appear
dark brown, contain little fecal material and consistmainly of blood and mucus. Fever is uncommon
unlike bacterial diarrhea. Almost all patients have
blood in the stools.
/square6Severe intestinal infection may present with severe
abdominal pain and high fever. Some patients maydevelop toxic megacolon where there is severegaseous dilation of colon. Rarely patients developchronic amebic colitis, which can be confused withinflammatory bowel disease.
Extraintestinal Amebiasis
/square6Extraintestinal infection by E. histolytica  most often
involves the liver. Other sites include the brain,spleen, lungs and pelvic organs.
/square6Patients present with fever and right-upper-quadrant pain. Pain is dull or pleuritic in natureand may radiate to the right shoulder. Pointtenderness over the liver and right-sided pleuraleffusion is common. Hepatomegaly is usually seen,but jaundice is rare. Although the initial site ofinfection is the colon, most patients do not give ahistory of dysentery. Most abscesses occur in theright lobe of liver. Amebic liver abscess can presentas FUO and should be considered in the differentialdiagnosis of fever of unknown origin.
Complications
/square6Perforation of amebic ulcers and toxic megacolon.
/square6Liver abscesses may become big and rupture intoadjacent structures such as the pleural cavity, lungs,pericardium and peritoneum which can be fatal.
Investigations
/square6Stool examination:  This is the best test to diagnose
amebic dysentery. A saline preparation of freshlypassed stool is examined for motile trophozoites.Cysts also may be seen. Stool can be cultured forEntamoeba histolytica and other bacteria.
/square6Colonoscopy and sigmoidoscopy:  These are useful
to see the typical ulcers and also to distinguish itfrom other ulcerative and inflammatory lesions likeacute bacillary dysentery and ulcerative colitis, andto obtain swabs and biopsies for appropriateexaminations.
/square6Ultrasonography:  Useful to identify amebic liver
abscess. It gives an assessment of the size andlocation of the abscess.
/square6Serological tests:  Demonstration of presence of
anti-amebic antibodies in the serum is an importantway of diagnosing amebic infections. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) and indirecthemagglutination test are used for this purpose.
Treatment
/square6Metronidazole 400 mg thrice a day for 7 days iseffective. Tinidazole can also be used.
/square6Newer agents like tinidazole, secnidazole orornidazole are equally effective and allow less
frequent dosing.
Figure 1.16 Life cycle of ameba


/square6Infectious Diseases75
1Figure 1.17 Giardia lamblia
/square6Along with above agents, it is useful to give luminal
amebicides like diloxanide furoate or iodoquinol
or Paromomycin which act in the gut lumen and
have minimal systemic absorption. Asymptomaticcyst passers do not require treatment.
/square6Liver abscess requires the above drugs at a higher
dosage. If liver abscess does not respond to medical
therapy, it can be aspirated under ultrasoundguidance by introducing a pig-tailed catheter.
Chloroquine has also been used for patients with
hepatic amebiasis.
/square6Complications such as perforation, toxic megacolonand stricture require appropriate surgical treatment.
Q.Describe the etiology, clinical features, diagnosis
and treatment of giardiasis.
/square6Giardiasis is one of the most common parasitic
diseases worldwide and is due to giardia lambliawhich is a protozoan. It causes intestinal disease
and diarrhea.
/square6Giardia lamblia  is a flagellated protozoan and has a
pair of nuclei which give it an owl-eyed appearance.Flagellae are responsible for its motility.
Pathogenesis
/square6Infection spreads through feco-oral route and is
acquired by ingestion of cysts present in food or
water. The cysts excyst in the intestine and become
trophozoites which have owl-eyed appearance.
Giardia colonises the mucosa of upper smallintestine but does not invade the mucosa.
/square6Giardia attach to the mucosa of duodenum and
jejunum with the help of their ventral suction disc.
They interfere with gut function by mechanicalcovering of the mucosa by a large number of
parasites and causing villous atrophy in the jejunal
mucosa leading to a reduced absorptive surface. Inmost infections the gut morphology is normal, but
in a few cases there may be changes resembling
tropical sprue and gluten-sensitive enteropathy onhistopathology. The pathogenesis of diarrhea in
giardiasis is not known.
/square6Both trophozoites and cystic forms are excreted in
the stool, but only cysts are infective to others. Highlevels of secretory IgA in breast milk are believed
to protect suckling infants from infection. Giardiasisis an important cause of travellers’ diarrhea and is
also an important cause of diarrhea in immuno-
suppressed individuals.
Clinical Features
/square6Giardia  infection can be asymptomatic.
/square6Acute giardiasis may manifest as diarrhea,
abdominal pain, bloating, belching, flatus, nausea,
and vomiting. This illness is usually self-limiting.Patients may also present with dyspeptic symptoms
with nausea and anorexia.
/square6Chronic giardiasis may present with malabsorption,
steatorrhea and weight loss. Such patients usuallyhave villous atrophy, with malabsorption of fat,
carbohydrates, vitamin B
12 and lactose intolerance.
Children with chronic giardiasis may have growthimpairment.
/square6Giardiasis can be life-threatening in patients with
hypogammaglobulinemia.
Diagnosis
/square6Giardiasis is diagnosed by the detection of parasite
antigen, cysts or trophozoites in the feces.
/square6Endoscopic sampling of duodenal fluid and biopsyof the mucosa may be required to detect the parasite.
Treatment
/square6Metronidazole is the drug of choice and is given either
as 200 mg thrice daily for 7 days or as a single dose of
2.4 g. Tinidazole or secnidazole are alternatives. Allinfected symptomatic persons should be treated.
Q.Trichomonas vaginalis .
/square6Trichomonas vaginalisis is a pear shaped protozoan and
causes infection of the vagina, urethra and prostate.
/square6It spreads through sexual contact.
Clinical Features
/square6In women, it causes vaginitis which presents asyellow and frothy vaginal discharge with burning
and itching. They may also complain of dysuria,
increased urinary frequency and dyspareunia.
/square6In men, trichomoniasis presents with urethritis andprostatitis, but may be asymptomatic.
Diagnosis
/square6The diagnosis is made by detection of motile
trichomonads in wet smears prepared from vaginal,
urethral or prostatic secretions. Direct immuno-fluorescent antibody staining is more sensitive test
than microscopy.
Treatment
/square6Metronidazole is the drug of choice and is given as200 mg thrice a day for 7 days or as a single 2 g
dose. Tinidazole also can be used. Both partnersshould be treated to prevent reinfection.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
176Q.Describe the etiology, clinical features, diagnosis
and treatment of leishmaniasis.
/square6The term leishmaniasis refers collectively to various
clinical syndromes caused by intracellular protozoa
of the genus Leishmania. The name leishmaniasis
comes from the scientist Sir William Leishman who
first discovered the organisms in a patient who died
of leishmaniasis. It is a vector-borne (sandfly)
zoonosis, with rodents and canids as reservoir hosts
and humans as incidental hosts.
/square6The clinical spectrum of leishmaniasis ranges from
self-healing cutaneous ulcers to fatal visceral
disease. These syndromes fall into three broad
categories:
– Visceral leishmaniasis (VL)—this is also known
as kala-azar and is the most serious form of the
disease.
– Cutaneous leishmaniasis (CL)—this is the most
common type.
– Mucocutaneous leishmaniasis (ML).
Etiology
/square6The various species of leishmania causing human
disease are as follows.
/square6Visceral leishmaniasis —Leishmania donovani, L.
infantum
/square6Cutaneous leishmaniasis —L. tropica, L. major, L.
aethiopica  and L. mexicana
/square6Mucocutaneous leishmaniasis —L. braziliensis .
Epidemiology
/square6Leishmaniasis mainly occurs in tropical and
temperate regions. India and neighboring Nepal,
Bangladesh, Sudan, and Brazil are the four largest
foci of visceral leishmaniasis.
/square6Cutaneous leishmaniasis occurs mainly in
Afghanistan, Pakistan, Ethiopia, Kenya, and
Uganda.
Life Cycle and Pathogenesis
/square6Leishmania parasites are transmitted to man by thebite of sandflies (Phlebotomus and Lutzomyia).
Visceral leishmaniasis can also be transmitted by
blood transfusion or needle sharing.
/square6Leishmania exists in the sandfly as a motile, spindle-
shaped promastigote with an anterior flagellum. As
the flies feed on hosts including man, they
regurgitate the promastigote stage into the skin.
Promastigotes are phagocytized by macrophages
and inside the macrophages develop into the
nonflagellated amastigote stage. This amastigote
multiplies by binary fission and are released after
rupture of macrophages. Released amastigotes are
phagocytized by other macrophages and start
multiplying there. Some amastigotes can be
ingested by sandflies where they transform back
into promastigotes and ready to infect other hosts./square6There is inflammatory response against leishmania
organisms with increased production of gamma
interferon (IFN), tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNF α), and other proinflammatory cytokines. In
addition to these proinflammatory cytokines and
chemokines, patients with active disease also have
markedly elevated levels of IL-10 in serum as wellas in lesions. IL-10 inhibits the killing of amastigotes
by inhibiting macrophages. This inflammation
along with inhibition of killing of amastigotescauses nodules, necrosis, ulceration and destruction
of tissues seen in leishmaniasis.
Clinical features
Visceral Leishmaniasis (Kala-azar)
/square6Potentially lethal widespread systemic disease
characterized by darkening of the skin as well as thepentad of fever, weight loss, hepatosplenomegaly,
pancytopenia, and hypergammaglobulinemia.
Cutaneous Leishmaniasis (CL)
/square6A few days or weeks after the bite of a sandfly, a
papule develops and grows into a nodule that
ulcerates. The base of the ulcer, which is usually
painless, consists of necrotic tissue and crustedserum. Satellite lesions and local lymphadenopathy
may be present.
/square6In diffuse cutaneous leishmaniasis, multiple, wide-
spread non-ulcerating cutaneous papules, nodulesand infiltration is seen.
/square6Post-kala-azar dermal leishmaniasis (PKDL):
Develops months to years after the patient’s
recovery from visceral leishmaniasis. Cutaneouslesions include hypopigmented macules, erythe-
matous papules, nodules and plaques.
Mucocutaneous Leishmaniasis (ML)
/square6Lesions in or around the nose or mouth are thetypical presentation of ML. Patients usually giveFigure 1.18 Lifecycle of leishmaniasis


/square6Infectious Diseases77
1history of self-healed CL preceding ML by 1–5
years. Typically, ML presents as nasal stuffiness andbleeding followed by destruction of nasal cartilage,perforation of the nasal septum, and collapse ofthe nasal bridge. Subsequent involvement of thepharynx and larynx leads to difficulty in swallow-
ing and phonation. The lips, cheeks, and soft palate
may also be affected. Secondary bacterial infectionis common, and aspiration pneumonia may be fatal.
Diagnosis
/square6The diagnosis is established by demonstration ofparasites. Amastigotes can be demonstrated bylight-microscopic examination of a specimen(smear, biopsy) obtained from the infected site.
/square6Culture can be done in Novy-MacNeal-Nicolle(NNN) blood agar.
/square6Immunologic methods for diagnosis includeserologic assays and skin testing for delayed-typehypersensitivity reactions. Traditional serologicmethods like indirect fluorescent testing do notreliably distinguish past from current infection.
/square6Other methods of parasitological confirmationinclude animal inoculation, and polymerase chainreaction (PCR).
Treatment
/square6Three groups of drugs are commonly used in thetreatment of leishmaniasis.
–Pentavalent antimonials —sodium stibogluconate
and meglumine antimoniate
–Pentamidine  is etheonate and pentamidine
methanosulphonate
–Amphotericin B
/square6All these drugs have to be given parenterally (IM
or IV) for effective cure.
/square6Miltefosine : This is the first oral compound approved
for the treatment of leishmaniasis. It has a long half-
life (150–200 h) and its mechanism of action is not
clearly understood.
/square6Allopurinolhas also been used to treat leishmaniasis.
Q.Visceral leishmaniasis (kala-azar, Dumdum fever).
Etiology
/square6Visceral leishmaniasis (kala-azar) is caused by
Leishmania donovani and  L. infantum . Kala-azar means
‘black fever’ in Hindi which refers to characteristic
darkening of the skin seen in this condition.
Epidemiology
/square6Most cases of visceral leishmaniasis occur inBangladesh, northeastern India (particularly BiharState), Nepal, Sudan, and northeastern Brazil.
/square6Visceral leishmaniasis is transmitted by sandflies.
/square6It can also spread by blood transfusion or needle
sharing.Pathogenesis
/square6Infection begins in macrophages at the inoculation
site as described above and disseminates through-
out the reticuloendothelial system. Reticulo-
endothelial cells undergo hyperplasia which leadsto enlargement of the spleen, liver, lymph nodes,
and bone marrow. Bone-marrow infiltration,
hypersplenism, autoimmune hemolysis, andbleeding all lead to pancytopenia.
Clinical Features
/square6The incubation period varies from weeks to monthsbut can be as long as years.
/square6Males are affected more than females and childrenare affected more than adults.
/square6Patients usually present with daily fever. Some
patients have 2 fever spikes per day (double quoti-
dian fever) with rigors. Occasionally continuousfever can occur.
/square6Skin manifestations in VL are frequent. Kala-azar
means “black sickness” and refers to characteristic
darkening of the skin seen in this condition.
/square6Hepatosplenomegaly is often present and spleno-megaly can be massive. Lymphadenopathy is also
present.
/square6Anemia is present in most patients due to hemolysis,
hypersplenism, and bone marrow suppression.
/square6Jaundice, hypoalbuminemia, edema and ascites canbe there due to liver involvement.
/square6Death occurs due to secondary infections.
Diagnosis
/square6Kala-azar can be diagnosed by demonstration of
the parasite in smears or cultures of a tissue aspirate
or a biopsy specimen (e.g. of spleen, liver, bonemarrow, or lymph node).
/square6Antibody detection by direct agglutination test (DAT)and ELISA are the tests of choice for field diagnosis.
/square6PCR is a sensitive test and can also identify thespecies. It can be performed on almost any tissue.
It is not widely available.
Treatment
/square6Pentavalent antimonials (sodium stibogluconate)
are the first-line drugs used to treat visceralleishmaniasis. Other choices include amphotericin
B, Pentamidine isethionate and allopurinol. All
these drugs are given parenterally.
/square6Recently miltefosine has been found to be highlyeffective and can be given orally. Sitamaquine,another oral agent, is also being field-tested.
Prevention
/square6Sandflies should be controlled by spraying insecti-
cides such as pyrethroids.
/square6Cases should be treated adequately to remove thereservoir of infection.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
178 /square6Insecticide-impregnated mosquito net and
repellants can be used for personal protectionagainst sandfly bites.
/square6Vaccines are being developed.
Q.Trypanosomiasis.
Q.American trypanosomiasis (Chagas disease).
Q.African trypanosomiasis (sleeping sickness).
/square6Trypanosomiasis is caused by protozoans belong-
ing to the genus Trypanosoma.
/square6There are mainly two types of trypanosomiasis,
American trypanosomiasis and African trypano-somiasis.
/square6American trypanosomiasis (Chagas disease) is
caused by Trypanosoma cruzi . African trypanosomiasis
(sleeping sickness) is caused by Trypanosoma brucei
gambiense  and T. brucei rhodesiense .
American Trypanosomiasis (Chagas Disease)
/square6Chagas disease is caused by the hemoflagellate
protozoan Trypanosoma cruzi . T. cruzi  is found only
in the America. It is the leading cause of congestiveheart failure in areas of Latin America where it isendemic.
Pathogenesis
/square6It is transmitted to man by the bite of triatomines(a type of reduvid bug also known as kissing bug).These bugs ingest organisms while sucking bloodfrom infected animals or humans. Ingested
organisms multiply in the gut of the bugs, and
infective forms are passed in the feces at the timeof bite. Transmission occurs when breaks in theskin, mucous membranes, or conjunctivae becomecontaminated with bug feces.
/square6T. cruzi  can also be transmitted by blood transfusion,
organ transplantation and from mother to fetus.
/square6A nodular swelling or chagoma develops at the site
of entry. Lymphatic spread then carries the
organism to regional lymph nodes. When thehistiocytes or other inflammatory cells ingest theparasites, they transform into amastigotes. Afterlocal multiplication, the organisms can assume thetrypomastigote form and invade the bloodstream,
carrying the infection to all parts of the body. Cells
of the reticuloendothelial system; cardiac, skeletal,and smooth muscles; and neural cells are pre-ferentially parasitized.
/square6During the acute phase of illness, the parasite isbelieved to directly destroy host cells. The patho-genesis of the cardiac and GI alterations typical ofthe chronic phase is not well understood. Loss ofganglionic neurons and nerve fibers along withinflammatory reaction are important pathological
findings.Clinical Features
/square6An indurated inflammatory lesion called “chagoma”
often appears at the site of parasite entry.
/square6If the bite occurs near the eye, unilateral painlessedema of palpebrae and periocular tissues
associated with preauricular lymphadenopathy
(Romana’s sign) occurs. These initial local signs arefollowed by malaise, fever, and anorexia.
/square6Cardiac abnormalities are the most frequentmanifestations of chronic Chagas disease. Conges-tive heart failure is the first sign of chagasic heart
disease. Other features are arrhythmias and heart
blocks (commonly RBBB-right bundle branchblock). Death usually occurs due to heart failure.
/square6Involvement of GI tract produces dysphagia, regurgi-
tation, hiccups, constipation, and abdominal pain.
/square6Muscle involvement leads to myositis and myalgia.
/square6Nervous system involvement leads to meningo-
encephalitis.
Diagnosis
/square6Microscopic examination of anticoagulated blood orof the buffy coat can show the motile trypanosomes.
/square6Giemsa-stained blood smears can also showtrypanosomes.
/square6Polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
/square6Blood culture in specialized media.
/square6Detection of specific antibodies.
Treatment
/square6There is no satisfactory treatment for Chagas’disease. Only two drugs—nifurtimox and benznida-zole are available for treatment and these drugs
cause severe side effects. Nifurtimox, a nitro-
furantoin derivative, is given for 3 or 4 months. Newdrugs are being developed.
African Trypanosomiasis (Sleeping Sickness)
Etiology
/square6African trypanosomiasis (sleeping sickness) iscaused by Trypanosoma brucei  complex, transmitted
to man by the bite of tsetse flies. Trypanosoma brucei
gambiense  infection is prevalent in West Africa and
T. brucei rhodesiense  is prevalent in East Africa.
Life Cycle
/square6The tsetse fly becomes infected when it bites
infected mammalian hosts. After multiplication in
the midgut of the tsetse fly, the parasites migrate
to the salivary glands. Parasites are transmitted toanother mammalian host when the tsetse fly bites.
The injected trypanosomes multiply in the blood of
new host and invade all the organs causing illness.
Clinical Features
/square6A painful chancre may appear in some patients at
the site of bite associated with enlargement of the
regional lymph nodes.

/square6Infectious Diseases79
1/square6Enlargement of the nodes of the posterior cervical
triangle is known as ‘Winterbottom’s sign’and ischaracteristic of T. brucei  gambiense infection.
/square6Hematogenous and lymphatic dissemination is
marked by the onset of fever, headache, arthralgia,
lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly.
/square6If untreated, CNS gets involved, producing sleepi-ness during the day (hence called sleeping sickness),
nighttime insomnia, mental confusion, coma and
death. CNS involvement occurs weeks to monthsafter the initial infection.
/square6In rhodesience infection, death from myocarditis
and intercurrent infection can occur before sleeping
sickness.
Diagnosis
/square6Microscopic examination of fluid expressed fromthe chancre or wet blood film may show trypano-somes. Thick and thin blood smears will also showtrypanosomes. Concentration methods likecentrifugation can be used if trypanosomes are not
seen by the above methods. Lymph node aspirate
and CSF can also show the parasites. CSFexamination should be done in all cases of Africantrypanosomiasis.
/square6Serological tests have not become popular becauseof variable sensitivity and specificity.
/square6PCR techniques are not yet commercially available.
Treatment
/square6Drugs used in the treatment of African trypano-somiasis include pentamidine, suramin, eflornithine,
and melarsoprol.
Prevention
/square6Avoid areas which harbor tsetse flies, wear
protective clothing and use insect repellents.Chemoprophylaxis is not recommended, and novaccine is available at present.
Q.Babesiosis.
/square6Babesiosis is a tick-borne infectious disease caused
by parasites of the genus Babesia . These protozoans
are obligate intracellular parasites of red blood cells
(RBCs). Wild and domestic animals are the natural
reservoirs of Babesia . Transmission to humans is
incidental.
/square6There are many species, but Babesia microti  is
responsible for most of the infections.
Epidemiology
/square6Most of the cases occur in the United States.Sporadic cases are reported in Europe and the restof the world including India. The number of casesof B. microti  illness has increased steadily over the
last decade.Life Cycle and Pathogenesis
/square6The nymphal stage of the deer tick Ixodes scapularis
is the primary vector for transmission of B. microti .
Transmission occurs from May through September
with three-fourths of cases presenting in June and
July. The incubation period is 1–6 weeks. Babesiosiscan also be acquired through blood transfusion.There are case reports of congenital babesiosis also.
Clinical Features
/square6Babesiosis causes malaria-like illness with fever andhemolytic anemia. Patients present with feverassociated with chills, sweats, headache, myalgia,
anorexia, dry cough, arthralgia, and nausea.
/square6Physical examination is usually normal except for
fever. Occasionally, hepatosplenomegaly may beseen. Rarely jaundice, pharyngeal erythema, retinal
infarcts, and retinopathy with splinter hemorrhages
is seen.
/square6Severe babesiosis can occur in immunocompro-mised states such as asplenia, HIV/AIDS, malig-
nancy, and immunosuppression. Complications
such as ARDS, disseminated intravascular coagula-tion, congestive heart failure, and renal failure canoccur in severe babesiosis. Splenic infarcts andrupture have also been reported.
Diagnosis
/square6Babesiosis should be considered in patients whopresents with flu-like symptoms and has recently
resided in or traveled to an endemic area.
/square6Babesiosis is diagnosed by identification of Babesia
in a peripheral blood smear. Babesia  species appear
as round or pear-shaped organisms inside RBCs.
/square6Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) can be used toidentify RNA of Babesia.
/square6Serological tests such as indirect immunofluorescentantibody test is useful to identify antibodies againstBabesia.
Treatment
/square6Treatment is indicated in symptomatic patientswith positive Babesia tests.
/square6Mild B. microti  illness: Oral atovaquone plus azithro-
mycin for 7–10 days. Clindamycin plus quinine isthe second choice.
/square6Severe B. microti  illness: IV clindamycin plus oral
quinine is given for 7–10 days.
Q.Toxoplasmosis.
/square6Toxoplasmosis is a disease caused by an intracellular
parasite Toxoplasma gondii . Toxoplasmosis can be
congenital or acquired.
/square6Congenital toxoplasmosis is transmitted from the
mother to the fetus during pregnancy.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
180 /square6Acquired infection is due to ingestion of cysts
excreted in the feces of infected cats or from eatingundercooked meat (especially lamb and pork).
/square6Infection can also be acquired through blood
transfusion and organ transplantation.
Life Cycle and Pathogenesis
/square6The cat is the definitive host in which the sexual
phase of the cycle takes place. Asexual cycle occursin other mammals (including humans). Oocysts areformed in the cat and shed in feces. Vegetablesor grass contaminated by cat feces can be ingestedby animals, birds, and humans. Ingested oocysts
become cysts (bradyzoites) in the muscle of
animals.
/square6Human infection occurs by ingestion of oocysts infood or water contaminated with cat feces (most
common mode of infection) or by eating raw or
undercooked meat containing cysts, most commonlylamb, pork, or rarely beef. Toxoplasmosis can betransmitted transplacentally if the mother becomesinfected during pregnancy.
/square6After ingestion of oocysts or tissue cysts, tachyzoitesare released and spread throughout the body. Thisacute infection is followed by the formation of tissuecysts in many organs especially in CNS, eyes, heart,lungs, and adrenals. The cysts can reactivate later
in immunocompromised patients such as AIDS
patients.
Clinical Features
Infections may manifest in several ways as follows:
/square6Acute toxoplasmosis
/square6CNS toxoplasmosis
/square6Congenital toxoplasmosis
/square6Ocular toxoplasmosis
/square6Disseminated disease.Acute Toxoplasmosis
/square6Majority of acute infections are asymptomatic.Some patients may present with non-tender cervicalor axillary lymphadenopathy. There may be fever,
pharyngitis, maculopapular rash and hepato-
splenomegaly (hence mistaken for infectious mono-nucleosis).
Central Nervous System (CNS) Toxoplasmosis
/square6Symptomatic CNS disease is mainly seen inimmunocompromised patients such as AIDSpatients. It presents as encephalitis and ring-enhancing intracranial lesions seen on CT or MRI
scans. Clinical features are headache, altered mental
status, seizures, coma, fever, and sometimes focalneurologic deficits.
Congenital Toxoplasmosis
/square6Infected children develop neurologic complicationssuch as hydrocephalus, microcephaly, mentalretardation, chorioretinitis and epilepsy.
Ocular Toxoplasmosis
/square6Presents with retinitis and choroiditis. Symptomsare ocular pain, blurred vision, and sometimes
blindness.
Disseminated Disease
/square6Usually seen in immunocompromised patients.
They may present with pneumonitis, myocarditis,polymyositis, diffuse maculopapular rash, and highfevers. This may occur with or without CNS disease.
Investigations
/square6Serological tests  like detection of antibodies are
helpful in the diagnosis. A rise in the titre of IgMantibodies indicates acute infection. Antibodies
persisting in an infant beyond 6 months of age
imply congenital toxoplasmosis.
/square6Biopsy  of a lymph node may show tachyzoites or
histological changes.
/square6Contrast CT or MRI of brain  should be done in
suspected CNS toxoplasmosis which will showmultiple ring enhancing lesions. Toxoplasma mayalso be demonstrated in the CSF of immuno-
compromised patients.
/square6PCR techniques  have high sensitivity and specificity
and are recent developments.
Management
/square6Immunocompetent persons do not require specifictreatment as the infection usually resolves sponta-
neously. But infants, immunosuppressed patients
and those with eye involvement require treatment.
/square6A combination of pyrimethamine plus eithersulfadiazine or clindamycin is used for treatment.
Figure 1.19 Life cycle of toxoplasmosis

/square6Infectious Diseases81
1/square6For immunocompromised persons (such as HIV
patients), trimethoprim–sulfamethoxazole (TMP–SMX) can be used as an alternative to abovetreatment. AIDS patients who are seropositivefor T. gondii  and who have a CD4+ T lymphocyte
count of <100/mcL should receive trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) as prophylaxis
against toxoplasmosis.
Toxoplasmosis and Pregnancy
/square6If a seronegative woman acquires toxoplasmosis in
first trimester of pregnancy, there is a high risk of
fetal damage. Hence, termination of pregnancyshould be considered in such women.
/square6If a woman is already seropositive before becoming
pregnant, then there is no risk of fetal damage.
/square6Spiramycin 1 g qid for 4–6 weeks is safe for use
during pregnancy.
Q.Describe the pathogenesis, clinical features, investiga-
tions and treatment of Pneumocystis infection.
Q.Pneumocystis jiroveci  pneumonia ( Pneumocystis
carinii ).
/square6Pneumocystis jiroveci (formerly known as Pneumo-
cystis carinii)  is an opportunistic fungal pulmonary
pathogen and is an important cause of pneumoniain the immunocompromised individuals.
/square6Pneumocystis is now classified as a fungus.However, unlike fungi, pneumocystis lacks ergo-sterol and is not susceptible to antifungal drugs.
/square6Pneumocystis has worldwide distribution and mostpeople are exposed to the organism in childhooditself.
Pathogenesis
/square6Pneumocystis infection develops usually in immuno-compromised individuals. HIV patients who haveCD4+ counts below 200/ μL have high chances of
developing Pneumocystis jiroveci infection. Other
persons at risk are patients on immunosuppressive
therapy (particularly glucocorticoids) for cancer,organ transplantation, and other disorders; childrenwith primary immunodeficiency diseases; andpremature malnourished infants.
/square6After being inhaled, pneumocystis reaches thealveoli, and attaches to type I alveolar cells. Themain defence against pneumocystis is alveolarmacrophages, which ingest and kill the organism.If the immune system of the host is compromised,
Pneumocystis multiplies and damages the type I
alveolar cells, alters surfactant, and increasesalveolar capillary permeability. Lung sectionsstained with hematoxylin and eosin, show thealveoli filled with a foamy exudate. In severedisease, there is interstitial edema, fibrosis, and
hyaline membrane formation.Clinical Features
/square6The incubation period is 1–2 months.
/square6Patients with pneumocystis pneumonia present
with fever, dyspnea, and dry cough. Physicalfindings include tachypnea, tachycardia, andcyanosis, but there are few lung findings (i.e.symptoms are more than signs). Pneumothoraxmay occur sometimes and management is difficult.
/square6Although pneumocystis usually remains confinedto the lungs, disseminated infection can occur andinvolves lymph nodes, spleen, liver, and bonemarrow. Eye lesions (choroiditis) also occur and
may be confused with CMV retinitis.
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray  shows bilateral diffuse infiltrates mainly
in the perihilar regions.
/square6ABG (arterial blood gas)  analysis shows reduced
arterial oxygen pressure (PaO2), and respiratory
alkalosis. There is increased alveolar-arterialoxygen gradient (PAO
2 – PaO2). PAO2 – PaO2 of
>35 mmHg indicates poor prognosis.
/square6Pulmonary function tests  show reduced diffusing
capacity of the lung (DLCO) and an increaseduptake of tracer with nuclear imaging (gallium-67
citrate scan).
/square6Serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)  levels are usually
elevated due to lung parenchymal damage.
/square6Since there is little sputum production, sputum canbe induced by inhalation of 3% saline and stainedwith methenamine silver and toluidine blue  which
selectively stain the wall of P. carinii  cysts. Fiber-
optic bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage
(BAL) is more sensitive (>90%) than induced
sputum.
/square6Transbronchial biopsy and open lung biopsy  are per-
formed only when the diagnosis remains in doubt.
Treatment
/square6Treatment should be started as soon as thediagnosis is suspected.
/square6Trimethoprim–sulphamethoxazole (TMP–SMX) isthe drug of choice for all types of pneumocystisinfections and is given for 14 days in non-HIVinfected patients and 21 days in HIV-infectedpatients. Other effective drugs include clindamycin,
pentamidine and trimetrexate. Intravenous therapy
may be switched over to oral after improvement.
/square6High-dose steroids improve the prognosis in HIVinfected patients with pneumocystosis. However,
one should be cautious about associated tuber-
culosis or fungal infection.
Prevention
/square6Primary prophylaxis is indicated for HIV-infectedpatients with CD4 counts less than 200 cells/cumm.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
182 Q.Taenia saginata (beef tapeworm).
/square6T. saginata  (also called the cattle or beef tapeworm)
occurs in all countries where raw or undercookedbeef is eaten. This worm can reach 8 metres in length.
Life Cycle
/square6Humans are the only definitive host for the adultstage of T. saginata  and cattle are intermediate hosts.
It lives in the upper jejunum. It attaches to jejunal
mucosa through a scolex which has four suckers.
Eggs are passed in the feaces and can live formonths to years on vegetation. Cattle may ingestthese eggs while grazing. Inside the cattle intestine,the embryo is released which invades the intestinalwall, carried to striated muscle, where it becomes a
cysticercus. When raw or undercooked beef is eaten
by humans, this cysticercus can grow into adultworm.
Clinical Features
/square6Patients may notice worm segments (proglottids)in their feces. The proglottids are often motile.
/square6Abdominal pain or discomfort, nausea, decreasedappetite, weakness, and weight loss can occur.
Diagnosis
/square6Detection of eggs or proglottids in the stool. Eggsmay also be present in the perianal area; thus, ifproglottids or eggs are not found in the stool, theperianal region should be examined with use of a
cellophane-tape swab.
/square6Eosinophilia and elevated serum IgE levels may be
present.
Treatment
/square6Praziquantel, given as a single dose (10 mg/kg) iseffective against this tapeworm. Niclosamide (2 g)is an alternative.
Prevention
/square6Proper cooking of beef and pork, inspection of beefbefore cooking, and proper disposal of humanfeces are measures which can prevent T. saginata
infestation.
Q.Taenia solium  and cysticercosis (pork tape-
worm).
/square6T. solium  is the pork tapeworm.
/square6It can cause two forms of infection. In humans,
infection can be with adult tapeworm in theintestine or with larval forms in the tissues
(cysticercosis).
/square6It has worldwide distribution.Figure 1.20 Tapeworm
Secondary prophylaxis is indicated for patients with
prior pneumocystosis.
/square6TMP–SMX (one double strength tablet once daily)is the drug of choice. Dapsone (100 mg OD) is an
alternative.
Q.Name the different tapeworms which infest human
beings.
/square6Cestodes or tapeworms, are segmented worms.
/square6Adult worms reside in the gastrointestinal tract, but
the larvae can be found in any organ.
/square6Humans are either the definitive hosts where theadult worms reside in GIT ( Taenia saginata,
Diphyllobothrium, Hymenolepis, and Dipylidium
caninum ) or the humans are intermediate
hosts where larval-stage parasites are present inthe tissues (echinococcosis, sparganosis, andcoenurosis).
/square6For Taenia solium , humans can be both definitive
and intermediate hosts.
/square6An adult tapeworm consists of a head (scolex), a
neck, and a chain of individual segments
(proglottids). The scolex is the attachment organthrough which tapeworm attaches to the intestinalmucosa. Neck is the narrow part behind scolex fromwhich proglottids (segments) form. Matureproglottids produce eggs. Proglottids are
hermophrodites and cross-fertilisation between
proglottids occurs. Big worms can be several metresin length. The entire worm is covered with an elasticcuticle. Tapeworms absorb nutrients directlythrough the cuticle since they do not have any GItract.
/square6Five tapeworms commonly infect humans. Theseare:
Large tapeworms Small tapeworms
Taenia saginata Hymenolepis nana
(beef tapeworm) (dwarf tapeworm)
Taenia solium Echinococcus granulosis
(pork tapeworm) (dog tapeworm)
Diphyllobothrium latum
(fish tapeworm)

/square6Infectious Diseases83
1Life Cycle
/square6Humans are the only definitive hosts for T. solium ;
pigs are the usual intermediate hosts. The adulttapeworm usually stays in the upper jejunum. Ithas a scolex with two sucking disks through whichit attaches to the mucosa. The adult worm is about3 m in length and may live for years. Proglottids(segments) contain eggs and are passed in the feces.Eggs can survive in the environment for manymonths. These eggs are infective to humans andanimals. If eggs are ingested by animals and man,the larvae are released in the intestine, penetratethe intestinal wall, and are carried to many tissues.In the tissues, larvas become encysted in 2–3 months(cysticerci). These cysticerci can survive for monthsto years. Humans also acquire infection by ingestingundercooked pork containing cysticerci. In this caseingested cysticerci develop into adult tapewormsin the intestine. Autoinfection may occur if anindividual ingests eggs from his own feces.
Clinical Manifestations
/square6Intestinal infection with T. solium  is usually
asymptomatic or produces epigastric discomfort,nausea, weight loss, and diarrhea. Worm segments(proglottids) may be noted in feces.
/square6In cysticercosis, the clinical manifestations dependon the location of cysticerci. Cysticerci arecommonly found in the brain, skeletal muscle,subcutaneous tissue, and eye.
/square6Cysticerci in the brain act like space occupyinglesions. Seizures, hydrocephalus (due to obstructionof CSF flow by cysticerci), signs of raised intra-cranial pressure including headache, nausea,vomiting, changes in vision, dizziness, ataxia, orconfusion, may be present. Patients with hydro-cephalus may develop papilledema or displayaltered mental status. Chronic meningitis andstrokes can also occur.
/square6In the eye they may cause blindness.Diagnosis
/square6Stool examination may show eggs or worm segments.
/square6Definitive diagnosis of cysticercosis is difficult
because it requires biopsy and histopathologicalstudies which are sometimes difficult to obtain asin brain infection. However, a clinical diagnosis canbe made based on clinical features, imaging studies,serologic tests, and exposure history.
Treatment
Intestinal Infection
/square6Praziquantel (10 mg/kg) as a single dose is effec-tive. Niclosamide (2 g) is an alternative.
Neurocysticercosis
/square6Praziquantel 50 to 60 mg/kg daily in three divideddoses for 15 days or albendazole (15 mg/kg per dayfor 8 to 28 days) hasten the resolution of cysticercosis.
/square6Both drugs can exacerbate the inflammatoryresponse due to dying parasites which may beprevented by addition of steroids.
/square6Antiepileptics for seizures.
/square6Obstructive hydrocephalus is treated by theremoval of the cysticercus via endoscopic surgery
or by ventriculoperitoneal shunting.
Prevention of T. solium  Infection
/square6Same as for T. saginata  infection.
Q.Diphyllobothriasis.
/square6Diphyllobothrium latum  (fish tapeworm) a parasite
of freshwater fish. D. latum  is the largest parasite
of humans (up to 10 m in length).
Life Cycle
/square6The adult tapeworm lives usually in the ileum andoccasionally in the jejunum. The adult worm has3000 to 4000 proglottids (segments) which releaseeggs daily into the feces. If an egg reaches water, ithatches and releases a free-swimming larva whichis eaten by Cyclops. Inside the Cyclops the larva
develops into a procercoid which is swallowed by
a fish. Inside the fish, the larva migrates into thefish’s flesh and grows into a sparganum larva.Humans acquire the infection by ingesting infectedraw fish. Inside the human intestine, the larvamatures into an adult worm. Diphyllobothriasis
occurs worldwide, especially where lakes are
contaminated by sewage.
Clinical Manifestations
/square6Most D. latum  infections are asymptomatic. Some
may have abdominal discomfort, diarrhea, vomit-ing, weakness, and weight loss. Rarely worm can
cause intestinal obstruction, cholangitis or chole-
Figure 1.21 Life cycle of Taenia solium

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
184 cystitis. Because the tapeworm absorbs vitamin B12,
vitamin B12 deficiency can develop which manifests
as megaloblastic anemia.
Diagnosis
/square6Stool examination may show eggs or worm seg-ments (proglottids) in the stool. Eosinophilia maybe present.
Treatment
/square6Praziquantel, 5 to 10 mg/kg as a single dose ishighly effective. Niclosamide (2 g) is an alternative.
Q.Hymenolepis nana (dwarf tapeworm).
/square6This is the most common and smallest tapeworm
(2–4 cm in length) infesting human beings. H. nanais endemic all over the world. Infection is spreadby feco-oral contamination.
Life Cycle
/square6H. nana  is the only tapeworm which does not
require an intermediate host. Both the larval andadult phases take place in the humans. The adult
worm resides in the proximal ileum. The eggs are
released into the feces and when ingested by a newhost, the oncosphere is freed and penetrates theintestinal villi, becoming a cysticercoid larva. Larvamigrates back into the intestinal lumen, attaches tothe mucosa, and matures into adult worm. Eggsmay also hatch before passing into the stool, causing
internal autoinfection.
Clinical Manifestations
/square6Infection is usually asymptomatic. Occasionally ano-
rexia, abdominal pain, and diarrhea may be seen.
Diagnosis
/square6Detection of eggs in the stool.
Treatment
/square6Praziquantel (25 mg/kg once) is the drug of choice.It is effective against both the adult worms and thecysticercoids. Niclosamide (2 g) is an alternative.
Q.Echinococcosis (dog tapeworm) (hydatid cyst).
/square6Echinococcosis is an infection caused in humans
by the larval stage of Echinococcus granulosus,
E. multilocularis,  or E. vogeli.
/square6E. granulosus  produces unilocular cystic lesions.
E. multilocularis  causes multilocular lesions. E. vogeli
causes polycystic hydatid disease.
Life Cycle
/square6Like other cestodes, echinococcal species have bothintermediate and definitive hosts. The definitivehosts are dogs that pass eggs in their feces. Theseeggs are ingested by intermediate hosts—sheep,
cattle, humans, goats, camels, and horses eitherthrough vegetables or while grazing. Eggs developinto cysts in the muscles of intermediate hosts.When a dog ingests beef or lamb containing cysts,they develop into adult worms in dogs and life cycle
is completed.
/square6When humans ingest the eggs, embryos escape
from the eggs, penetrate the intestinal mucosa, enterthe portal circulation, and are carried to various
organs, most commonly the liver and lungs where
they develop into fluid-filled unilocular hydatidcysts. These cysts consist of an external membraneand an inner germinal layer. Daughter cysts andbrood capsules develop from the inner germinallayer. New larvae, called protoscolices, develop
within the brood capsule. The cysts expand slowly
over a period of years.
/square6The life cycle of E. multilocularis  is same except that
the intermediate hosts are rodents.
Clinical Manifestations
/square6Echinococcal cysts remain asymptomatic until their
expanding size elicits symptoms in the involved
organ. Liver and lungs are involved commonly.Patients with liver cysts often present withabdominal pain or a palpable mass in the rightupper quadrant. Compression of a bile duct cancause biliary obstruction and jaundice. Involvement
of bone leads to pathologic fractures, CNS
involvement leads to seizure, neurological deficitsand raised ICT. Involvement of the heart leads toconduction defects and pericarditis.
/square6Rupture or leakage of hydatid cyst fluid mayproduce fever, pruritus, urticaria, eosinophilia, oranaphylaxis. Lung hydatid cysts may rupture intothe bronchi or peritoneal cavity and produce cough,Figure 1.22 Life cycle of dog tapeworm (hydatid cyst)


/square6Infectious Diseases85
1chest pain, or hemoptysis. Rupture of hydatid cysts
may lead to dissemination of protoscolices, whichcan develop into additional cysts. Rupture canoccur spontaneously or at surgery.
/square6The larval forms of E. multilocularis  present as
slowly growing mass in the liver with destructionof hepatic parenchyma. These cysts may lead toobstruction of biliary tree leading to obstructivejaundice, or invade adjacent structures likediaphragm, kidneys and lungs.
Diagnosis
/square6MRI, CT, and ultrasound can define the site and
size of echinococcal cysts.
/square6Examination of aspirated fluid from cyst for proto-
scolices or hooklets can make a definite diagnosisof E. granulosus  infection, but is not usually
recommended because of the risk of fluid leakage
resulting in either dissemination of infection oranaphylactic reactions.
/square6Serologic studies for antibodies can be useful, but
negative result does not rule out the diagnosis.
Treatment
/square6For uncomplicated E. granulosus  cysts, PAIR
(percutaneous aspiration, infusion of scolicidal
agents, and respiration) is now the treatment of
choice. PAIR is contraindicated for superficiallylocated cysts (because of the risk of rupture), forcysts with multiple internal septae, and for cystscommunicating with the biliary tree. Albendazole
(15 mg/kg daily in two divided doses) should begiven for at least 4 days before the procedure andcontinued for at least 4 weeks afterward.
/square6For complicated E. granulosus  cysts (e.g. those
communicating with the biliary tree), surgery is thetreatment of choice. Pericystectomy is the procedureof choice, where the entire cyst and the surroundingfibrous tissue are removed. There is a risk of spillageof cyst contents during surgery. Albendazole
should be given for several days before resection
and for several weeks after resection. Praziquantel(50 mg/kg daily for 2 weeks), may hasten the deathof the protoscolices.
/square6Medical therapy with albendazole alone for12 weeks to 6 months results in cure in ~30% ofcases and improvement in another 50%.
/square6Surgical resection remains the treatment of choice
for E. multilocularis  infection.
Q.Name the different intestinal nematodes that infest
man.
Intestinal Nematodes
/square6Intestinal nematodes are roundworms. Their length
varies from 1 mm to many centimetres. There are
more than a billion people worldwide who are
infected with intestinal nematodes. Thoughnematode infections are not usually fatal, they cancause malnutrition and diminished work capacity.
TABLE 1.18: Intestinal nematodes infesting man
Ascaris Hookworm ( Necator Strongyloides Trichuris trichiura Enterobius
lumbricoides americanus , stercoralis (whipworm) vermicularis
(roundworm) ancylostoma (pinworm)
duodenale)
Endemic areas Worldwide Hot, humid regions Hot, humid regions Worldwide Worldwide
Infective stage Egg Filariform larva Filariform larva Egg Egg
Route of infection Oral Percutaneous Percutaneous Oral Oral
Gastrointestinal Jejunum Jejunum Small intestine Cecum, colon Cecum, appendix
location of worms
Adult worm size 15–35 cm 0.7–1.2 cm 2 mm 3–5 cm 0.8–1.3 cm
Pulmonary passage Yes Yes Yes No No
of larvae
Incubation period 60–75 40–100 17–28 70–90 35–45
(days)
Lifspan 1 – 2 years 2 – 8years Decades (owing to 5 years 2 months
autoinfection)
Main symptoms Usually asympto- Iron-deficiency Gastrointestinal Gastrointestinal Perianal pruritus
matic. Rarely anemia symptoms, symptoms, anemia
gastrointestinal or malabsorption
biliary obstruction
Diagnosis Detection of eggs Detection of eggs Detection of larvae Detection of eggs Detection of eggs
in stool in fresh stool, in stool or duodenal in stool from perianal skin on
larvae in old stool aspirate cellulose acetate  tape
Treatment Mebendazole Mebendazole Ivermectin Mebendazole Mebendazole
Albendazole Albendazole Albendazole Albendazole Albendazole
Pyrantel pamoate Pyrantel pamoate Thiabendazole Pyrantel pamoate

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
186Q.Describe the, lifecycle, clinical features, diagnosis
and treatment of intestinal.
/square6Ascaris is a nematode seen worldwide.
/square6It is transmitted through feco-oral route and is
common in areas of poor sanitation.
/square6The length of adult ascaris is 15–35 cm.
Life Cycle
/square6Adult worms live in the small intestine for 1 to2 years. Female Ascaris worms produce eggs whichare passed in the stools. These eggs mature in thesoil and become infective after several weeks. Eggscan remain infective for many years. When a personswallows these eggs, eggs hatch in the intestine and
produce larvae. These larvae invade the intestinal
mucosa, reach lungs through circulation, break intothe alveoli, ascend the bronchial tree, and areswallowed. They reach small intestine and developinto adult worms. About 2 and 3 months arerequired from swallowing of eggs to development
of adult worms
Clinical Features
/square6Most infected individuals are asymptomatic.
Symptoms arise due to larval migration throughthe lungs or adult worms in the intestines.
/square6When the larvae migrate through the lungs, patients
may develop a dry cough and burning substernal
discomfort worsened by coughing or deepinspiration. Sometimes dyspnea and blood-tingedsputum may be seen. Low grade fever and weightloss may be present. All these features may bemistaken for pulmonary tuberculosis. Eosinophiliadevelops during this symptomatic phase and
subsides slowly over weeks. Chest X-ray may show
eosinophilic pneumonitis (Löffler’s syndrome) withround or oval infiltrates./square6In heavy infections, a large number of worms canget entangled and cause intestinal obstruction.Single worm may migrate into and occlude thebiliary tree, causing biliary colic, cholecystitis,cholangitis, and pancreatitis. Sometimes wormsmay come out of mouth or nose.
Diagnosis
/square6Detection of ascaris eggs in the stool sample.
/square6Detection of larvae in sputum or gastric aspirateswhen they migrate through the lungs.
/square6Eosinophilia may be found in the blood in early stages.
/square6The large adult worm shadows may be visualizedoccasionally on contrast studies of the gastro-intestinal tract. A plain abdominal X-ray may showmasses of worms in gas-filled loops of bowel inpatients with intestinal obstruction.
/square6Pancreaticobiliary worms can be detected byultrasound and endoscopic retrograde cholangio-pancreatography (ERCP).
Treatment
/square6Albendazole (400 mg once), or mebendazole (500mg once) is effective against ascariasis. These drugs
are contraindicated in pregnancy and instead
pyrantel pamoate (11 mg/kg once; maximum, 1 g)can be used in pregnancy. Intestinal obstructionrequires surgery.
Q.Describe the epidemiology, lifecycle, clinical
features, diagnosis and treatment of hookworm
infestation.
Epidemiology
/square6Human hookworm disease is predominantly caused
by the nematode parasites Necator americanus  and
Ancylostoma duodenale ; and rarely by Ancylostoma
ceylonicum, Ancylostoma braziliense , and Ancylostoma
caninum .
/square6Ancylostoma duodenale is found in Mediterranean
countries, Iran, India, Pakistan, and the Far East.
Necator americanus  is found in North and South
America, Central Africa, Indonesia, and parts ofIndia. Both are found in many tropical regions,particularly Southeast Asia.
/square6It is common in rural areas where defecating inopen fields is common. Barefoot walking is a riskfactor for infection.
/square6Older children are affected commonly.
/square6Ancylostoma caninum and Ancylostoma brazilienseare animal hookworms and can cause cutaneouslarva migrans (“creeping eruption”).
Life Cycle
/square6Adult hookworms are about 1 cm long. They attach
to the intestinal mucosa through buccal teeth Figure 1.23 Life cycle of ascariasis


/square6Infectious Diseases87
1(Ancylostoma) or cutting plates (Necator) and suck
blood (0.5 ml/day per Ancylostoma and 0.03 ml/day per each N. americanus ) and interstitial fluid.
The adult hookworms produce thousands of eggsdaily. The eggs are passed with feces into the soil,
where rhabditiform larvae hatch and develop over
a 1 week period into filariform larvae. Thesefilariform larvae penetrate the skin and reach thelungs through bloodstream. In the lungs, theyinvade alveoli and ascend the airways, getswallowed and reach the small intestine. In the
small intestine they develop into adult worms. It
takes about 6 to 8 weeks from skin invasion toappearance of eggs in the feces. Adult hookwormslive about 6 to 8 years ( A. duodenale ) or 2 to 5 years
(N. americanus ).
Clinical Features
/square6Most hookworm infections are asymptomatic.
/square6Filariform larvae may cause pruritic maculopapular
dermatitis (“ground itch”) at the site of skinpenetration as well as serpiginous tracks when theymigrate through subcutaneous tissue (similar tocutaneous larva migrans).
/square6Larvae migrating through the lungs may causetransient pneumonitis.
/square6Mild epigastric pain or diarrhea may be seen some-times.
/square6Chronic hookworm infection leads to iron defi-ciency anemia.
Diagnosis
/square6Detection of oval hookworm eggs in the feces. In
light infections, stool-concentration procedures
may be required to detect eggs. Eggs of the twospecies cannot be differentiated by light micro-scopy./square6Eosinophilia may be present.
/square6Microcytic hypochromic anemia, occasionally witheosinophilia is characteristic of chronic hookworminfestation.
Treatment
/square6Albendazole (400 mg single dose), or mebendazole
(500 mg single dose), or pyrantel pamoate (11 mg/
kg for 3 days) are highly effective.
Q.Strongyloidiasis.
/square6Strongyloidiasis is due to Strongyloides stercoralis
which is a helminth.
/square6In contrast to other helminthic parasites, S.
stercoralis  can complete its entire life cycle within
the human host. This unique capacity leads torepeated cycles of autoinfection and thusstrongyloidiasis can persist for decades in thehost.
Epidemiology
/square6S. stercoralis  is found in tropical areas and is particu-
larly common in Southeast Asia, sub-SaharanAfrica, and Brazil. It is also found in some parts ofUnited States.
Life Cycle
Adult female worms of S. stercoralis  are about
2 mm long. Parasitic adult males do not exist and
female worms produce eggs by parthenogenesis.Eggs hatch in the intestine itself, releasing rhabditi-form larvae which are passed with the feces into soil.These rhabditiform larvae transform into infectiousfilariform larvae either directly or after a free-living
phase of development in the soil. Humans acquire
strongyloidiasis when filariform larvae penetrate theskin or mucous membranes and enter the body. Thesefilariform larvae reach the lungs through bloodstream.In the lungs, they invade alveoli and ascend theairways, get swallowed and reach the small intestine.
In the small intestine, larvae mature into adult worms
that penetrate the mucosa of the small intestine.Alternatively, rhabditiform larvae in the intestine candevelop directly into filariform larvae that penetratethe colonic wall or perianal skin and enter the bloodstream to repeat the migration that establishes ongoing
internal reinfection (autoinfection).
Clinical Features
/square6Most patients are asymptomatic or have mild
cutaneous and/or abdominal symptoms.
/square6Recurrent urticaria is the most common cutaneousmanifestation.
/square6Migrating larvae can elicit a pathognomonicserpiginous eruption, larva currens (“running
larva”), a pruritic, raised, erythematous lesion thatFigure 1.24 Life cycle of hookworm


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
188 advances as rapidly as 10 cm/h along the course of
larval migration.
/square6Adult worms burrow into the duodenojejunal
mucosa and can cause abdominal (usually
epigastric) pain, which resembles peptic ulcer pain.
Nausea, diarrhea, gastrointestinal bleeding, and
weight loss can occur.
/square6Immunosuppressed states can lead to disseminated
infection where larvae may invade the central
nervous system, peritoneum, liver, and kidney.
Diagnosis
/square6Finding rhabditiform larvae in feces is diagnostic.
Since the eggs hatch in the intestine, they are not
usually found in the feces. Repeated stool examina-
tions can improve the sensitivity of stool diagnosis.
/square6If stool examinations are negative, strongyloides
can be detected by sampling of the duodenojejunal
contents by aspiration or biopsy.
/square6Detection of antibodies against Strongyloides is a
sensitive method of diagnosing uncomplicated
infections.
/square6Eosinophilia is common.
Treatment
/square6Ivermectin (200 μg/kg daily for 1 or 2 days) is the
drug of choice and is more effective than albenda-
zole (400 mg daily for 3 days, repeated at 2 weeks)
and is better tolerated than thiabendazole (25 mg/kg
twice daily for 2 days). Ivermectin should be given
for at least 5 to 7 days in disseminated strongyloidiasis.
Q.Trichuriasis(whipworm).
/square6Trichuriasis is caused by infection with the
nematode, Trichuris trichiura .
/square6It is about 4 cm long and has a thin anterior
end and a broad posterior end which gives it a
characteristic whiplike appearance (hence called
whipworm).Epidemiology
/square6It is found all over the world both in the tropics
and subtropics.
/square6It most commonly affects poor children.
Life Cycle
/square6The adult worms live for many years in the colon
and cecum. Their anterior ends are embedded into
the mucosa. Adult female worms produce
thousands of eggs per day which are passed with
the feces, mature in the soil and become infective.
After ingestion, infective eggs hatch in the
duodenum, releasing larvae which mature and
migrate to the colon. The full cycle takes about
3 months.
Clinical Features
/square6Most infected persons are asymptomatic.
/square6Heavy infections can cause abdominal pain,
anorexia, and diarrhea. Rectal prolapse and growth
retardation can happen in children.
Diagnosis
/square6The characteristic lemon-shaped whipworm eggs
may be detected on stool examination. Adult worms
can occasionally be seen on proctoscopy.
Treatment
/square6Mebendazole (500 mg once for mass treatment or
100 mg BD for 3 days for individual patient) or
albendazole (400 mg daily for 3 doses) or ivermectin
200 μg/kg orally once a day for 3 days are effective
against whipworm.
Q.Pinworm infestation (Enterobiasis, Oxyuriasis).
/square6Pinworm ( Enterobius vermicularis ) is a small
nematode about 1 cm long. It is more common in
temperate countries than in the tropics. School
children are affected commonly.
Life Cycle
/square6Humans are the only natural host for enterobius.
Adult worms live in the terminal ileum and colon.
The female worm migrates out at night into the
perianal region and lays up to 10,000 eggs. Self-
infection results from perianal scratching and trans-
port of eggs by the hands to the mouth. The larvae
hatch and mature within the intestine. This life cycle
takes ~1 month, and adult worms live for ~2 months.
It can spread easily from one person to another.
Clinical Features
/square6Most pinworm infections are asymptomatic.
Perianal itching is the cardinal symptom. The
itching is worse at night and is due to the nocturnal
migration of the female worms. Figure 1.25 Whipworm


/square6Infectious Diseases89
1/square6Heavy infections can cause abdominal pain and
weight loss.
/square6Rarely, pinworms invade the female genital tractand cause vulvovaginitis.
Diagnosis
/square6Since the eggs are deposited in the perianal region,
they can be detected by the application of clear cello-
phane tape to the perianal region in the morning.Eggs get attached to the sticky cellophane tapewhich is then transferred to a slide and examinedunder microscope for characteristic pinworm eggs,which are oval and flattened along one side.
Treatment
/square6A single dose of mebendazole (100 mg), or albenda-
zole (400 mg), or pyrantel pamoate (11 mg/kg base),
is effective against pinworms. Treatment should berepeated after 2 weeks. All family members shouldbe treated to eliminate asymptomatic reservoirs ofinfection.
Q.Emumerate the different filarial species which cause
infection in man.
/square6Filariasis is a group of parasitic infections due to
filarial worms (nematodes) (Table 1.19). Filariasisis transmitted by mosquitoes or other arthropods.
/square6Eight filarial species infect humans. Out of these,four: (1) Wuchereria bancrofti , (2) Brugia malayi ,
(3) Onchocerca volvulus , and (4) Loa loa —are
responsible for most infections.
/square6Adult filarial worms reside in either lymphatic orsubcutaneous tissues of humans. Adult worms live
for many years and produce offsprings called
microfilariae, which either circulate in the blood ormigrate through the skin.
/square6Microfilariae are ingested by the arthropod vector
and there develop into new infective larvae.
/square6All filarial worms have similar life cycles but differ
in: (1) their vector, (2) the final dwelling place ofthe adult worms, (3) the circadian periodicity of themicrofilariae, and (4) the pathological syndromes
they cause.
Q.Describe the etiology, epidemiology, pathogenesis,
clinical features, diagnosis and treatment oflymphatic filariasis.
Q. Wuchereria bancrofti .
/square6Lymphatic filariasis is caused by Wuchereria bancrofti,
Brugia malayi , and Brugia timori . The thread like
adult worms live in lymphatic channels or lymphnodes for many years. World Health Organization(WHO) has identified lymphatic filariasis as one ofthe major cause of permanent and long-term dis-ability in the world.
Epidemiology
/square6W. bancrofti  is the most common human filarial
infec tion seen all over the world. Humans are the
only definitive host for this parasite. W. bancrofti  is
nocturnally periodic (microfilariae are found in peri-pheral blood mainly at night). Vectors for W. bancrofti
are Culex fatigans  mosquitoes in urban settings and
anopheles or Aedes mosquitoes in rural areas.
/square6B. malayi  occurs mainly in China, India, Indonesia,
Korea, Japan, Malaysia, and the Philippines.
/square6B. timori  is seen only on islands of the Indonesian
archipelago.
Pathology
/square6Female adult worms are 8 to 10 cm long; males areabout 4 cm long. Gravid adult females producemicrofilariae that circulate in blood. Adult wormslive in afferent lymphatics or sinuses of lymphnodes and cause dilatation and thickening oflymphatics. An inflammatory reaction develops in
the lymphatics due to the presence of worms which
further damages lymphatics and their valvesleading to tortuous and blocked lymphatics.Blocked and damaged lymphatics lead tolymphedema with hard or brawny edema in the
TABLE 1.19: Filarial species causing disease in humans
Worm species Periodicity Vector Dwelling place of Dwelling place of
adult worm microfilariae
Wuchereria bancrofti Nocturnal Mosquitoes Lymphatic vessels Blood
Brugia malayi Nocturnal Mosquitoes Lymphatic vessels Blood
B. timori Nocturnal Mosquitoes Lymphatic tissue Blood
Oncocercus valvulus None Simulium (blackflies) Subcutaneous Skin
Loa loa Diurnal Chrysops (deerflies) Subcutaneous Blood
Mansonella ozzardi None Midges Retroperitoneal Blood and skin
Mansonella perstans None Midges Retroperitoneal Blood
Mansonella streptocerca None Midges Skin Skin

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
190 overlying skin. Death of the adult worm leads to
increased inflammatory reaction and fibrosis oflymphatics which may be permanent.
/square6Microfilariae do not have much role in the develop-
ment of lymphedema.
Clinical Features
/square6Patients with lymphatic filariasis usually present
with subclinical microfilaremia, acute adenolymph-
angitis (ADL), and chronic lymphatic disease.
/square6In areas where W. bancrofti  or B. malayi  is endemic,
most infected individuals are clinically asympto-matic. Investigations may show microfilariae in the
blood or microscopic hematuria and/or protei-
nuria, dilated and tortuous lymphatics on imaging.Scrotal lymphangiectasia may be detectable byultrasound.
/square6Only very few of these asymptomatic individualsdevelop acute and chronic stages of infection. Acutestage of infection leads to adenolymphangitis whichis characterized by fever, lymphangitis, lympha-denitis, and transient local edema. Lymphangitisis inflammation of lymphatic vessels and is retro-
grade extending from the lymph node to periphery.
In bacterial lymphangitis ascending lymphangitisis seen. Lymphadenitis is inflammation of lymphnodes which become enlarged and painful. Thelymphangitis and lymphadenitis can involve boththe upper and lower limbs. Genital lymphatics
involvement occurs almost exclusively with W.
bancrofti  infection and manifests as funiculitis,
epididymitis, and scrotal pain and tenderness.Hydrocele and scrotal elephantiasis may develop.Renal lymphatic involvement leads to rupture ofthe renal lymphatics and chyluria.
/square6Chronic filarial disease develops insidiously aftermany years and is due to severe lymphatic damage.This leads to elephantiasis characterized by non-pitting edema due to thickening of the subcuta-
neous tissues and hyperkeratosis. Recurrent
infections of these edematous tissues lead to furtherswelling.
/square6Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia (TPE) is another
rare manifestation which causes low grade fever
and wheezing. Blood eosinophil count is usuallyhigh. It is most likely due to hypersensitivityreactions to microfilariae.
Diagnosis
/square6Definitive diagnosis can be made by detection of
adult filarial worms. But this is difficult. Imaging
techniques like ultrasound and Doppler can some-times identify motile adult worms in the dilatedlymphatics.
/square6Microscopic examination of blood samples : Micro-
filariae can be demonstrated in the blood, hydrocelefluid, or rarely in other body fluids. Blood shouldbe collected based on the periodicity of the
microfilariae. Nighttime blood sample should beexamined in case of nocturnal periodicity.
/square6Antigen test for W. bancrofti:  Antigens of W. bancrofti
can be detected by enzyme-linked immunosorbentassay (ELISA) and immunochromatographic cardtest. There are currently no tests to detect antigensof brugian filariasis.
/square6Antibody tests:  Enzyme immunoassay tests for
antifilarial antibodies.
/square6Molecular diagnosis : Polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) based assays for DNA of W. bancrofti  and
B. malayi  in blood have been developed. PCR tests
have high sensitivity and can detect infection inalmost all infected subjects.
/square6Elevated eosinophils and serum IgE support thediagnosis of lymphatic filariasis.
Differential diagnosis
/square6Acute filarial lymphangitis and lymphadenitis hasto be differentiated from bacterial lymphangitis.
/square6Chronic filarial lymphedema must be distinguishedfrom the lymphedema of malignancy, postopera-tive scarring, trauma, chronic edematous states, andcongenital lymphatic abnormalities.
Treatment
/square6Diethylcarbamazine (DEC) is the drug of choice forfilariasis. It has action on adult worms as well asmicrofilariae. It is given in a dose of 6 mg/kg/day
in three divided doses for 12 days. A single dose of
6 mg/kg also has equivalent efficacy in reducinglevels of microfilariae. For tropical pulmonaryeosinophilia (TPE), a longer DEC treatment courseof 14–21 days is generally recommended.
/square6Ivermectin is a semisynthetic macrolide antibioticand a single oral dose of 150 μg/kg is useful to
clear microfilaria. Ivermectin does not kill adultworms.
/square6A single dose of albendazole plus either DEC orivermectin has been found to be more effective thansingle drug. Recently single dose of a 3-drugregimen of ivermectin plus diethylcarbamazine andalbendazole has been shown to be more effective
than the 2 drug combination.
/square6Early treatment of asymptomatic persons is
recommended to prevent permanent lymphaticdamage. For adenolymphangitis (ADL), supportive
treatment with antipyretics and analgesics is given
and antibiotics are also indicated if secondarybacterial infection is suspected. In persons whohave chronic lymphedema, good local hygieneshould be maintained, and secondary bacterialinfections should be prevented. Hydroceles are
managed by repeated aspiration or surgical
intervention.

/square6Infectious Diseases91
1Prevention and Control
/square6Avoidance of mosquito bites by using insect
repellents and mosquito nets reduce the chances ofinfection.
/square6Mass treatment with either DEC or ivermectin everyyear suppress microfilaremia and interruptstransmission.
/square6Community use of DEC-fortified salt dramaticallyreduces microfilarial density.
Q.Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia.
/square6Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia (TPE) is a distinct
syndrome that develops in some individuals withlymphatic filariasis.
/square6Males are affected commonly often during the thirddecade of life. Most cases occur in India, Pakistan,Sri Lanka, Brazil, and Southeast Asia.
Etiology
/square6Wuchereria bancrofti  and Brugia malayi  are the main
causes of TPE. It is due to an exaggerated immuneresponse to microfilariae trapped in the lungs.
Clinical Features
/square6Patients are usually from filaria-endemic areas.
/square6They usually present with nocturnal dry coughand wheezing (probably due to the nocturnalperiodicity of microfilariae), low-grade fever, and
high blood eosinophil counts (usually >3000
eosinophils/ μL).
/square6The clinical symptoms are due to allergic and
inflammatory reactions elicited by the microfilariae
in the lungs.
/square6Interstitial fibrosis and lung damage can happen if
this condition is not treated properly.
Investigations
/square6Eosinophil count is high (usually >3000 eosino-phils/μL).
/square6Chest X-ray may show increased bronchovascular
markings, diffuse miliary lesions or mottled
opacities.
/square6Pulmonary function tests show both restrictive and
obstructive defects.
/square6Serum IgE levels and antifilarial antibodies areelevated.
Differential Diagnosis
/square6Asthma
/square6Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
/square6Löffler’s syndrome
/square6Allergic granulomatosis with angiitis (Churg-
Strauss syndrome)
/square6Systemic vasculitis (Wegener’s granulomatosis)
/square6Chronic eosinophilic pneumonia/square6Idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome.
/square6History of filarial exposure, nocturnal cough and
wheezing, high levels of antifilarial antibodies, and
a rapid response to DEC help in differentiating TPE
from other conditions.
Treatment
/square6DEC should be given at a dosage of 4 to 6 mg/kgof body weight divided into 2 or 3 doses per day
for 3 weeks. DEC plus albendazole is more effective
than DEC alone.
Q.Onchocerciasis (river blindness).
/square6Onchocerciasis (river blindness) is caused by the
filarial nematode Onchocerca volvulus . Humans
acquire onchocerciasis through the bite of Simulium
blackflies. Because the fly develops and breeds in
flowing water, onchocerciasis is commonly found
along rivers and is sometimes referred to as river
blindness.
/square6This disease is seen mainly in Africa.
/square6It affects mainly the skin and eyes. Onchocerciasisis the second leading cause of infectious blindness
worldwide.
Life Cycle and Pathogenesis
/square6Man acquires infection by the bite of an infectedblackfly. Infective larvae of O. volvulus  are deposited
into the skin during bite. The larvae develop into
adults worms, which are found in subcutaneous
nodules. The adult female worm releases
microfilariae that migrate to all tissues. Infection is
transmitted to other persons when a female blackfly
ingests microfilariae from the host and these
microfilariae then develop into infective larvae.
Adult female worms are about 40 to 60 cm in length
and males 3 to 6 cm in length. These worms can
live up to 18 years.
Clinical Features
/square6In onchocerciasis, tissue damage occurs due tomicrofilariae and not due to adult worms.
/square6In the skin, pruritus and papular rash are the most
frequent manifestations. Subcutaneous nodules form
around the adult worms and are seen commonly
over bony prominences. Chronic inflammatory
changes in skin result in loss of elasticity, atrophy,
fibrosis and premature wrinkling.
/square6In the eye, the most common early finding is con-
junctivitis with photophobia. Corneal inflammation
(keratitis) occurs due to microfilaria which leads to
neovascularization, corneal scarring and formation
of opacities. This leads to blindness. Inflammation
in the anterior and posterior chambers frequently
results in anterior uveitis, chorioretinitis, and optic
atrophy.
/square6Lymphadenopathy is usually present.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
192Diagnosis
/square6Diagnosis can be confirmed by the detection of an
adult worm in an excised nodule or microfilariaein a skin snip.
/square6Ultrasound can also visualize worm in the sub-cutaneous nodules.
/square6Eosinophils and serum IgE levels are elevated.
/square6Antibody detection:
– Ov16 card test: Antibodies against this antigen
have been shown to yield high sensitivity(approximately 80%) and specificity (approxi-mately 85%).
– An ELISA-based test using a cocktail of 3
antigens (Ov7, Ov11, Ov16) has also been usedto detect antibodies. It has 97% sensitivity and100% specificity.
/square6PCR to detect onchocercal DNA in skin snips arehighly sensitive and specific but not availableeverywhere.
/square6Diethylcarbamazine (DEC) patch test (Mazzotti
reaction): Topical application of DEC in a cream
base (DEC patch) elicits localized cutaneousreactions (pruritus, maculopapular eruptions,dermal edema) in response to dying microfilariaewhich is highly suggestive of onchocerciasis.
Treatment
/square6Ivermectin is the drug of choice for onchocerciasis.It is given as a single oral dose of 150 μg/kg,
repeated at 6- to 12-month intervals for at least10–12 years. Ivermectin kills microfilaria and doesnot kill the adult worms. Ivermectin is contra-indicated in pregnant or breastfeeding women.
/square6Doxycycline can kill the adult worms by killingendosymbiont bacteria Wolbachia which O.volvulus requires for survival and embryogenesis.
/square6Moxidectin is a new drug that has been approvedfor use in onchocerciasis. It has been shown to besuperior to ivermectin.
/square6Subcutaneous nodules near the head should beexcised (because the adult worms are nearer to theeye).
Prevention
/square6Vector control.
/square6Community-based administration of ivermectinevery 6 to 12 months to interrupt transmission.
Q.Dracunculiasis (guinea worm infection).
Etiology
/square6Dracunculiasis is a parasitic infection caused by
Dracunculus medinensis . Female Dracunculus worm
is very thin but length is up to 1 meter.
/square6Its incidence has declined dramatically due to global
eradication efforts. But cases still occur in Sudan.Life Cycle
/square6Humans are the definitive hosts and Cyclops (a
crustacean) are intermediates hosts.
/square6Humans acquire infection by drinking watercontaining infected microcrustaceans (Cyclops).containing infective larvae. The larvae are released,penetrate the bowel wall, and mature in theabdominal cavity into adult worms. After mating,
adult male worm dies, but gravid female worm
migrates through the subcutaneous tissue, usuallyto lower limb.
/square6A blister forms in the skin and breaks down to form
an ulcer through which the worm can come out and
release motile, rhabditiform larvae into water.These rhabditiform larvae are ingested by cyclopswhere they develop into infective larvae. Cyclopsrelease the infective larvae into the water thuscompleting the cycle.
Clinical Features
/square6Guinea worm infection is usually asymptomatic.
But just before blister formation, there is fever and
allergic symptoms like periorbital edema, wheez-ing, and urticaria. The emergence of the worm isassociated with local pain and swelling. Sometimes,the worm is visible to the naked eye when it comesout. Fever and local symptoms subside when the
blister ruptures releasing larva-rich fluid. The ulcer
slowly heals but can become secondarily infected.Occasionally, the adult worm does not emerge butbecomes encapsulated and calcified.
Treatment
/square6Emerging adult worm can be gradually extractedby winding a few centimetres on a stick every day.Worms may be excised surgically. Niridazole can
be used but not very effective.
/square6Guineaworm infestation can be prevented by the
provision of safe drinking water.
Q.Describe the etiology, lifecycle, clinical features,
investigations and management of schistosomiasis
(bilharziasis).
Etiology
/square6Schistosomiasis is also known as bilharziasis after
Theodor Bilharz who first identified the parasite.It is caused by infection with parasitic blood flukes
known as schistosomes. Schistosomes are trema-
todes (flat worms) which belong to the phylumPlatyhelminthes.
/square6The organisms infect the vasculature of thegastrointestinal or genitourinary system. Humanschistosomiasis is caused by five species. These areSchistosoma mansoni, S. japonicum, S. mekongi, S.
intercalatum  and S. haematobium. S. haematobium

/square6Infectious Diseases93
1causes urinary tract disease and others cause
intestinal disease.
Epidemiology
/square6Schistosomiasis is found in South America, theCaribbean, Africa, the Middle East, and SoutheastAsia. People between 15 and 20 years age groupare affected commonly. It is less common in olderage groups probably due to less water exposure.
Life Cycle
/square6Human infection is acquired when infective
cercariae in fresh water penetrate the skin and reach
the subcutaneous tissue. In the subcutaneous tissue,cercariae transform into schistosomula which travelthrough the bloodstream to the liver, where theymature into adults worms.
/square6The mature adult worms then migrate through theveins to their ultimate home in the intestinal veins(typically S. japonicum  and S. mansoni ) or the venous
plexus of urinary bladder (typically S. haematobium ).
Adult worms measure 1 to 2 cm in length. In these
organs worms mate and gravid female worms
produces eggs. Eggs can penetrate the venous wallby enzyme secretion and reach the lumen of theintestine or urinary bladder from where they arepassed with stools or urine. Some eggs are carriedby venous blood flow to the liver and other organs
(e.g. lungs, central nervous system, spinal cord).
Excreted eggs hatch in freshwater, releasingmiracidia (first larval stage) which enter snails.After multiplication in snail, thousands of free-swimming cercariae are released which are readyto infect humans.Pathogenesis
/square6The clinical manifestations seen in schistosomiasisare due to inflammatory reaction to eggs in thetissues. Chronic inflammation leads to granuloma
formation and irreversible fibrosis.
Clinical Features
/square6Most people with intestinal schistosomiasis are
asymptomatic. In contrast, most people with urinary
schistosomiasis are symptomatic.
/square6In general, disease manifestations of schisto-
somiasis occur in 2 stages: Acute and chronic stages.
Acute Infection
/square6During the phase of cercarial invasion, a form of
dermatitis called swimmers’ itch may be seen. It isseen 2 or 3 days after invasion as an itchy maculo-
papular rash.
/square6Acute shistosomiasis syndrome (also called
Katayama fever) is seen during worm maturationand is characterized by a serum sickness-like
syndrome with fever, generalized lymphadeno-
pathy, hepatosplenomegaly and increased eosino-phil counts.
Chronic Infection
/square6The clinical manifestations of chronic schisto-
somiasis are species-dependent. Egg deposition
in the intestinal wall ( S. mansoni, S. japonicum,
S. mekongi,  and S. intercalatum ) causes colicky
abdominal pain and bloody diarrhea. Eggs canpenetrate the bowel adjacent to mesenteric vesselswhere adult worms are residing. Unshed eggs,
Figure 1.26 Lifecycle of schistosomiasis


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
194 which are swept back to the portal circulation
induce granulomatous reaction in the portal tractsleading to presinusoidal blockage and portalhypertension. Portal hypertension can lead toesophageal varices and splenomegaly. Right andleft upper-quadrant “dragging” pain may be
experienced due to hepatomegaly and splenomegaly
respectively. Bleeding from esophageal varices maycause hematemesis and malena and may be the firstmanifestation of the disease. In late-stage disease,cirrhosis and liver failure may develop.
/square6Deposition of eggs in the urinary bladder ( S.
haematobium ) causes inflammation and granuloma
formation in the urinary bladder leading to dysuria,increased frequency, and hematuria. Obstructionof the lower end of the ureters results in hydroureter
and hydronephrosis. Bladder granulomas undergo
fibrosis and result in typical sandy patches visibleon cystoscopy. Squamous cell carcinoma has beenobserved to develop in damaged bladder; hence,S. haematobium  has now been classified as a human
carcinogen.
/square6Lungs can also get affected in schistosomiasis.Embolized eggs lodge in small lung arterioles, andproduce acute necrotizing arteriolitis and granu-loma formation. Later, fibrosis leads to endarteritis
obliterans, pulmonary hypertension, and cor
pulmonale.
/square6CNS schistosomiasis occurs when eggs which arecarried to the brain induce a granulomatous
response and fibrosis. Patients may present with
epilepsy. Transverse myelitis may also be seen dueto eggs traveling to the venous plexus around thespinal cord. Patients with transverse myelitispresent with lower limb weakness accompanied bybladder dysfunction.
Diagnosis
/square6History of travel to endemic areas and exposure tofreshwater bodies is central to diagnosis.
/square6High blood eosinophil count and presence of
schistosomal antibodies is highly suggestive of
infection. Schistosomal antibodies can be detectedby indirect fluorescent antibody test and ELISA.
/square6Examination of stool or urine may show eggs of
schistosoma.
/square6Plain X-ray of the abdomen or CT scan may reveal
intramural calcification in the wall of the bladderor colon.
/square6Schistosome infection can also be diagnosed byexamination of tissue samples, usually rectalbiopsies and rarely liver biopsy.
Treatment
/square6Infections with all major Schistosoma species can be
treated with praziquantel . Steroids can be given
along with praziquantel to suppress inflammation.Prevention and Control
/square6Travelers should avoid fresh water contact espe-cially in endemic areas.
/square6Application of molluscicides, provision of safewater and disposal of sewage, chemotherapy, andhealth education are all effective in reducing theprevalence of schistosomiasis.
Q.List the important fungi affecting human beings.
/square6Fungi are universally present in nature but only a
few fungi belonging to Eumycetes group are
pathogenic to man.
/square6The eumycetes group can be divided into:
1.Moulds (filamentous, mycelial fungi),  e.g. the ring-
worm fungi, actinomycetes.
2.Yeasts (unicellular fungi) , e.g. Cryptococcus
neoformans .
3. Yeast-like fungi, e.g. Candida albicans .
4. Dimorphic fungi, e.g.  Histoplasma capsulatum ,
Blastomyces dermatitidis, Sporothrix schenckii
Q.Describe the etiology, clinical features, diagnosis
and treatment of candidiasis.
Etiology
/square6Candidiasis is a fungal infection caused by yeasts
that belong to the genus Candida . Out of many
species of candida, Candida albicans is the most
common yeast causing human disease.
/square6Candida albicans  is a normal oropharyngeal and
gastrointestinal commensal.
/square6Candida  species reproduce asexually by budding.
Clinical Features
/square6Oropharyngeal candidiasis (thrush)  is common in
neonates, patients with diabetes mellitus, HIVinfection, dentures, patients treated with antibiotics,
chemotherapy, or radiation therapy, patients with
xerostomia and those treated with inhaled cortico-steroids. Oral candidiasis (thrush) presents as welldefined, painless adherent white patches in themouth, tongue and pharyngeal mucosa. HIVinfection should be ruled out in unexplained oro-
pharyngeal candidiasis.
/square6Cutaneous candidiasis  usually occurs in macerated
skin, such as diapered area of infants, underpendulous breasts. It presents as red macerated
areas, paronychia, balanitis, or pruritus ani. Partial
alopecia can occur in scalp infections.
/square6Vulvovaginal candidiasis  is especially common in the
third trimester of pregnancy. It causes pruritus, white
discharge, and sometimes pain on intercourse.
/square6Esophageal candidiasis can cause substernal pain
or dysphagia. Most lesions occur in the distal thirdof the esophagus.

/square6Infectious Diseases95
1/square6Systemic candidiasis and septic shock can occur
especially in immunocompromised persons. It caninvade almost any organ. Hematogenous seedingis particularly common in the retina, kidney, spleen,and liver. Kidney involvement causes cystitis,pyelitis, or papillary necrosis. Retinal infection
appears as unilateral or bilateral small white retinal
exudates. The vitreous humor becomes cloudy, andthe patient notices blurring, ocular pain, or ascotoma. Retinal detachment can occur. Infectionof liver and spleen can occur in patients with acuteleukemia recovering from profound neutropenia.
Candida pneumonia is very rare. Candida
endocarditis can occur in previously damaged orprosthetic heart valves. The source is often anintravascular catheter or illicit drug injection. Othermanifestations include arthritis, subacute perito-nitis, brain abscess and chronic meningitis.
Diagnosis
/square6Pseudohyphae are seen on a wet KOH smear
prepared from the scrapings of lesion. Diagnosis
can be confirmed by culture.
/square6Since candida is a normal commensal, positivecultures of urine, sputum, abdominal drains,endotracheal aspirates, or the vagina is notdiagnostic.
/square6Blood cultures are useful in the diagnosis ofCandida endocarditis. Serologic tests for antibodyor antigen are not useful.
Treatment
/square6For cutaneous candidiasis, topical antifungals areeffective. Nystatin powder or ciclopirox cream oran azole is useful. Clotrimazole, miconazole,econazole, and tolnafate are available as creams or
lotions.
/square6For vulvovaginal candidiasis, azoles are better than
nystatin preparations. All azoles are equallyefficacious. A single dose of 150 mg fluconazole ismore convenient to use for vulvovaginitis thantopical treatment but is contraindicated in preg-
nancy.
/square6For oral candidiasis clotrimazole troches can be
used five times a day. Oral fluconazole (150 mgdaily) can also be used.
/square6For esophageal candidiasis, oral fluconazole (150 mg
once daily for 2–3 weeks) is the treatment of choice.
Itraconazole is an alternative. For azole-resistant
oropharyngeal or esophageal candidiasis a 2-weekcourse of intravenous amphotericin B or caspo-fungin is effective.
/square6For invasive candidiasis, intravenous amphotericinB is the drug of choice. Candida endocarditis
requires valve replacement along with long-term
fluconazole administration.Q.Describe the etiology, clinical features, diagnosis
and treatment of Aspergillosis.
/square6The term “aspergillosis” refers to illness due to
allergy, colonization, or tissue invasion by species
of Aspergillus.
/square6Aspergillus species are A. fumigatus  (most
common), A. flavus, A. niger, A. nidulans, A. terreus ,
and many other species.
/square6Aspergillus is a mold with septate branching
hyphae. Aspergillus is ubiquitous in the environ-ment, and is present on dead leaves, stored grain,
compost piles, hay, and other decaying vegetation.
/square6Infection is seen most often in immunocompro-
mised and diabetic persons. Aspergillus cancolonize the damaged bronchial tree, pulmonary
cysts, or cavities. Balls of hyphae within cysts or
cavities (aspergillomas) may form and can reachseveral centimeters in diameter.
Clinical Manifestations
/square6Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA)can occur in patients with asthma and cystic fibrosisand lead to worsening of wheezing and breathless-ness.
/square6Invasive aspergillosis pneumonia can occur inimmunosuppressed individuals and is difficult totreat. Aspergillus may invade immunosuppressedpatients through the skin at a site of minor traumaor through the upper airway mucosa. Rapidextension into the adjacent paranasal sinus, orbit,or face is common. Patients usually have a history
of chronic allergic rhinitis, and present with painless
proptosis, nasal obstruction, or dull aching pain.CT or MRI scan shows a solid mass pushing outthe lateral wall of the ethmoid sinus or the medialwall of the maxillary sinus.
/square6Aspergillus can grow on cerumen and detrituswithin the external auditory canal and is calledotomycosis.
/square6Other manifestations include aspergillus keratitis,endophthalmitis, and infection of intracardiac orintravascular prostheses.
Diagnosis
/square6Detection of hyphae in clinical specimens suggests
infection.
/square6Fungus ball in the lung is detectable by chest
X-ray.
/square6IgG antibody to Aspergillus antigens is found inmany colonized patients and almost all patientswith fungus ball. Serum IgE antibody is raised inallergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis.
/square6Biopsy is required for the diagnosis of invasiveaspergillosis of the lungs, nose, and paranasalsinuses, etc.
/square6Blood cultures rarely yield positive results.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
196Treatment
/square6Fungus ball of the lung usually requires lobectomy.
/square6Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis responds
to short courses of steroids.
/square6Invasive aspergillosis is treated with voriconazole,or itraconazole or liposomal or conventional
amphotericin B.
Q.Mucormycosis: Zygomycosis.
Q.Rhinocerebral mucormycosis.
/square6Mucormycosis (zygomycosis, phycomycosis) refers
to opportunistic infections caused by members ofthe genera Rhizopus, Mucor, Absidia , and Cunning-
hamella .
/square6Predisposing factors are:
– Diabetic ketoacidosis
– Chronic renal failure
– Desferoxamine therapy
– AIDS
– Corticosteroids or cytotoxic drugs
/square6Infection commonly involves sinuses, orbits, and
the lungs. Disseminated infection can occur inimmunocompromised and those receiving chemo-therapy
Clinical Features
/square6The most common clinical presentation of mucor-mycosis is rhinocerebral infection. Here theinfection involves the nose, paranasal sinuses andthen spreads to orbit and adjacent brain. It shouldbe suspected in patients with black necrotic lesionsof the nose or sinuses with cranial nerve palsies.
Prognosis is poor in rhinocerebral mucormycosis.
Diagnosis
/square6Diagnosis is by demonstrating characteristic fungal
hyphae in secretions and biopsy specimens.Cultures are frequently negative.
Treatment
/square6Treatment is by high-dose amphotericin B (1–1.5mg/kg/d intravenously) or a lipid preparation of
amphotericin B for prolonged periods. Posacona-
zole is also effective. Control of diabetes and otherunderlying conditions is important. Extensivesurgical removal of necrotic involved tissue isessential for cure.
Q.Sporotrichosis.
/square6Sporotrichosis is a chronic fungal infection caused
by Sporothrix schenckii.
/square6It is seen worldwide but most cases occur in
Americas and Japan. It is found in soil, sphagnummoss, and decaying wood./square6Infection takes place when the organism isinoculated into the skin—usually on the hand, arm,or foot, especially during gardening. Pulmonaryinfection develops after inhalation. Invasive infec-tion can occur in immunocompromised persons.
/square6Lymphocutaneous sporotrichosis is the commonestform seen. A nodule develops at the site of inocula-tion. This later becomes adherent to the overlyingskin and ulcerates. Within a few days to weeks,similar nodules develop along the lymphatics
draining this area, and these may ulcerate as well.
The lymphatic vessels become indurated and areeasily palpable.
/square6Diagnosis is by culture of the organism. Detection
of antibody is useful for diagnosis of disseminated
disease, especially meningitis.
/square6Treatment for localized disease is by itraconazole,200–400 mg orally daily for several months.
Terbinafine, 500 mg twice daily, is also effective.
Systemic infection is treated by intravenousamphotericin-B.
/square6Prognosis is good in lymphocutaneous sporo-
trichosis, and bad in systemic disease.
Q.Adult immunization (vaccination).
/square6Immunization enables the body to better defend
itself against diseases caused by certain bacteria orviruses. When people are immunized against adisease, they usually do not get the disease or getonly a mild form of the disease. However, becauseno vaccine is 100% effective, some people who have
been immunized still may get the disease.
/square6Many diseases have been eradicated by immuniza-
tion practice. Example is smallpox which has beeneradicated. Polio is also about to be eradicated by
polio vaccination programmes.
/square6There are two types of immunization:
– Active immunization (by using vaccines)
– Passive immunization (by using antibodies)
Adult Vaccination
/square6Routine immunization against various diseases is
given for all children. Similarly, adults are also atrisk of developing many diseases and many
vaccines are recommended for them also.
Vaccines may be made from one of the following:
/square6Non-infectious fragments of bacteria or viruses (e.g.
hepatitis B vaccine).
/square6A toxin that is produced by a bacteria but has beenmodified to be harmless called a toxoid (e.g. tetanus,
toxoid).
/square6Weakened (attenuated), live whole organisms thatdo not cause illness (e.g. oral polio vaccine).
/square6Following vaccines are recommended for all adultsunless there are contraindications. Certain vaccines

/square6Infectious Diseases97
1TABLE 1.20
Disease Who should be vaccinated Dose and administration Major brands available
Chickenpox (varicella) All adults who have not had 2-dose series 4–8 weeks apart Varilrix
the vaccine or the disease
Varicella zoster or herpes All adults above 50 years It is given as a 2-dose series, Shingrix
zoster with the second shot admini-
stered 2 to 6 months after thefirst shot
Tetanus and diphtheria All adults as a combination booster Every 10 years TENIVAC
vaccine with tetanus. Tetanus Given IM into deltoid TDVAX
vaccine alone can be given if
there is a contaminated wound
Pertussis (whooping cough) All adults (usually given as a Given IM into deltoid BOOSTRIX (this is a 3 in
combination vaccine with tetanus one vaccine)
and diphtheria (Tdap—tetanus,
diphtheria, and acellular pertussis)if they have not already been
vaccinated
Pregnant women during eachpregnancy
Haemophilus influenzae  type b Adults who have not been vacci- Single dose given IM into deltoid HIBERIX
infections (such as meningitis) nated and who are at increased
risk, such as the following:
• People who do not have a
functioning spleen
• People who have a weakened
immune system (such as those
with AIDS)
• People who have had chemo-
therapy for cancer
• People who have had stem cell
transplantation
Hepatitis A All adults who have not been 2-dose series 6–12 months apart Havrix
vaccinated
Hepatitis B All adults who have not been 3 doses at 0,1, and 6 months. ENGE RIX-B
vaccinated Booster dose every 5 years. SHANVAC-B
Given IM into deltoid
Influenza All people over age 6 months Given IM into deltoid every year
Pneumococcal infections Adults at increased risk, such as Single dose IM deltoid PREN VAR-13
(such as meningitis and those aged 65 and above, thosepneumonia) with COPD, chronic heart disease,
and diabetes.
Typhoid vaccine Adults at increased risk especially Given as IM injection into deltoid. SHANTYPH
travellers Can be repeated evry 2 to 4 years. TYPBAR
Oral vaccine is also available TYPHERIX
(TYPHORAL) and is given as Typhoral capsulesone capsule on alternate day
for 3 doses
are recommended routinely for all adults at certain
ages who have not previously been vaccinated orhave no evidence of previous infection. Othervaccines (e.g. rabies, typhoid, yellow fever) are not
routinely given but are recommended only forspecific people and circumstances.

2
98Q.Lung defense mechanisms.
/square6The air that we breathe contains potentially harmful
particles, gases, and infectious agents. Particles,such as dust and soot, mold, fungi, bacteria, andviruses deposit on airway and alveolar surfaces.Fortunately, there are many defense mechanismsin the respiratory tract which protect us from thesepotentially harmful agents. Pulmonary diseaseoften results from a failure of many of these defense
mechanisms.
/square6The defense mechanisms of lungs are as follows.
Nasal Hair and Mucosal Secretions
/square6Over 90% of particles greater than 10 microns are
trapped by the mucus and hair in the nose.
Humidification
/square6It happens in the nose and upper respiratory tract.It prevents dehydration of the epithelium.
Coughing, Sneezing or Gagging
/square6These physiological mechanisms expel any particlesor foreign bodies that are inhaled.
Mucociliary Layer of Respiratory Tract
/square6The epithelium of respiratory tract is covered by alayer of mucus secreted by goblet cells and mucous
glands. The respiratory epithelium is also coveredby cilia which are in contact with the under surfaceof the mucus layer. Smaller particles get trappedin this mucus blanket. The cilia push the mucusblanket upwards along with the trapped particles.
Cigarette smoking reduces ciliary action. In the
‘immotile cilia’ syndrome and cystic fibrosis there is
reduced ciliary function, leading to stagnation ofsecretions and recurrent infections.Diseases of Respiratory System
/square6Lysozyme, lactoferrin or peroxide are present
within the mucus. These substances provide non-specific first-line of defence to invasion by micro-
organisms.
Secretary IgA
/square6This is present in mucus secretion which provides
local immunity within the lumen of airways.
Alpha 1 Antitrypsin
/square6This is  present in lung secretions. It inhibits chymo-
trypsin and trypsin and neutralizes proteases andelastase which cause damage to lung tissue.
Cellular Defenses
/square6Epithelial cells of airways and alveoli:  They produce
surfactant proteins which enhance the phagocytosisand killing of microbes.
/square6Pulmonary alveolar macrophages: They phagocytize
foreign particles and bacteria which reach the alveoli.
/square6Lymphoid tissue:  The lung contains large numbers
of lymphocytes which scattered throughout the
airways. These lymphocytes contribute to local
immunity through differentiation into IgA-secreting
plasma cells.
Q.Pulmonary function tests.
Q.Vital capacity (VC).
Q.Peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR) and its uses.
/square6Pulmonary function tests are used to measure
airflow rates, lung volumes, and gaseous exchange
across the alveolar-capillary membrane.
/square6Many test results depend on the effort of patient,
and suboptimal effort is a common cause of mis-interpretation of results. All pulmonary function
tests are measured against predicted values derived

/square6Diseases of Respiratory System99
2from large studies of healthy subjects. These predic-
tions depend on age, sex, height and weight of thepatient.
Indications for Pulmonary Function Testing
/square6Assessment of the type and severity of lung dys-function.
/square6Diagnosis of causes of dyspnea and cough.
/square6Monitoring lung function in certain occupations athigh risk of lung damage (e.g. mine workers).
/square6Monitoring response to treatment.
/square6Preoperative assessment.
/square6Disability evaluation.
Contraindications to Pulmonary Function Testing
/square6Acute severe asthma
/square6Respiratory distress
/square6Angina
/square6Pneumothorax
/square6Hemoptysis
/square6Active tuberculosis.
Spirometry
/square6Spirometry is measurement of lung volumes andairflow rates by an instrument called spirometer.
/square6The volume of gas in the lungs is divided into
volumes and capacities. Tidal volume (VT) is the
amount of gas inhaled and exhaled during a normalbreath. Residual volume (RV) is the amount of gasremaining in the lungs at the end of a maximalexhalation. Vital capacity (VC) is the total amountof gas that can be exhaled following a maximal
inhalation. FVC is maximal volume of air exhaled
with maximally forced effort after maximalinspiration, i.e. vital capacity performed with amaximally forced expiratory effort. The vitalcapacity and the residual volume together consti-
tute the total lung capacity (TLC). The functionalresidual capacity (FRC) is the amount of gas in thelungs at the end of normal expiration.
/square6FEV1 (forced expiratory volume in the first second)
is the amount of gas exhaled during the first secondafter inhaling to maximum capacity. Normal FEV1is about 80%. The ratio of the FEV
1 to the FVC (often
referred to as the FEV1%) is diminished in patients
with obstructive lung diseases such as asthma and
COPD.
/square6All lung volumes can be measured by spirometry
except residual volume (RV), functional residualcapacity (FRC), and total lung capacity (TLC). These
are measured by helium dilution and body
plethysmography.
/square6Measurement of lung volumes gives an idea aboutthe presence and severity of obstructive and restric-
tive pulmonary dysfunction. Obstructive dysfunc-
tion is characterized by a fall in the ratio of FEV
1 to
FVC. Causes of obstructive dysfunction includeasthma, COPD, bronchiectasis, bronchiolitis, andupper airway obstruction. Restrictive dysfunctionis characterized a reduction in lung volumes with
a normal to increased FEV
1/FVC ratio. Causes
include interstitial lung diseases, weak respiratorymuscles, pleural disease, and prior lung resection.
Peak Expiratory Flow Rate (PEFR)
/square6It measures the maximum expiratory flow rate overthe first 10 milli seconds during a forced expiration.It is measured by a peak flow meter. The patienttakes a deep breath and blows as hard as possible
into the instrument. A pointer on the calibrated dial
of the instrument moves indicating PEFR. Thenormal PEFR for men is 450 to 700 L/min and 300to 500 L/min for women.
Figure 2.1

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
2100 /square6PEFR is reduced in airway narrowing and expira-
tory muscle weakness. PEF values less than 200 L/min indicate severe airflow obstruction. PEFRmonitoring can quantify asthma severity, andprovide an objective measurement for monitoringresponse to therapy in asthma. Predicted values
for PEFR vary with age, sex, and height. PEFR
shows diurnal variation. It is lowest on first
awakening and highest many hours later. PEFRshould be measured in the morning before taking
bronchodilator and in the afternoon after taking abronchodilator.
Diffusing Capacity of Lungs forCarbon Monoxide (DLCO)
/square6This reflects the diffusibility of gas across thealveolar/capillary membrane. It is helpful in
evaluation of patients with diffuse infiltrative lung
disease or emphysema. DLCO is low in emphysemaand interstitial lung diseases whereas it is normalor high in asthma. DLCO is a useful screening testfor patients with AIDS who are suspected to havePneumocystis pneumoniae . A normal DLCO is strong
evidence against Pneumocystis pneumonia.
Arterial Blood Gas (ABG)
/square6ABG measurement is indicated whenever acid–
base disturbance, hypoxemia, or hypercapnia is
suspected.
Pulse Oximetry
/square6This is a noninvasive method of monitoring oxygen
saturation of blood.
Cardiopulmonary Exercise Stress Testing
/square6This is done in patients with unexplained dyspnea.A bicycle ergometer or treadmill is used. Minuteventilation, expired oxygen and carbon dioxide
tension, heart rate, blood pressure, and respiratory
rate are monitored.
Q.Enumerate the common signs and symptoms of
respiratory disease.
Following are the common signs and symptoms of
respiratory disease.
/square6Cough
/square6Hemoptysis
/square6Dyspnea
/square6Wheezing
/square6Chest pain (pleuritic, musculoskeletal)
/square6Cyanosis
/square6Clubbing
/square6Pedal edema (due to cor pulmonale).Q.Enumerate the causes and differential diagnosis of
cough.
Q.Discuss the approach to a case of cough.
/square6Cough is a forced expulsive maneuver, usually
against a closed glottis and which is associated witha characteristic sound. Cough clears and protects the
airways. It is the most frequent symptom of respira-tory disease and is one of the most common cause
for which medical consultation is sought.
/square6Cough is initiated by the irritation of cough
receptors which exist in the epithelium of the upperand lower respiratory tracts. Cough receptors also
exist in the pericardium, esophagus, diaphragm,
and stomach. Impulses from stimulated coughreceptors travel through afferent nerves (vagus,glossopharyngeal, trigeminal, or phrenic) and goto a “cough center” in the medulla. The coughcenter generates efferent signals which travel
through vagus, phrenic, and spinal motor nerves
to expiratory musculature to produce the cough.
/square6The explosive quality of a normal cough is lost inpatients with respiratory muscle paralysis or vocal
cord palsy. Vocal cord palsy gives rise to low-
pitched, inefficient ‘bovine’ cough accompanied byhoarseness.
Causes of Cough
Based on the duration, cough can be classified as,
Acute cough:  It presents for less than three weeks.
/square6Causes:  Upper respiratory tract infection (such as
common cold, pharyngitis), acute bronchitis,aspiration event, inhalation of noxious chemicalsor smoke, pulmonary embolism.
Subacute cough:  Lasts three to eight weeks  (pneumonia)
/square6Causes: Tracheobronchitis, such as in pertussis or
“post-viral tussive syndrome.
Chronic cough:  Lasts more than eight weeks
/square6Causes: Asthma, COPD, bronchogenic ca, tuber-
culosis, bronchiectasis, tropical pulmonary eosino-
philia, postnasal drip, gastroesophageal refluxdisease, interstitial lung diseases (ILD), pulmonaryedema due to cardiac failure, ACE inhibitors.
History
Age and Sex
/square6Bronchogenic carcinoma (Ca) and COPD are morecommon in elderly males. Asthma is more commonin females.
Onset
/square6Cough of sudden onset may be associated withforeign body aspiration, allergic reactions and pulmo-nary edema due to left ventricular failure. Insidiousonset cough occurs in COPD, interstitial lung
diseases, chronic lung infections such as TB, etc.

/square6Diseases of Respiratory System101
2Is the Cough Dry/Productive?
/square6Significant sputum production suggests primary
pulmonary pathology (such as pneumonia, lung
abscess, bronchiectasis). Dry cough is more likelyto be associated with upper airway infections such
as rhinitis, pharyngitis, etc.
Associated Symptoms
/square6Presence of wheezing along with cough suggests
bronchial asthma, acute bronchitis, COPD, eosino-
philic pneumonia, tropical pulmonary eosinophilia,
etc. Presence of breathlessness can occur in pneu-monia, acute exacerbation of asthma and COPD,
or significant pleural pathology. Presence of fever
usually suggests an infectious etiology for cough.
Diurnal Variation in Cough
/square6Asthma has early morning cough. Cough due to
gastroesophageal reflux may increase after food
intake and at night due to recumbent position.Pulmonary edema due to heart failure can cause
coughing at night which wakes patients (PND).
Intake of any Medications
/square6ACE inhibitors can cause cough.Smoking
/square6One of the commonest causes of persistent cough
is smoking. Smoking also leads to COPD and lungcancer which can present as cough.
Occupation
/square6Dust/chemical exposure in certain occupations cancause cough. For example, coal mine workers maydevelop chronic cough.
Investigations
/square6Acute cough usually does not require any investiga-tions. It should be treated symptomatically (withantitussives for dry cough and expectorants for pro-
ductive cough).  Indications for investigation in acute
cough include hemoptysis, prominent systemicillness, suspicion of inhaled foreign body andsuspicion of lung cancer. However, chronic choughrequires many of the following investigations.
Chest X-ray
/square6It can show any pleural or parenchymal pathologysuch as effusion, pneumonia, mass lesions, etc.
Sinus Imaging (X-ray or Sinus CT Scan)
/square6To rule out sinusitis.TABLE 2.1: Differential diagnosis of cough
Site of origin Causes Clinical features
Pharynx Postnasal drip due to sinusitis, rhinitis History of rhinitis
Pharyngitis Sore throat, fever
Larynx Laryngitis, tumor, whooping cough, History of hoarseness of voice, painful cough, fever. Stridor
croup may be present in severe laryngitis
Trachea Tracheitis Retrosternal pain with cough
Bronchi Acute bronchitis Dry or productive cough. Worse in mornings. Wheezing present
Asthma Usually dry, worse at night. Associated wheezing is usually
present. Asthma-related cough may be seasonal and mayworsen upon exposure to cold, dry air, or certain fumes or
fragrances
COPD Most patients are smokers. Sputum is usually scanty and
mucoid. Associated wheezing is usually present
Bronchogenic ca Persistent cough often with hemoptysis. Patient is usually a
chronic smoker. Weight loss may be present
Lung parenchyma Tuberculosis Productive, often with hemoptysis. Low grade fever may be
present along with weight loss
Pneumonia Initially dry, later associated with sputum production
Bronchiectasis Sputum is mucopurulent and large quantity. Changes in
posture induces sputum production
Pulmonary edema Often at night. Pink, frothy sputum may be produced. Signs
and symptoms of cardiac failure present
Interstitial lung disease Dry, irritant and distressing cough. Associated exertional
dyspnea is usually present initially on exertion and later atrest also
Miscellaneous GERD Cough is usually nocturnal. Heartburn may be present
(extrapulmonary ACE inhibitors Dry cough. It follows initiation of ACE inhibitors
causes) Irritation of the external auditory canal Dry cough. Ear pain and discharge may be present
by impacted foreign bodies or cerumen

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
2102 Spirometry
/square6Spirometry should be performed in all patients with
chronic cough. It is helpful in diagnosing cough dueto asthma and COPD.
High Resolution Computed Tomographic (HRCT)
Scanning of Chest
/square6HRCT scanning may be of useful for diagnosingbronchiectasis, interstitial lung diseases or detailedevaluation of any lung pathology.
Bronchial Provocation Testing
/square6Should be done in patients without a clinicallyobvious etiology for cough.
Bronchoscopy
/square6Bronchoscopy should be done if inhalation of a foreignbody or endobronchial pathology is suspected.
24 hours Esophageal pH Monitoring
/square6To rule out gastroesophageal reflux disease as acause of cough.
Treatment of Cough
/square6Treat the underlying cause for cough
/square6Symptomatic management of cough involves useof cough suppressants (such as codeine, dextro-methorphan, levocloperastine) for dry cough andexpectorants for productive cough. Do not suppress
a productive cough.
Complications of Cough
/square6Cough syncope, rib fracture, pneumothorax,
development of hernias.
Q.Define clubbing. Enumerate the causes and
mechanism of clubbing.
/square6Clubbing is enlargement of soft tissues in the
terminal phalanges leading to both transverseand longitudinal curving of nails. Longitudinalcurving of nails leads to loss of angle between
the nail and nail bed. Normally this angle is less
than 160 degrees. In clubbing it is more than 160degrees.Causes of Clubbing
RS
• Pulmonary tuberculosis
• Lung abscess
• Bronchiectasis• Bronchogenic carcinoma
• Mesothelioma
• Interstitial lung disease• Empyema
• Cystic fibrosis
CVS
• Infective endocarditis
• Cyanotic congenital heart diseases
• Atrial myxoma
GIT
• Ulcerative colitis
• Crohn’s disease• Primary biliary cirrhosis
• Hepatocellular carcinoma
Endocrine
• Acromegaly
• Myxedema
Miscellaneous
• Hereditary
• Unilateral clubbing—pancost tumor, subclavian artery
aneurysm
• Unidigital clubbing—trauma
• Idiopathic
Grading of Clubbing
/square6Grade I.  Softening of nail bed. Fluctuation is present
at this stage.
/square6Grade II. Loss of angle between the nail and nail bed.
/square6Grade III.  Parrot beak appearance nail or drumstick
appearance of the digit.
/square6Grade IV.  Swelling of fingers in all dimensions
associated with hypertrophic pulmonary osteo-arthropathy.
Mechanism of Clubbing
/square6The exact mechanism is unknown.
/square6It is believed that chronic hypoxia is the main
triggering factor for the development of clubbing.
Chronic hypoxia leads to opening of arteriovenousfistulas which increase the blood supply to digitsand toes leading to soft tissue hypertrophy.
Q.Define dyspnea. What are the mechanisms of
dyspnea?
Q.Enumerate the causes of dyspnea.
Q.Give the differential diagnosis of acute onset
dyspnea.
/square6Dyspnea (or breathlessness) refers to the abnormal
and uncomfortable awareness of breathing.
/square6Dyspnea can be acute or chronic. Acute dyspneadevelops over minutes to hours. Chronic dyspneadevelops over weeks to months.
Figure 2.2

/square6Diseases of Respiratory System103
2TABLE 2.3: Causes of dyspnea
Acute dyspnea Chronic dyspnea
Cardiovascular • Acute pulmonary edema • Chronic heart failure
• Acute myocardial ischemia • IHD• Cardiac tamponade
Respiratory • Acute severe asthma • COPD
• Acute exacerbation of COPD • Chronic asthma• Pneumothorax • Bronchial carcinoma
• Pneumonia • Interstitial lung disease
• Pulmonary embolism • Chronic pulmonary thromboembolism• ARDS • Lymphangitis carcinomatosis• Foreign body aspiration • Pleural effusion• Laryngeal edema (e.g. anaphylaxis)
Others • Metabolic acidosis (e.g. diabetic ketoacidosis, • Severe anemia
lactic acidosis, uremia, overdose of salicylates, • Obesity
ethylene glycol poisoning)
• Psychogenic hyperventilation (anxiety or
panic-related)
TABLE 2.4: Differential diagnosis of acute dyspnea
Condition Clinical features Investigations
Pulmonary edema (due to LVF) History:  Chest pain, orthopnea, palpitations. Chest X-ray: Cardiomegaly. Prominent pulmo-
Previous history of cardiac problems. nary vasculature. Pleural effusion may be
Expectoration of pink frothy sp utum. present.
Examination:  Central cyanosis, raised JVP,
sweating, cool extremities, B/L basal lung
crepitations. S3 and S4 may be present.
Acute pulmonary embolism History:  Risk factors for DVT present (recent Chest X-ray: Prominent hilar vessels, oligaemic
major surgery, immobilization, stroke). lung fields, prominent pulmonary artery.
Sudden onset pleuritic chest pain, hemoptysis, ECG may show signs of pulmonary embolism
syncope. such as, S1Q3T3 pattern and right bundle-
Examination:  Central cyanosis, elevated JVP, branch block.
hypotension. Signs of DVT in the lower limbs. Echo shows dilated pulmonary artery, dilatedBreath sounds normal. right ventricle.
Acute severe asthma History:  Dyspnea associated with wheezing, Chest X-ray shows hyperinflation. ECG normal.
previous history of asthma. Response to PEFR reduced.bronchodilators.
Examination:  Bilateral polyphonic rhonchi
present over the lungs. Usually no crepitations.Prolonged expiration. Tachycardia, pulsus
paradoxus and cyanosis may be present.
(Contd.)TABLE 2.2: Mechanisms of dyspnea
Mechanisms of dyspnea Causes
Stimulation of intrapulmonary sensory nerves • Interstitial inflammation
• Pulmonary embolism
Increase in the mechanical load on the respiratory muscles • Airflow obstruction
• Pulmonary fibrosis
Stimulation of chemoreceptors • Hypoxia
• Hypercapnia• Acidosis
Reduction of lung compliance • Pulmonary edema
• Severe kyphoscoliosis• Pleural effusion• Pneumothorax

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
2104 TABLE 2.4: Differential diagnosis of acute dyspnea (Contd.)
Condition Clinical features Investigations
Acute exacerbation of COPD History:  Smoking history present. H istory of Chest X-ray: Hyperinflation, increased broncho-
similar episodes in the past. History of vascular markings, signs of emphysema.
wheezing present.Examination:  Cyanosis, signs of COPD such ECG usually normal, but may show signs of
as increased AP diameter of chest, pushed pulmonary HTN.down diaphragm. Signs of CO
2 retention
(warm periphery, flapping tremor, bounding
pulses).
Pneumonia History:  Fever with chills and rigors. Cough Chest X-ray: Pneumonic shadow.
with purulent sputum. Pleuritic chest pain Total leukocyte count high.in lobar pneumonia. ECG normal.Examination:  Signs of consolidation present.
Crepitations present. Pleural rub may be
present if there is associated pleurisy. Signsof pleural effusion may be present if there issyn-pneumonic effusion.
Metabolic acidosis History of diabetes/renal failure present. Chest-ray and ECG normal.
Oliguria or anuria in renal failure. History of ABG shows metabolic acidosis.
ingestion of ethylene glycol, methanol etc. Ketone bodies present in urine in diabetic can
which produce metabolic acidosis. ketoacidosis.
Examination:  Smell of acetone in diabetic Urea and creatinine high in renal failure.
ketoacidosis. Anemia present in CRF. Pedaledema in renal failure.
Psychogenic hyperventilation History:  Previous similar episodes. History of All investigations are normal.
stressful event preceding the attack. Common
in young  women.
Examination:  No cyanosis. CVS and RS normal.
Carpopedal spasm present due to hyper-ventilation induced respiratory alkalosisleading to low calcium.
Pneumothorax History:  Sudden onset unilateral chest pain. Chest X-ray: Shows pneumothorax.
History of wheezing absent. ECG normal.Examination:  Signs of pneumothorax present
(trachea deviated to opposite side, hyper-resonant percussion note, absent breathsounds).
Upper airway obstruction History:  Stridor present. Hoarseness of voice Chest X-ray may be normal or may show
(foreign body aspiration, may be present. Patient may be unable to foreign body if it is radio-opaque.
laryngeal edema) speak. Direct laryngoscopy or bronchoscopy may
Examination : Inspiratory sound localized to show laryngeal edema or foreign body.
trachea or larynx. Lungs and heart normal. ECG normal.
• Localised pneumonia • Single metastasis
• Lung abscess • Lymphoma
• Pulmonary infarct
• Arteriovenous malformation• Hamartoma
• Hydatid cyst
• Bronchogenic cyst• Rheumatoid nodule
• Pulmonary sequestration
• Pulmonary hematoma• ‘Pseudotumor’ (fluid collection
in a fissure)
• Aspergilloma (usually surrounded
by air ‘halo’)
Diagnosis
/square6The main task is to distinguish between malignant
and benign nodules. Malignant nodules should be
excised whereas benign nodules may be left behind.Q.Solitary pulmonary nodule (SPN).
/square6Solitary pulmonary nodule (SPN) or “coin lesion”
is a lesion less than 3 cm that is both within andsurrounded by pulmonary parenchyma.
/square6A “nodule” is called a “mass” when the size is more
than 3 or 4 cm. SPN is a common clinical problem and
is detected incidentally on a chest X-ray or CT scan.
/square6The differential diagnosis of SPN is broad. The mainquestion that has to be answered is whether it is
malignant or benign.
Causes of Solitary Pulmonary Nodule
Benign causes Malignant causes
• Infectious granulomas (tuberculoma, • Primary lung
histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis) cancer
• Wegener’s granuloma • Carcinoid tumor

/square6Diseases of Respiratory System105
2/square6It is not always possible to distinguish between
malignant and benign lesions noninvasively.However, certain clinical and radiological featuresmay help in this aspect.
/square6Clinical features suggesting more chances ofmalignancy are:
–Advanced age:  More than 50 percent nodules are
malignant at the age of 60 or above
– History of smoking or asbestos exposure– Previous history of malignancy
/square6Radiographic features suggestive of malignancy
are:
–Size:  Larger lesions are more likely to be
malignant than smaller lesions.
– Irregular border
–Growth:  Fast growing nodules are likely to be
malignant
– Presence of calcification goes in favor of benign
lesion. If the nodule remains same size on
repeated imaging, it goes in favor of benignlesion.
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray
/square6CT-scan chest
/square6PET scan can noninvasively distinguish betweenbenign and malignant lesions.
/square6FNAC or biopsy is the gold standard to confirm orrule out malignancy.
Management
/square6If the probability of nodule being malignant is high,it should be resected.
/square6If the probability of nodule being malignant is low,it should be followed with serial CT scan. PET scanor sampling of the nodule may be alternatives forpatients who are uncomfortable with a strategy ofobservation.
Q.Define hemoptysis. Discuss the causes, clinical
features, investigations and management of
hemoptysis.
/square6Hemoptysis  is coughing out of blood that originates
below the vocal cords.
/square6Hemoptysis is often a sign of serious disease.
/square6Non-pulmonary sources of hemorrhage—from the
nose or the gastrointestinal tract—should be excluded.
/square6It is classified as trivial, mild, or massive.
/square6Massive hemoptysis usually refers to the expectora-tion of a large amount of blood and/or to a rapidrate of bleeding. There is no universally acceptedvolume of blood that defines massive hemoptysisbut generally more than 200–600 mL in 24 hours
indicates massive hemoptysis./square6A useful clinical definition of massive hemoptysis
is hemoptysis that results in a life-threatening eventincluding significant airway obstruction, significantabnormal gas exchange, or hemodynamic insta-bility. It is better to use the term “life-threateninghemoptysis” rather than massive hemoptysis.
/square6Lungs have two sources of blood supply. Thepulmonary arteries which arise from the rightventricle and bronchial arteries which arise fromthe aorta or intercostal arteries both supply the
lungs. The bronchial arterial circulation is a high-
pressure circuit. Though it contributes to only1–2% of total pulmonary blood flow, bronchialcirculation is frequently the source of hemoptysis.
Causes of Hemoptysis
Respiratory causes
• Tuberculosis (most common cause worldwide)• Chronic bronchitis• Bronchiectasis• Bronchogenic carcinoma• Bronchial adenoma• Aspergilloma• Pulmonary embolism• Pneumonia• Lung abscess• Arteriovenous malformations
Cardiac causes
• Left ventricular failure• Mitral stenosisHematologic causes• Thrombocytopenia• Hemophilia• DIC
Iatrogenic
• After transbronchial lung biopsies, bronchoscopy, etc.
Miscellaneous
• Endometriosis• Goodpasture’s disease• Wegener’s granulomatosis
Clinical Features
/square6Patient gives h/o of blood-streaking of sputum or
frank hemoptysis.
/square6Patient is usually anxious.
/square6Massive hemoptysis may have signs of hemo-dynamic compromise such as tachycardia, hypo-tension and cold peripheries.
/square6Symptoms and signs of underlying disease causinghemoptysis may be present.
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray should be done in all cases and mayshow underlying pathology.
/square6Hemoglobin, PCV, complete blood count, including
platelet count, renal function tests, urinalysis, and
coagulation studies should be done.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
2106 /square6High-resolution CT can diagnose unsuspected
bronchiectasis and arteriovenous malformationsand can also show central endobronchial lesions inmany cases.
/square6Rigid or fiberoptic bronchoscopy can be done, ifthe cause of hemoptysis is not evident from non-invasive tests.
Management
/square6The cause of hemoptysis needs to be identified andtreated.
/square6Massive hemoptysis is life-threatening. Attentionshould be given to airway, breathing, and circula-tion (ABCs). Patient should be placed in the lateraldecubitus position with the involved lung depen-
dent so that the blood does not enter the other lung
/square6Volume expansion by using IV fluids or blood trans-
fusion is required to maintain blood circulation.
/square6Cough suppressants such as codeine syrup andmild sedation (with benzodiazepines) are helpful.
/square6Nebulized adrenaline can cause pulmonary
vasoconstriction and reduce hemoptysis.
/square6Oral tranexamic acid (500 mg tds)
/square6Uncontrollable hemoptysis needs rigid broncho-
scopy and specific intervention. Angiography andembolization of the involved bronchial arteries isanother option.
/square6Lung resection should be considered if the bleedingsite is localized and not responding to any of theabove measures.
Q.Describe the etiology, clinical features and treat-
ment of acute rhinitis (common cold, acute coryza).
Etiology
/square6Rhinoviruses, coronaviruses, influenza and para-
influenza viruses, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV),etc. Rhinoviruses are the commonest cause.
Epidemiology
/square6It is more common in children and incidencedecreases with advancing age.
/square6Common cold is a major cause of absenteeism fromschool and the work place. The disease spreadsthrough infected droplets. There is no evidence thatexposure to cold temperatures, fatigue, or sleep
deprivation causes increased incidence of common
cold.
Transmission
/square6Common cold viruses can be spread by directcontact and aerosols.
Clinical Features
/square6The incubation period for most common cold
viruses is 24 to 72 hours./square6Sneezing, nasal congestion with rhinorrhea, mild
malaise, photophobia and watering of eyes.Secondary infection causes the discharge to turnmucopurulent. Nasal obstruction which usuallyalternates. Dry cough may be noted due to post-nasal discharge.
/square6Examination shows congested nasal mucosa withsecretions.
Treatment
/square6Treatment is mainly symptomatic. Antihistamineslike cetirizine, loratidine, etc. can be used to decreasenasal discharge. Topical decongestants may be use-
ful to decrease nasal blockage. Antipyretics can be
used for headache and bodyache. Vit C supplemen-tation may help in decreasing the severity of attack.
Complications
/square6Sinusitis.
/square6Lower respiratory tract disease —pneumonia, acute
bronchitis.
/square6Exacerbation of congestive heart failure, COPD, and
asthma attacks.
/square6Otitis media.
Q.Acute bronchitis.
/square6Acute bronchitis is inflammation of medium sized
airways.
/square6It usually develops as a complication of an upper
respiratory tract infection or as an exacerbation of
acute infection in COPD.
Etiology
/square6It is usually due to viral infections, such as adeno-virus, rhinovirus or influenza virus in adults andrespiratory syncytial virus or parainfluenza virusin children and the elderly.
/square6Secondary bacterial infection with Strep. pneumoniae
and H. influenzae  can occur.
/square6Atypical infections with Mycoplasma pneumoniae,
Chlamydia pneumoniae  and Chlamydia psittaci  can
rarely present as acute bronchitis.
Clinical Features
/square6Patient complains of fever, malaise and dry cough.
There can be scanty mucoid sputum which may
later become mucopurulent. Dyspnea with
wheezing is usually present.
/square6Examination shows diffuse B/L rhonchi on auscul-tation. There may be signs of upper respiratory tract
infection.
Investigations
/square6Chest C-ray is usually normal. Total leukocyte
count may be high. Sputum Gram stain and culture
can give an idea about the infecting organism.

/square6Diseases of Respiratory System107
2/square6Airway hyperresponsiveness: Airway hyper-
responsiveness is due to chronic inflammation ofthe airways, which leads to bronchospasm andtypical symptoms of wheezing, shortness of breath,and coughing after exposure to allergens, environ-mental irritants, viruses, cold air, or exercise.
/square6Gender: Asthma predominantly occurs in boys in
childhood, with a male-to-female ratio of 2:1 untilpuberty. After puberty there is equal incidence.
/square6Ethnicity: Asthma is more common in industrialized
western countries
/square6Obesity: Obese individuals seem to be at higher risk
of developing asthma.
Environmental Factors
/square6Allergens:  Inhaled allergens are common triggers of
asthma symptoms and have also been implicated
in allergic sensitization. Exposure to house dust mites
in early childhood is a risk factor for allergic sensiti-zation and asthma. Domestic pets, particularly cats,have also been associated with allergic sensitization.
/square6Diet:  The role of dietary factors is controversial.
Observational studies have shown that diets lowin antioxidants such as vitamin C and vitamin A,magnesium, selenium, and omega-3 polyun-saturated fats (fish oil) or high in sodium andomega-6 polyunsaturated fats are associated with
an increased risk of asthma. Vitamin D deficiency
may also predispose to the development of asthma.
/square6Air pollution: Air pollutants such as sulfur dioxide,
ozone, and diesel particulates, may trigger asthma
symptoms, but the role of different air pollutants
in the etiology of the disease is less certain.
/square6Occupational sensitizers:  Exposure to chemicals such
as toluene diisocyanate and trimellitic anhydride,
may lead to sensitization independent of atopy.
Individuals may also be exposed to allergens in theworkplace such as small animal allergens inlaboratory workers and fungal amylase in wheatflour in bakers.
/square6Respiratory infections:  Though many vial illnesses
(rhinovirus, respiratory syncitial virus) have beenknown to trigger asthma attack, their role inetiology is uncertain. Many patients with asthmahave coexistent sinusitis.
Pathogenesis
/square6Basically, asthmatics have bronchial hyper-responsiveness compared to normal people. Hence,stimuli that normally produce no clinical responsecan produce clinical symptoms in asthmatics.
/square6Bronchial hyper-responsiveness is due to persistentsubacute inflammation of the airways. The airwaysare edematous and infiltrated with eosinophils,neutrophils, and lymphocytes. Glandular hyper-
trophy and denudation of the epithelium is usually
present. The inflammatory cells present in airwaysTreatment
/square6Antibiotics are prescribed if bacterial infection issuspected. Cough syrups give symptomatic relief.Bronchodilators may be needed if there are rhonchi
on auscultation.
Q.Describe the etiopathogenesis, types, clinical
features, differential diagnosis and management
of bronchial asthma.
/square6Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disease ofairways characterized by increased responsivenessof the tracheobronchial tree to multiple stimuli.
/square6It is characterized by episodic airflow obstruction,
which is reversible.
/square6Clinically, asthma presents as episodes of dyspnea,
wheezing, and cough. In between the episodes theperson is usually normal.
/square6An attack of asthma may last a few minutes or hoursor days. When the attack is severe lasting days or
weeks, it is known as status asthmaticus.
Incidence and Prevalence
/square6About 10% of the world’s population is affected by
asthma. It can occur at any age, but commonly startsbefore the age of 10 years. In childhood, there is 2:1male/female preponderance, but the sex ratio
equalizes by the age of 30.
Etiology
/square6Asthma is a heterogeneous disease with both endo-
genous and environmental factors playing a role.Several risk factors have been implicated.
Risk factors involved in asthma
Endogenous factors Environmental factors
Genetic predisposition Indoor and outdoor allergens
Atopy DietAirway hyperresponsiveness Air pollutionGender Occupational sensitizers
Ethnicity (common in Europeans) Respiratory infections
ObesityEarly viral infections
Endogenous Factors
/square6Genetic predisposition: The familial association of
asthma and a high degree of concordance forasthma in identical twins indicate a genetic pre-disposition to the disease. More than 100 asthmasusceptibility genes have been reported. Some ofthe chromosomes implicated are 5, 13, 14, and 17.
/square6Atopy: Atopy refers to genetic predisposition to
develop an allergic reaction (as allergic rhinitis,asthma, or atopic dermatitis) and produce elevatedlevels of IgE upon exposure to an environmentalantigen. Atopy is the major risk factor for asthma,and non-atopic individuals have a very low risk of
developing asthma.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
2108
release mediators on provocation which produce
bronchoconstriction, vascular congestion, edemaformation, increased mucus production, andimpaired mucociliary transport.
/square6Provocating factors include allergens like pollen,
house-dust, mite, drugs like NSAIDs, exercise,inhalation of cold air, infections of the respiratory
tract, air pollution, cigarette smoke, strong scents
and perfumes, etc.
/square6Inhalation of allergens by atopic asthmaticindividuals leads to the development of two types
of responses. Early response, where brhoncho-
constriction occurs within 10–15 minutes ofexposure to an allergen. This type of response
usually subsides in one hour. This response is
mediated by mast cells in the lumen of the airways,where they interact with inhaled allergens through
surface-bound IgE molecules. Histamine and
leucotriens released from mast cells mediatebronchoconstriction. The early response is reversed
by bronchodilator therapy and can be prevented
by prior treatment with a mast cell stabilizer suchas sodium cromoglycate.
/square6In some individuals, the early response is followed
by a later phase of bronchoconstriction which
begins 4–6 hours after exposure to the allergen andcan persist for 8–12 hours or longer. The late
reaction responds poorly to bronchodilators, but
responds to steroids. This late response is mediatedby neutrophils, eosinophils and macrophages.
These cells contain large quantities of powerful
mediators like leukotrienes, platelet activatingfactor and eosinophilic major basic protein. All
these mediators cause an inflammatory reaction
responsible for late-phase asthmatic reaction andairway hyper-responsiveness.
Types
/square6Asthma can be classified into two types, extrinsic
and intrinsic asthma.TABLE 2.5: Classification of asthma
Extrinsic (atopic) Intrinsic
Etiology Allergic Idiopathic
Hereditary predisposition Yes No
Onset Early in life Late in life
Serum IgE levels Elevated Normal
Symptoms Usually seasonal perennial
History of allergy Yes No
Figure 2.3
Clinical Features
/square6The symptoms of asthma consist of a triad of inter-
mittent and reversible attacks of dyspnea, cough, andwheezing. All three symptoms coexist in a typicalattack of asthma. Initially patient experiences a sense ofconstriction in the chest, often with dry cough. Respi-ration becomes harsh, expiration becomes prolongedand wheezing is heard usually in expiratory phasebut can be heard in both phases of respiration.
/square6Asthma usually worsens at night especially earlymorning. The end of an attack is usually markedby cough that produces thick, stringy mucus, whichoften takes the form of casts of the distal airways(Curschmann’s spirals). Some patients may justpresent with intermittent dry cough or exertionaldyspnea without any history of wheezing. In thesepatients a bronchoprovocation test may be requiredto make the diagnosis of asthma.
/square6Examination shows tachypnea, tachycardia, mildsystolic hypertension, hyper-inflated lungs, withincrease in AP diameter of the thorax. High pitchedpolyphonic rhonchi are heard all over the lungsbilaterally. The presence of cyanosis, severetachypnea, pulse rate more than 120 per minute,widened pulse pressure, pulsus paradoxus andcompletely silent chest on auscultation areindicative of a severe airway obstruction.
Differential Diagnosis (Table 2.6)
Investigations
/square6Blood examination may show increased eosinophils.
/square6Total serum immunoglobulin E levels are fre-quently elevated.
/square6Chest X-ray  may show hyperinflation.
/square6Pulmonary functions tests show a decrease in the
forced vital capacity (FVC), peak expiratory flowrate (PEFR) and forced expiratory volume in onesecond (FEV1). The FEV1/FVC ratio is usually lessthan 75%. The diagnosis of asthma is establishedby demonstrating reversible airway obstruction.Reversibility is traditionally defined as a ≥15%
increase in FEV
1 after two puffs of a β2-adrenergic
agonist. Serial recordings of FEV1 or peak expira-tory flow rate (PEFR) can give an idea about the
response to treatment.
/square6Methacholine/histamine challenge test: Assesses the
airway hyperresponsiveness. It is useful when spiro-metry findings are normal or near normal, especiallyin patients with intermittent or exercise-inducedasthma symptoms. The patient breathes in nebulized

/square6Diseases of Respiratory System109
2methacholine or histamine. Both drugs provoke
bronchoconstriction and the level of airflow obstruc-tion is documented by spirometry. However, thistest is not routinely done in clinical practice
/square6Arterial blood gas analysis shows respiratory alkalosisand in severe attacks hypoxia. However, in respiratoryfailure CO
2 retention causes respiratory acidosis. A
rising CO2 even in the normal range is a bad prognostic
sign and indicates impending respiratory failure.
/square6Skin prick tests are done to identify the allergen incase of allergic or atopic asthma.
Treatment
The goals of asthma treatment are:
/square6Achieve and maintain control of asthma symptoms.
/square6Maintain normal activity levels, including exercise.
/square6Maintain pulmonary function as close to normalas possible.
/square6Prevent asthma exacerbations.
/square6Avoid adverse effects from asthma medications.
/square6Prevent asthma mortality.
Controlling Trigger Factors
/square6Avoidance of asthma “triggers” is important in
successful asthma management. It will prevent fre-quent attacks and also the requirement of medica-
tions. Common asthma triggers include: Allergens,
respiratory infections, inhaled irritants such as
tobacco smoke and air pollutants, exposure to cold
air, emotional stress and gastroesophageal reflux
disease. Drugs such as beta-blockers and NSAIDs
can precipitate an attack and should be avoided.
Drug Treatment
/square6Drugs used in the treatment of asthma can be
divided into two categories.
– First category is drugs that relax the smooth-
muscle (called “quick relief medications”). Quick
relief medicines are used to treat an acute attack.
They can be used as and when required basis.
These include β-adrenergic agonists, methyl-
xanthines, and anticholinergics.
– Second category is drugs that prevent and/or
reverse inflammation (called “long-term control
medications”). These medicines prevent or
decrease the attacks of asthma. Usually they are
used on a regular basis. These include inhaled
glucocorticoids, long-acting β2-agonists, mast cell
stabilizers, and leukotriene modifiers.TABLE 2.6: Differential diagnosis of asthma
Upper airway diseases • Typically present with stridor
• Vocal cord paralysis, vocal cord dysfunction syndrome, • Respiratory sound is more over the trachea
laryngeal edema, tracheal narrowing. • Absence of diffuse rhonchi over both lung fields
• Indirect laryngoscopy or bronchoscopy is diagnostic
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) • ABPA occurs in patients with asthma or with cystic fibrosis
• Immediate skin test reactivity to Aspergillus antigens
• Serum antibodies to A. fumigatus  positive
• Peripheral blood eosinophilia
• Lung infiltrates on chest X-ray
Cystic fibrosis • Onset in childhood
• Multisystem involvement
• Sweat chloride test diagnostic
Endobronchial disease such as foreign-body aspiration, • All these conditions usually produce localized rhonchi unlike
neoplasm, or bronchial stenosis asthma which produces bilateral diffuse rhonchi
Acute left ventricular failure (cardiac asthma) • There is usually S3 and S4
• Bilateral basal lung crepitations may be heard
Carcinoid tumors • Usually associated with stridor
• Recurrent episodes of bronchospasm can occur
Recurrent pulmonary emboli • Risk factors for embolism present such as DVT
• Pulmonary HTN may be present
• Definitive diagnosis requires chest CT or pulmonary angiography
COPD • Patient is usually a chronic smoker
• No true symptom-free periods
• History of chronic cough and sputum production present
• Progressive worsening of dyspnea
Eosinophilic pneumonias • Fever and cough present
• High eosinophil count in the blood
• Chest X-ray shows bilateral diffuse opacities
Systemic vasculitis  (Churg-Strauss syndrome) • Multisystem involvement
• Hemoptysis may be present
Psychiatric disorders (conversion reactions and • Wheezing more on inspiration. Sound localized to trachea.
laryngeal spasm) Lung fields clear
• Stressors present before the attack
• Usually young women

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
2110
Long-term Control Medications
/square6These medicines prevent or decrease the number of attacks by preventing or reversing airway inflammation.
TABLE 2.8: Long-term control medications
Drug category Mechanism of action Side effects
Inhaled glucocorticoids Decrease airway inflammation. Since the drug is Oral thrush and dysphonia, cataract  formation,
Beclomethasone directly delivered to lungs, they have less systemic decreased growth in children, interference with
Budesonide side effects and less pituitary adrenal suppression bone metabolism. Rarely pituitary adrenal
Flunisolide suppression
FluticasoneTriamcinolone
Systemic glucocorticoids Decrease airway inflammation. Especially useful in Pituitary adrenal suppression. May pre dispose
Hydrocortisone acute severe attack of asthma but remember that to infections, cataract formation, decreased
Prednisolone they are not quick relief medications growth in children, interference with bone
Dexamethasone metabolism, and purpura
Long acting βββββ
2-agonists Relaxation of bronchial smooth muscle for a long Major side effect is tremors, tachycardia, and
Salmeterol time hypokalemia
Formoterol
Mast cell stabilizers They inhibit the degranulation of mast cells thus
Cromolyn preventing the release of mediators
Nedocromil
Leukotriene modifiers Inhibit the synthesis of leukotrienes which mediate Zileuton can cause elevations in aminotrans-
Montelukast airway inflammation ferase levels. May predispose to the development
Zafirlukast of Churg-Strauss syndrome
Zileuton
Anti-IgE antibody Omalizumab is a blocking antibody that neutralizes Headache, upper respiratory tract infections,
Omalizumab circulating IgE and inhibits IgE-mediated reactions. injection site pain, anaphylaxis
It reduces the number of exacerbations in patientswith severe asthma. It should be used when all other
medications fail to control asthma. However, it is very
expensive and has to be injected subcutaneously.
Thromboxane A2/prosta- Seratrodast blocks the bronchoconstrictor effects of Drowsiness, headache, palpitations, and
glandin receptor antagonist prostaglandins and also decreases the inflammation hepatitis
Seratrodast by antagonising the thromboxane A2 receptorTABLE 2.7: Quick relief medications
Drug category Mechanism of action Side effects
Adrenergic stimulants They are first line therapy in acute attack. Tremors, tachycardia, and hypokalemia
Salbutamol, levosalbutamol, terbutaline, They act through adrenergic β2 receptors
adrenaline, salmeterol, formoterol which mediate smooth muscle relaxation.
They can be given orally or by inhalation
or by nebulization. Adrenaline andterbutaline can be given parenterally also.
Salmeterol is long acting and should not
be used to treat acute attacks. It is particu-larly helpful in nocturnal and exercise-
induced asthma
Methylxanthines They are considered second-line therapy. Nervousness, nausea, vomiting, anorexia,
Theophylline, doxofylline, acebrophylline They act by inhibiting phosphodiesterase and headache. High levels can cause
enzyme. They are usually used along with seizures and cardiac arrhythmias
β
2 agonists in acute attacks. However, there
is minimal evidence for additional benefit
when used with optimal doses of β-agonists
Anticholinergics They have only modest efficacy. They are Blurred vision, urinary retention and
Ipratropium bromide slow to act (60 to 90 min may be required cardiac arrhythmias
Tiotropium bromide for peak effect). They are particularly helpful
in patients with heart disease, in whom theuse of methylxanthines and β-adrenergic
stimulants may be dangerousQuick Relief Medications

/square6Diseases of Respiratory System111
2Stepwise Treatment of Asthma
/square6Stepwise treatment of asthma involves increasing
or decreasing the intensity of asthma treatment
based on symptom control.
/square6Consider stepping up if good control is notachieved despite good adherence and correctinhaler technique.
/square6When asthma is stable and well controlled for 2–3months, consider stepping down (e.g. reducinginhaled corticosteroid dose, or stopping long-actingβ
2 agonist if inhaled corticosteroid dose is already
low).
/square6Good control of asthma is indicated by all of thefollowing:
– Daytime symptoms ≤2 days per week
– Need for short acting β
2 agonist (SABA) reliever
≤2 days per week
– No limitation of activities– No symptoms during night or on waking
/square6Poor control of asthma is indicated by three or more
of following:
– Daytime symptoms >2 days per week
– Need for SABA reliever >2 days per week– Any limitation of activitie
– Any symptoms during night or on waking
Prognosis
/square6Asthma is a chronic relapsing disorder. Most
patients have recurrent attacks but there is noprogressive lung damage like COPD.
Q.Acute severe asthma (status asthmaticus).
/square6Acute episodes of bronchial asthma are one of the
most common respiratory emergencies. If not
treated in time, death may occur due to asphyxia.Patient should be treated in an intensive care unit.
Clinical Features
/square6Patient appears severely breathless.
/square6Patient may be restless or drowsy due to hypoxiaand hypercarbia.
/square6There may be cyanosis, paradoxical pulse, use ofaccessory muscles, inability to speak in sentences,
unable to recline, and marked hyperinflation of thechest. Respiratory rate is usually >30 per minute,
and pulse is usually >120 beats/min. A silent chest
on auscultation suggests that there is no airmovement in and out of lungs due to severe airway
obstruction and is a sign of impending respiratory
failure.
Investigations
/square6ECG to rule out MI with pulmonary edema which
can also present with dyspnea and wheezing
/square6Chest X-ray is usually normal except hyper-
inflation. It is also helpful to rule out other causes
of breathlessness such as pulmonary edema,
pneumonia, and pneumothorax, etc.
/square6ABG and PEFR may be done if feasible.
Treatment
Supplemental Oxygen
/square6Should be given to maintain a SaO2 >90% or a PaO2
>60 mm Hg. Venturi masks can deliver oxygenbetter than nasal prongs.TABLE 2.9: Classification of asthma severity
Daytime symptoms Nighttime symptoms FEV1
(cough, wheeze, dyspnea,
chest tightness)
Intermittent Symptoms ≤2 times a week ≤2 times a month ≥80%
Mild persistent Symptoms 3 to 6 times a week 3 to 4 times a month ≥80%
Moderate persistent Daily symptoms 5 or more times a month >60 to <80%
Severe persistent Continuous symptoms Frequent ≤60%Classification of Asthma Severity
TABLE 2.10: Stepwise treatment of asthma
Controller medications (to prevent
exacerbations and control symptoms)
STEP 1
Intermittent asthma Inhaled short-acting β2 agonist as
needed plus low dose inhaled cortico-
steroid (ICS) as needed
STEP 2 Daily Inhaled short-acting β2 agonist
plus inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) 200–
800 micrograms/day.
STEP 3 Add inhaled long-acting β2 agonist (LABA).
Consider adding leukotriene receptor
antagonist or theophylline
STEP 4 Increase inhaled corticosteroid up to
2,000 micrograms/day
Add leukotriene receptor antagonist or
theophylline, or β2 agonist tablet
STEP 5 Add oral steroid in lowest dose
providing adequate control.
Maintain high dose inhaled cortico-
steroid daily
Consider other treatments such as omali-
zumab to minimize the use of steroid
tablets

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
2112 Bronchodilators
/square6Frequent administration of a short acting β2-agonist
through nebulization is the most importantmeasure. Nebulizations are repeated as necessary
till the patient feels better. Inhalers also can be used
if the patient can take it. At least three nebulizertreatments should be given in the first hour. There-after, the frequency of nebulization can be basedon patient response and improvement.
/square6Administration of anticholinergic bronchodilatorssuch as ipratropium bromide is also helpful.
/square6IV aminophylline infusion can also be helpful in
addition to nebulized bronchodilators.
/square6Terbutaline injection can be given subcutaneously,
and may be repeated 2–4 hourly depending uponthe response.
Systemic Corticosteroids
/square6Corticosteroids should be given by intravenousroute.
/square6Methyl prednisolone should be given at a dose of40–60 mg every 6 hours for 2 days or until the FEV
1
(or PEFR) returns to 50% of predicted (or 50% of
baseline) and then slowly tapered off.
/square6An equivalent dose of any other steroid (e.g.
hydrocortisone 200 mg IV stat and 8th hourly ordexamethasone) can also be used.
Magnesium Sulphate
/square6Intravenous magnesium sulphate (2 gm infusedover 20 min) may be considered in patients notresponding to above therapies. It relaxes bronchialsmooth muscle by inhibiting calcium influx.
Mechanical Ventilation
/square6May be required in respiratory failure or impending
respiratory failure.
Antibiotics
/square6They are indicated if there is evidence of infection.
Sedatives are contraindicated during an acute attack
unless the patient is intubated.
Q.Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
/square6The global initiative for chronic obstructive lung
disease (GOLD) defines COPD as a common,preventable, and treatable disease state charac-terized by persistent respiratory symptoms andairflow limitation due to airway and alveolar abnor-malities usually caused by significant exposure to
noxious particles or gases.
/square6COPD includes:
–Chronic bronchitis : It is a condition characterized
by chronic cough, sputum production and
airway narrowing.–Emphysema : It is a condition characterized by
destruction of alveolar walls and enlargement ofthe alveoli.
–Small-airways disease : It is a condition in which
small bronchioles are narrowed.
/square6Chronic bronchitis is a clinical diagnosis whereas
emphysema and small-airways disease requirebiopsy to confirm the diagnosis which is not
routinely done.
Epidemiology
/square6COPD occurs all over the world and is a public
health problem. Its incidence is expected to increasefurther.
/square6In India COPD is the commonest lung disorder
following pulmonary tuberculosis.
/square6It affects men more commonly than women
probably due to smoking habits. But the prevalenceis also increasing in women due to increasing
smoking habits among them also.
/square6There is higher prevalence with increasing age
probably due to cumulative lung injury.
Risk Factors
/square6Smoking:  Cigarette smoking is a major risk factor.
95% of cases are smoking-related, typically >20
pack years (1 pack year is 20 cigarettes smoked per
day for 1 year). There is less evidence for cigar andpipe smoking probably due to lower dose of inhaledtobacco by-products. Passive (secondhand) smokingis also a risk factor for COPD.
/square6Airway hyper-responsiveness:  Patients with increased
airway responsiveness are more likely to developCOPD.
/square6Occupational exposures:  Several occupational
exposures, like coal mining, gold mining, cottontextile dust, etc., are all risk factors for developmentof COPD. But their effect is less than cigarettesmoking.
/square6Air pollution:  It is thought to increase the risk of
developing COPD.
/square6Genetic factors:  Also play an important role. For
example, α1 antitrypsin ( α1AT) deficiency pre-
disposes to the development of COPD.
Pathology
/square6In COPD, all three components of lungs areaffected, i.e. airways, lung parenchyma, and lungvasculature.
/square6Changes in airways:  Changes in large airways
include mucous gland enlargement and goblet cellhyperplasia. The Reid index, which indicates theratio of thickness of the submucosal glands to thatof the bronchial wall, is thus increased. There may
be squamous metaplasia of mucous membrane
which predisposes to cancer development and also

/square6Diseases of Respiratory System113
2impairs mucociliary clearance. These changes
produce chronic cough and sputum production.There is loss of surfactant-secreting Clara cells andsmooth-muscle hypertrophy. There is chronicinflammation and fibrosis of small airways,characterized by CD8 lymphocyte, macrophage,
and neutrophil infiltration, with release of pro-
inflammatory cytokines. Recurrent infections mayperpetuate airway inflammation. These changesproduce airway obstruction.
/square6Changes in lung parenchyma:  There is destruction of
gas-exchanging air spaces, i.e. the respiratorybronchioles, alveolar ducts, and alveoli leadingto emphysema. Emphysema is classified into2 pathologic types, centriacinar and panacinar.Centriacinar emphysema is associated with cigarette
smoking. It is characterized by enlarged airspaces
found (initially) with respiratory bronchioles andoften affects upper lobes (remember “C” for ceiling,means above and also for cigarettes). Panacinaremphysema is characterized by enlarged airspaceswithin and across acinar units. Panacinar
emphysema is usually seen in patients with α
1AT
deficiency, and often affects lower lobes.
/square6Changes in the pulmonary vasculature:  These
include intimal hyperplasia and smooth muscle
hypertrophy/hyperplasia due to hypoxic vaso-
constriction of the small pulmonary arteries.Destruction of alveoli due to emphysema can leadto loss of the associated areas of the pulmonarycapillary. All these changes lead to pulmonaryhypertension. Pulmonary hypertension can lead to
cor pulmonale.
Clinical Features
/square6Three most common symptoms of COPD are
cough, sputum production, and exertional dyspnea.
The duration of these symptoms is usually months
to years. Onset of these symptoms is gradual. AsCOPD advances, dyspnea worsens and in the mostadvanced stage, patients are breathless doingroutine activities or even at rest.
/square6Episodes of exacerbations occur precipitatedusually by upper or lower respiratory tractinfections./square6Examination may be normal in early stages ofCOPD. There may be signs of smoking, like odorof smoke, tobacco staining of teeth or nicotinestaining of fingernails. Clubbing is usually not seenin COPD, and if it is present other causes shouldbe searched. Development of lung cancer is the most
likely cause of newly developed clubbing in COPD
patients.
/square6Patients with severe COPD may have cyanosis.Accessory muscles of respiration may be active, and
patient sits in a characteristic “tripod” position to
facilitate the actions of accessory muscles. Inpatients with severe COPD, expiration is prolongedand there is usually expiratory wheezing. Signs ofhyperinflation of lungs are present and include abarrel-shaped chest, pushed down diaphragm, and
obliteration of cardiac dullness. Tidal percussion
reveals decreased movement of diaphragm as it isalready pushed down.
/square6Patients with predominant emphysema are referred
to as “pink puffers,” due to lack of cyanosis and
pursed-lip breathing. Patients with chronicbronchitis are called “blue bloaters,” due topresence of cyanosis and fluid retention. Usuallypatients have features of both and cannot be simplyclassified.
/square6Patients with advanced COPD have wasting andloss of subcutaneous fat. Such wasting is a poorprognostic sign in COPD.
/square6In advanced COPD patient may develop pulmonaryHTN and right heart failure, called cor pulmonale.Such patients present with peripheral edema, raisedJVP, congestive hepatomegaly, and ascites.
Differences between chronic bronchitis and
emphysema (Table 2.11).
Investigations
/square6The hallmark of COPD is airflow obstruction.
Pulmonary function testing shows reduction inFEV
1 and FEV1/FVC. DLCO (diffusibility of carbon
monoxide across alveolar membrane) may be
reduced in emphysema reflecting destruction
of alveolar walls. Arterial blood gas analysisand oximetry may show resting or exertionalhypoxemia.
TABLE 2.11: Differences between chronic bronchitis and emphysema
Chronic bronchitis Emphysema
Main pathology Airway inflammation Destruction of alveolar walls
Main symptom Cough Breathlessness
Clinical appearance Blue bloater Pink puffer
Sputum production Copious Scanty
Cor pulmonale Common Only in advanced stage
Respiratory insufficiency Repeated episodes Only in advanced stage
Arterial blood gases Abnormality early in the course of disease Abnormality only in advanced stage

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
2114 /square6Hematocrit may be high due to chronic hypoxemia.
/square6ECG may show evidence of right ventricular
hypertrophy.
/square6Chest X-ray may show bullae, flattening of the
diaphragm and hyperlucency in emphysema. On
lateral film, large retrosternal air space and localized
emphysematous bullae may also be seen in
emphysema. Increased bronchovascular markings
may be seen in chronic bronchitis.
/square6If the patient is less than ≥50 years, with a strong
family history, and with a minimal smoking history,
serum level of alpha-1 antitrypsin ( α1AT) should
be checked.
Treatment
/square6Only smoking cessation and oxygen therapy have
been shown to alter the course of COPD. All other
treatments are aimed at improving symptoms and
decreasing the frequency of exacerbations.
Smoking Cessation
/square6All patients with COPD should be strongly urgedto quit smoking. Combining pharmacotherapy with
traditional supportive approaches increases the
chances of smoking cessation. Two drugs, bupro-
pion, and nicotine are helpful in this regard.
Nicotine is available as gum, transdermal patches,
inhaler, and nasal spray. All patients should be
offered pharmacotherapy, in the absence of any
contraindication to treatment.
Oxygen
/square6Supplemental oxygen for patients with resting
hypoxemia is the only therapy which decreases
mortality and improves quality of life in patients
with COPD. Oxygen can be given during day or at
night at home (home oxygen therapy). Using it for
12 hours or more has been shown to provide
significant benefit.
Bronchodilators
/square6These drugs provide symptomatic relief. These
include β-2 agonists (such as salbutamol, formoterol,
salmeterol), theophylline, ipratopium bromide, etc.
Inhaled route is preferred as the incidence of side
effects are less. In acute exacerbations these are
given through nebulization.
Glucocorticoids
/square6Inhaled glucocorticoids reduce the frequencyof exacerbations. Side effects are oropharyngeal
candidiasis and osteoporosis. A trial of inhaled
glucocorticoids should be considered in patients
with frequent exacerbations defined as two or more
per year. Oral glucocorticoids can be used during
exacerbations but long term use of oral gluco-
corticoids is not recommended because of more side
effects than benefits.Phosphodiesterase 4 Inhibitor
/square6Roflumilast has been shown to reduce exacerbation
frequency in patients who have moderate or severe
COPD in spite of taking all the above medications.
Mechanical Ventilatory Support
/square6This is required in COPD with respiratory failure
as happens during exacerbations and advanced
stages. Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation
(NIPPV) can be given through a tight fitting mask
without tracheal intubation. Contraindications to
NIPPV include hypotension, altered mental status
or inability to cooperate, copious secretions or the
inability to clear secretions, craniofacial abnorma-
lities or trauma, extreme obesity, and significant
burns in the head and neck region. Invasive
mechanical ventilation via an endotracheal tube is
indicated for patients in respiratory failure who are
not candidates for NIPPV.
Surgery for COPD
/square6Lung volume reduction surgery can produce sympto-
matic and functional improvements in patients with
advanced diffuse emphysema and lung hyperinflation.
/square6Bullectomy can be considered when a single large
emphysematous bulla occupies at least 30–50% of
the hemithorax.
/square6Lung transplantation can be an option for advancedCOPD.
Other Measures
/square6Intravenous α-1 antitrypsin can be used in patients
with deficiency.
/square6All COPD patients should receive the influenza andpneumococcal vaccine since H. influenzae  and
Pneomococcus are the causes of frequent infective
exacerbations.
/square6Pulmonary rehabilitation—graded aerobic physical
exercise programs improve patients’ ability to carry
out daily activities. Training of inspiratory muscles
by inspiring against progressively larger resistive
loads reduces dyspnea and improves exercise
tolerance and quality of life.
Differential Diagnosis
/square6The most difficult disease to differentiate fromCOPD is asthma. Asthma typically begins early in
life with episodes of dyspnea and wheezing which
reverse rapidly and completely.
/square6Other differential diagnoses include cystic fibrosis,bronchiectasis, eosinophilic granuloma, lymph-
angioleiomyomatosis and bronchiolitis obliterans.
Prognosis
/square6COPD is a progressive disease. Poor prognosticfactors include weight loss, presence of resting
hypoxemia and the need for hospital admission for
an exacerbation, especially to intensive care unit.

/square6Diseases of Respiratory System115
2Q.Define pneumonia. How do you classify pneumonia?
Definition
/square6Pneumonia is an inflammation of the lung paren-
chyma due to acute microbial infection with at leastone opacity on chest X-ray.
Classification
Based on the setting in which pneumonia develops
/square6Community aquired pneumonia (CAP)
/square6Hospital-aquired (nosocomial) pneumonia.
– Ventilator-associated
– Non-ventilator-associated
Based on the anatomical distribution of pneumonia
/square6Lobar pneumonia
/square6Bronchopneumonia
/square6Interstitial pneumonia
/square6Miliary pneumonia.
Q.Discuss the etiology, pathology, clinical features,
investigations and management of community-
acquired pneumonia.
Definition
/square6Community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) is defined
as an acute infection of the pulmonary parenchyma
in a patient who has acquired the infection in thecommunity.
/square6Community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) is a
common and serious illness with considerable
morbidity and mortality.
Etiology
/square6Bacteria:  Streptococcus pneumoniae, H. influenzae,
Moraxella  catarrhalis , Mycoplasma pneumoniae ,
legionella, gram-negative bacilli, anaerobes,
Mycobacterium tuberculosis , Coxiella burnetii . Out of
these, the first three bacteria (Streptococcus
pneumoniae, H. influenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis)account for almost 85% of CAP.
/square6Viruses: Influenza virus, parainfluenza virus,
respiratory syncytial virus.
/square6Fungi:  Cryptococcus, Histoplasma Capsulatum.
/square6Most of the cases are due to bacteria. Nearly 50%
of cases of CAP are caused by Streptococcus pneu-
monia  (pneumococcal pneumonia).
Risk Factors for Pneumonia
/square6Pneumonia is more common in immunocompro-
mised, as occurs in HIV and steroid therapy.Splenectomy is an important risk factor forpneumonia with S. pneumoniae .
/square6Uncontrolled diabetes mellitus is also a risk factor.
/square6Anatomical defects such as obstructed bronchus,
bronchiectasis, or fibrosis lead to recurrent pneu-monia./square6Chronic alcoholism predisposes to pneumoniaespecially aspiration pneumonia.
Pathogenesis
/square6Microbial agents reach lungs by aspiration, inhala-tion, hematogenous spread from a distant site, anddirect spread from a contiguous site.
/square6The most common route is micro-aspiration of oro-pharyngeal secretions colonized with pathogenicmicro-organisms. Aspiration can occur post-operatively and also during seizures and strokes.Oropharyngeal secretions contain anaerobic andgram-negative organisms. H. influenzae  and
S. pneumoniae  can also colonize oropharynx.
/square6Hematogenous spread occurs in the setting of
endocarditis, intravenous catheter infections, orinfections at other sites. Staphylococcus usually
originates from endocarditis and IV catheter
infections whereas E. coli  originates from urinary
tract infections.
/square6Mycobacterium tuberculosis , fungi, legionella, Coxiella
burnetii , and viruses reach the lungs through
inhalation of aerosols.
/square6Once microorganisms reach the alveoli, there isinflammatory response against them. This inflamma-
tory response, rather than the proliferation of
microorganisms, triggers the clinical syndrome ofpneumonia. The release of inflammatory mediators,such as interleukin (IL)-1 and tumor necrosis factor(TNF), results in fever. Chemokines, such as IL-8and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor,
stimulate the release of neutrophils and attract them
to the lung, producing both peripheral leukocytosisand increased purulent secretions. Inflammatorymediators released by macrophages and neutro-phils create an alveolar capillary leak. RBCs can alsoleak into the alveoli causing hemoptysis. The
capillary leak results in a radiographic infiltrate and
crepitations heard on auscultation. Alveolar fillingalso results in hypoxemia. Increased respiratorydrive leads to respiratory alkalosis.
/square6All patients with pneumonia have reduced vitalcapacity, lung compliance, functional residualcapacity, and total lung capacity. Decreasedcompliance, hypoxemia, increased respiratorydrive, increased secretions, and occasionallyinfection-related bronchospasm all lead to dyspnea.
/square6Pathologically pneumonia manifests as four generalanatomical patterns: Lobar pneumonia, broncho-pneumonia, interstitial pneumonia, and miliarypneumonia.
Lobar Pneumonia
/square6In lobar pneumonia an entire lobe of lung is involved.
Inflammation can involve pleura causing pleuritic
chest pain, pleural effusion and pleural rub. Thereare four stages in the course of lobar pneumonia.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
2116 /square6Stage of congestion —occurs during the first 24 h and
is characterized grossly by redness and a doughyconsistency and microscopically by vascularcongestion and alveolar edema.
/square6Stage of red hepatization —so called because in this
stage, the affected part of lung resembles liver incolour and consistency. Microscopically this stage
is characterized by the presence of erythrocytes,
neutrophils, desquamated epithelial cells, and fibrinin the alveolar spaces. Erythrocytes give theappearance of red color.
/square6Stage of gray hepatization —here the affected part of
lung is dry, friable, and gray-brown due to fibrino-purulent exudate, disintegration of red blood cells,
and presence of hemosiderin. The second and third
stages last for 2 to 3 days each.
/square6Stage of resolution —this is characterized by
resolution of above changes by enzymatic digestionof exudates, phagocytosis, and coughing out ofdebris.
Bronchopneumonia
/square6This pattern of pneumonia involves one or manylobes, and has patchy distribution. It occurs
commonly due to aspiration of oropharyngeal
secretions and hence usually involves the depen-dent parts.
/square6The consolidated areas are poorly demarcated. Theneutrophilic exudate is more in bronchi andbronchioles, with centrifugal spread to the adjacentalveoli.
Interstitial Pneumonia
/square6This pattern of pneumonia involves the interstitium.
Inflammation may be patchy or diffuse. There is infil-
tration of lymphocytes, macrophages, and plasmacells into the alveolar septa. The alveoli may containa protein-rich hyaline membrane similar to thosefound in adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).
Miliary Pneumonia
/square6The pattern is so-called because of resemblance oflesions to millet seeds. These lesions are numerous,
2–3 mm in size and diffusely distributed. They
result from the spread of the pathogen to the lungsvia the bloodstream. The lesions consist ofgranulomas or foci of necrosis.
/square6Miliary pneumonia occurs in miliary tuberculosis,histoplasmosis, and coccidioidomycosis. Viruseslike herpes virus, cytomegalovirus, or varicella-
zoster virus can cause miliary pattern pneumonia
in immunocompromised patients.
Clinical Features
/square6The onset may be sudden or insidious.
/square6Fever./square6Cough (with or without sputum).
/square6Breathlessness.
/square6Pleuritic type chest pain (in lobar pneumonia).
/square6There may be other symptoms like headache,nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, myalgia, arthralgia, andfatigue. Confusion may occur in elderly persons.
/square6General examination shows tachypnea, tachycardiaand in severe cases cyanosis.
/square6RS examination shows dull percussion over the areaof consolidation, increased tactile and vocal fremitus,egophony, whispering pectoriloquy, bronchialbreath sounds, crepitations and sometimes pleural
rub. Crepitations are heard in the stage of conges-
tion and resolution. Bronchial breath sounds areheard in the stage of consolidation. The single mostuseful sign of the severity of pneumonia is arespiratory rate of >30/min.
Investigations
Iamaging Studies
/square6The most important investigation is chest X-ray. Itshows pneumonic patch with or without pleuraleffusion. However, chest X-ray can be normal in
early stages of pneumonia. Hence, it is useful to
repeat chest X-ray after 1or 2 days.
/square6High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT)can pick up opacities even if chest X-ray is normal.
Sputum Stains and Culture
/square6Gram’s stain can tell whether the infecting organism
is gram-positive or negative.
/square6AFB staining to identify tubercle bacilli.
/square6Monoclonal antibody staining to identify pneumo-
cystis.
/square6Special stains for fungi are useful in selectedpatients.
/square6Culture and sensitivity can clearly identify theorganism and also antibiotic susceptibility. Cultureresults should always be correlated with those ofGram’s staining. If an organism is cultured fromsputum which was not seen on Gram’s staining,the isolate may be a contaminant from upper
airway.
/square6Some organisms should always be considered as
pathogens if isolated from sputum. These includeM. tuberculosis , legionella, Histoplasma capsulatum ,
and Coccidioides immitis .
Blood Culture
/square6Blood should be drawn before starting antibiotics
for culture and sensitivity. The organism causing
pneumonia is sometimes picked up by blood
culture due to bacteremia. Two sets of bloodcultures should be drawn.

/square6Diseases of Respiratory System117
2Serological Tests
/square6The detection of IgM antibody or a fourfold rise in
the titer of antibody to a particular organism is agood evidence for infection by that organism.
Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydia pneumoniae,
Chlamydia psittaci, Legionella  and Coxiella burnetii , are
often diagnosed serologically.
/square6Antibody detection is by complement fixation,
indirect immunofluorescence, and ELISA.
/square6Serologic testing is not recommended for routine
use.
Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR)
/square6Amplification of the DNA or RNA of micro-organisms can be used to detect organisms like
Legionella  spp, M. pneumoniae,  and Chlamydia
pneumoniae  which are not part of normal flora. This
test is expensive and is not routinely available.
Detection of Antigens in Urine
/square6Legionella pneumophila serogroup 1 antigen can bedetected in the urine of patients with Legionnaires’disease by ELISA. The urine antigen test is now themost frequently used diagnostic method for
Legionnaires’ disease. Antigen of Streptococcus
pneumoniae  can also be detected in the urine.
Differential Diagnosis
/square6Pleural effusion
/square6Pulmonary tuberculosis
/square6Pulmonary infarction
/square6Pulmonary edema
/square6Pulmonary eosinophilia
/square6Malignancy
/square6Alveolitis/cryptogenic pneumonitis/drug-induced
pneumonitis
/square6Systemic necrotising vasculitis
/square6Interstitial lung diseases.
Treatment of Pneumonia
Admit the patient if any one of the following featuresis there:
/square6Respiratory rate >28/min.
/square6Systolic blood pressure <90 mmHg or 30 mmHg
below baseline.
/square6New-onset confusion or impaired level of
consciousness.
/square6Hypoxemia: PaO2 <60 mmHg while breathing room
air or oxygen saturation <90%.
/square6Unstable comorbid illness (e.g. decompensatedcongestive heart failure, uncontrolled diabetesmellitus, alcoholism, immunosuppression).
/square6Multilobar pneumonia, if hypoxemia is present.
/square6Pleural effusion that is >1 cm on lateral decubituschest radiography and has the characteristics of acomplicated parapneumonic effusion on pleuralfluid analysis.
/square6CURB-65 scoring: CURB-65 score is used to predictthe severity and prognosis of pneumonia. It is very
useful to decide whether the patient is to be
admitted or not. Each risk factor scores one point,for a maximum score of 5
Clinical parameter Points
C Confusion 1
U Urea ≥20 mg/dL 1
R Respiratory rate ≥30 breaths/min 1
B BP systolic <90 mm Hg or diastolic ≤60 mm Hg 1
65 Age ≥65 years 1
/square6If the cumulative score is 0 or 1, the risk of mortality
is low and patient can be treated as an outpatient.
/square6If the score is 2 or 3 the risk is moderate and ideally
should be treated as inpatient.
/square6If the score is 4 or 5 the risk of mortality is high and
the patient should be treated as inpatient.
Antibiotic Therapy
/square6Initially empirical antibiotic therapy is started basedon clinical judgment till the organism is identified.
Macrolides have excellent activity against Strepto-
coccus pneumoniae  and atypical pathogens like
Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydia pneumoniae , and
Legionella spp and can be used as first line therapy.
Doxycycline, also has activity against S. pneumoniae
and atypical pathogens and can be used for out-
patient therapy.
/square6IV antibiotics can be changed to oral therapy when
(1) the white blood cell count is returning towardnormal, (2) there are two normal temperature
readings (<37.5°C) 16 h apart, and (3) there is
improvement in cough and shortness of breath.
/square6Antibiotics should be given for minimum 2 weeks.Azithromycin has a long half life and needs to be
given for only 5 days. Patients with severe
Legionnaires’ disease, pneumonia due to Pseudo-
monas aeruginosa  or other aerobic gram-negative
bacilli require 21 days of therapy.
/square6Patients can be discharged if he is afebrile for 24 h,heart rate is <100/min, respiratory rate is <24/min,systolic blood pressure is >90 mmHg, and oxygensaturation is >90% (Table 2.12).
General Measures
/square6IV fluids.
/square6Oxygen.
/square6Addition of bronchodilators and mucolytics may
enhance sputum clearance.
/square6Physiotherapy to teach effective coughing techni-
ques.
/square6Mechanical ventilation may be required in patientswith respiratory failure.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
2118
Causes of Unresolving Pneumonia
/square6Wrong diagnosis:  Other diseases may be mistaken
for community-acquired pneumonia. These arecollagen vascular disease, tuberculosis, pneumo-cystis, or fungal pneumonia.
/square6Improper antibiotics:  For example, using nafcillin or
cloxacillin to treat methicillin-resistant S. aureus  will
lead to poor response to treatment.
/square6Obstructed bronchus:  Due to carcinoma or sequestra-
tion of a segment of lung.
/square6Undrained or metastatic pyogenic focus:  For example,
empyema, endocarditis, splenic abscess, osteo-
myelitis.
/square6Immunosuppressed states.
Causes of Recurrent Pneumonia
/square6Bronchopulmonary disease: Foreign body, obstruction
of bronchus due to enlarged lymph nodes orbronchogenic Ca, COPD, bronchiectasis, lungfibrosis, cystic fibrosis.
/square6Immunodeficiency states: HIV infection, immuno-
suppressant drugs, congenital immunoglobulindeficiencies.
/square6Conditions leading to recurrent aspiration : Gastro-
oesophageal reflux disease, esophageal stricture.Complications of Pneumonia
/square6Pleural effusion (common).
/square6Empyema.
/square6Pneumothorax-particularly with Staph. aureus .
/square6Lung abscess.
/square6ARDS.
/square6Sepsis with multiorgan failure.
/square6Ectopic abscess formation ( Staph. aureus ).
Vaccination
/square6Pneumococcal vaccination is now recommonded
for all adults 65 years and older and thoseconsidered at risk for pneumonia.
Q.Hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP).
Q.Ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP).
/square6Hospital-acquired or nosocomial pneumonia refers
to pneumonia that occurs at least 48 hours after
admission to hospital and not incubating at the time
of admission.
/square6It can be further divided into ventilator associatedand non-ventilator associated pneumonia. Ventilator-
associated pneumonia (VAP) is pneumonia thatTABLE 2.12: Initial antibiotic choice for community-acquired pneumonia
Clinical setting Antibiotic choice
Out patients Macrolide (e.g. clarithromycin 500 mg BD PO × 10 days; or azithromycin
Previously healthy and no antibiotics in 500 mg PO × 5 days) or Doxycycline 100 mg bid PO × 10 days
past 3 monthsComorbidities or antibiotics in past 3 months Quinolones, e.g. levofloxacin 500 mg/d PO, or gatifloxacin 400 mg/d PO or
A beta-lactam [amoxicillin/clavulanate (2 g bid); alternatives: ceftriaxone (1 g IV
bid), cefpodoxime (200 mg PO bid), cefuroxime (500 mg PO bid)] plus a
macrolide or doxycycline
Inpatients, non-ICU A respiratory fluoroquinolone [moxifloxacin (400 mg PO or IV qd), gemifloxacin
(320 mg PO qd), levofloxacin (750 mg PO or IV qd)]
A beta-lactam [cefotaxime (1–2 g IV q8h), ceftriaxone (1–2 g IV qd), ampicillin
(1–2 g IV q4–6h), ertapenem (1 g IV qd in selected patients)] plus a macrolide
[oral clarithromycin or azithromycin (as listed above for previously healthy
patients) or IV azithromycin (1 g once, then 500 mg qd)]
Inpatients, ICU A beta lactam [cefotaxime (1–2 g IV q8h), ceftriaxone (2 g IV qd), ampicillin-
sulbactam (2 g IV q8h)] plus
Azithromycin or a fluoroquinolone (as listed above for inpatients, non-ICU)
Special concerns
If Pseudomonas  is a consideration An antipneumococcal, antipseudomonal beta lactam [piperacillin/tazobactam
(4.5 g IV q6h), cefepime (1–2 g IV q12h), imipenem (500 mg IV q6h), meropenem(1 g IV q8h)] plus either ciprofloxacin (400 mg IV q12h) or levofloxacin (750 mg
IV qd)
ORThe above beta lactams plus an aminoglycoside [amikacin (15 mg/kg qd) or
tobramycin (1.7 mg/kg qd) and azithromycin]
ORThe above beta lactams plus an aminoglycoside plus an antipneumococcal
fluoroquinolone
If community acquired MRSA is a Above beta lactams plus add linezolid (600 mg IV q12h) or vancomycin (1 g IVconsideration q12h)

/square6Diseases of Respiratory System119
2develops after 48 hours of mechanical ventilation
and not incubating at the time of intubation.  Non-
ventilator associated pneumonia includes all othertypes of HAP such as postoperative pneumonia,aspiration pneumonia, etc.
/square6Both HAP and VAP have similar features and thefollowing description applies to both.
Epidemiology
/square65–20 cases per 1,000 hospital admissions.
/square6Accounts for up to 30% of all nosocomial infections.
/square6Highest rates among intensive care unit (ICU)patients undergoing mechanical ventilation.
/square6About 1.5% of patients develop pneumonia post-operatively.
/square6HAP lengthens hospital stay by an average of 7–9days per affected patient.
Risk Factors
Colonization with potential pathogens
/square6Decreased gastric acidity due to use of H-2 blockersand proton pump inhibitors.
/square6Antimicrobial therapy.
/square6Contaminated ventilator circuits or equipment.
Aspiration of oropharyngeal contents into lower
respiratory tract
/square6Intubation/mechanical ventilation.
/square6Decreased level of consciousness.
/square6Nasogastric intubation.
/square6Reduced cough (general anesthesia, thoracic and
abdominal surgery).
Reduced host defenses: Corticosteroid treatment,
diabetes, malignancy.
Bacteremia
/square6Infected emboli.
/square6Intravenous cannula infection.
/square6Sepsis.
Organisms Causing HAP
/square6Majority of hospital-acquired infections are
caused by gram-negative bacteria. These areEscherichia, Pseudomonas, Klebsiella and Acineto-bacter species.
/square6Other organisms include Staph. aureus including
MRSA forms and anaerobic organisms.
Clinical Features
/square6Fever, leukocytosis, increase in respiratory secre-
tions, and signs of pulmonary consolidation on
physical examination, along with a new or changingradiographic infiltrate.
/square6Other clinical features may include tachypnea,
tachycardia, worsening oxygenation, and increased
minute ventilation if the patient is on ventilator.Differential Diagnosis
/square6Pulmonary edema
/square6Pulmonary embolism
/square6Atelectasis
/square6ARDS
/square6Pulmonary hemorrhage
/square6Neoplasm.
Laboratory Tests
/square6Complete blood count shows increase in leukocytecount.
/square6Blood cultures.
/square6Sputum culture and Gram staining. Endotrachealaspirate can yield good uncontaminated sample forGram’s stain and culture.
/square6Chest X-ray shows a new or changing pulmonaryinfiltrate.
/square6CT of the chest if necessary.
/square6Bronchoscopy may be required sometimes.
Management
/square6Since organisms causing HAP are likely to be due
to gram-negative bacteria such as Pseudomonas,
one of the following antibiotics active againstPseudomonas and other gram-negative organismsshould be chosen
– Piperacillin/tazobactam
– Cefepime
– Levooxacin
– Imipenem
– Meropenem
/square6If MRSA is highly prevalent in the institution and
the patient is at risk for MRSA infection, add vanco-mycin or linezolid.
/square6Aspiration pneumonia can be treated withamoxicillin clavulinic acid 1.2 g 8-hourly plusmetronidazole 500 mg 8-hourly.
/square6Physiotherapy for immobile and elderly, and toteach coughing techniques.
Complications
/square6Increased mortality.
/square6Prolongation of mechanical ventilation.
/square6Pulmonary hemorrhage (especially with pseudo-monas).
/square6Long-term complications such as bronchiectasisand parenchymal scarring leading to recurrentpneumonias.
Prevention
/square6Healthcare providers must adhere strictly to hand-washing protocols.
/square6In patients undergoing mechanical ventilation,
–Extubate as early as possible
–Ensure careful periodic drainage of tubing condensate.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
2120 –Avoid paralytic agents and heavy sedation that can
depress cough.
–Continuous suctioning of subglottic secretions.
/square6Use small-bore enteral feeding tubes .
/square6Elevate the head of the bed by >30 degrees.
/square6Incentive spirometry is recommended to prevent
postoperative pneumonia.
/square6Use of kinetic beds.
Q.Suppurative or necrotizing pneumonia.
Q.Staphylococcal pneumonia.
Q.Klebsiella pneumoniae .
/square6Suppurative (or necrotizing) pneumonia is a form
of pneumonic consolidation in which there isdestruction of the lung parenchyma by theinflammatory process. Suppurative pneumona can
give rise to lung abscess which is a large localized
collection of pus. Suppurative pneumonia can occureither as community-acquired or hospital-acquiredpneumonia.
/square6Organisms responsible— Staph. aureus  or Klebsiella
pneumoniae .
/square6Aspiration of septic material during operations on
the nose, mouth or throat under general anesthesia,
or of vomitus during anesthesia or coma can produce
suppurative pneumonia.
/square6Bacterial infection of a pulmonary infarct or of acollapsed lobe may also produce a suppurativepneumonia or a lung abscess.
Staphylococcal Pneumonia
Clinical Features
/square6Fever, dyspnea and other constitutional symptoms.
Staphylococcal pneumonia is often preceded by
influenza.
/square6Cough with large amounts of foul smelling sputumsometimes blood-stained.
/square6Pleuritic chest pain.
/square6RS examination usually reveals signs of consolida-
tion; signs of cavitation. Pleural rub may be present.
/square6Dissemination to other organs may cause osteo-
myelitis, endocarditis or brain abscesses.
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray: Homogeneous lobar or segmental
opacity. Abscess may be present with an air fluid
level. Additional radiographic features include multi-
lobar shadowing, cavitation, and pneumatoceles.
/square6Sputum Gram stain and culture sensitivity.
Management
/square6Flucloxacillin 1–2 g 6-hourly IV plus clarithromycin500 mg 12-hourly IV. If MRSA is suspected, linezolid
or vancomycin should be added.Klebsiella pneumoniae
Clinical Features
/square6More common in men, alcoholics and diabetics. It
can be either community-acquired or hospital-
acquired. It is one of the most common causes of
hospital-acquired pneumonia. Upper lobe involve-ment common. The sputum in Klebsiella pneumoniae
is described as “red currant jelly.” This is because
K. pneumoniae  causes significant inflammation and
necrosis of the surrounding tissue. Complicationsinclude lung abscess, cavitation, empyema, andpleural adhesions.
Investigations
/square6Leukocytosis is common.
/square6Sputum Gram’s stain and culture sensitivity.
/square6Chest X-ray—upper lobe involvement is common.Sometimes bulging fissure sign is seen in theaffected area because of severe inflammation.
Treatment
/square6Preferred:  Third-generation cephalosporin. For
severe infections, add an aminoglycoside.
/square6Alternatives: Aztreonam, imipenem, meropenem,
aminoglycoside, or a fluoroquinolone.
Q.Legionnaires’ disease.
/square6Legionnaires’ disease was first recognized in 1976,
when an outbreak of pneumonia took place during
the annual convention of the American Legion at a
Philadelphia hotel.
Etiology
/square6The causative agent is Legionella pneumophila which
is a gram-negative aerobic bacillus. Legionella
pneumophila  causes 2 distinct disease entities;
Legionnaires’ disease (LD) and Pontiac fever.Legionnaires’ disease (LD) is characterized by pneu-
monia. Pontiac fever is a short-term illness mani-
festing as fever and myalgias without pneumonia.
/square6Its natural habitat is water. It is ubiquitous, and isfound in rivers and lakes where it can survive foryears at very low temperatures.
/square6Human infection is acquired via inhalation aerosolsfrom contaminated water or soil. Sources of infectionare water distribution system colonized by legionella,contaminated shower heads and faucets in patientrooms and air conditioning systems. Legionella
infection is not transmitted from person to person.
Clinical Features
/square6The incubation period is 2–10 days.
/square6Males are affected more often. Smokers and theimmunocompromised are also more at risk.

/square6Diseases of Respiratory System121
2/square6It causes pneumonia which begins with high fever,
cough and dyspnea. Extrapulmonary manifesta-
tions can occur due to bacteremia. Gastrointestinal
symptoms include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea
(watery, not bloody), abdominal pain, and anorexia.
Neurologic symptoms include headache, lethargy,
encephalopathy, and altered mental status.
/square6There may be relative bradycardia.
/square6Failure to respond to beta-lactam antibiotics is a clue
to diagnosis.
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray usually shows lobar pneumonia,
sometimes with a small pleural effusion.
/square6Sputum Gram stain shows numerous neutrophils
and gram-negative rods.
/square6Hyponatremia, elevated creatinine and liver
enzymes can occur.
/square6Diagnosis is by the direct fluorescent antibody
(DFA) test of the sputum. Serum IgM antibody
showing a fourfold rise in titer between paired sera
or a single value of >1:256 is also diagnostic.
/square6Urinary antigen testing: Legionella  lipopolysaccha-
ride antigen is excreted in the urine and can be
detected by ELISA, radioimmunoassay (RIA), or
latex agglutination test. The antigen becomes detect-
able in 80% of patients on days 1–3 of clinical illness.
Urine antigen testing is very useful to confirm the
diagnosis as this test is not affected by antibiotics
and urine sample is easy to obtain than sputum.
Treatment
/square6Azithromycin (for 5 to 10 days) or levofloxacin (for
1 to 2 weeks) are the antibiotics of choice and are
effective as monotherapy.
Q.Discuss the etiology, pathology, clinical features
and management of bronchiectasis.
/square6Bronchiectasis is an abnormal and permanent
dilatation of bronchi.
/square6It can be congenital or acquired and localized or
diffuse.
/square6It leads to chronic or recurrent infection in the
dilated bronchi, copious sputum production and
hemoptysis.
Etiopathogenesis
/square6Development of bronchiectasis is mainly due to two
factors; infection and obstruction or both. Infection
leads to inflammation and destruction of the
bronchial wall, damages respiratory epithelium and
impairs mucociliary clearance. This leads to pooling
of secretions, and dilatation of bronchi. Dilated
bronchi become more susceptible to infection and
thus, a vicious cycle results. Pulmonary tuberculosis
leads to fibrosis, distorted and dilated bronchi./square6Bronchial obstruction due to any reason can lead
to recurrent infections and development of
bronchiectasis.
/square6Some congenital disorders like dyskinetic cilia or
mucoviscidosis can also predispose to bronchiec-
tasis.
/square6A congenital condition, Kartagener’s syndrome is
characterized by a combination of situs inversus,
bilateral bronchiectasis and abnormal cilia lining
the respiratory epithelium. This condition leads to
stagnant secretions and repeated bronchial
infections which lead to bronchiectasis.
/square6Bronchiectasis usually affects lower lobe bronchi.
Upper lobe bronchiectasis is usually due to tuber-
culosis.
/square6Three forms of bronchiectasis have been recog-
nized, namely cylindrical, fusiform, and saccular
(cystic).
– In the cylindrical type, there is uniform dilatation
of bronchi.
– In the fusiform type, dilatation is irregular with
tapering at both ends.
– In saccular type, there are multiple bulgings from
side wall of bronchi.
/square6The bronchial epithelium may be ulcerated with
exposure of thin-walled capillaries in the sub-
mucosae which are responsible for hemoptysis.
Causes of Bronchiectasis
Bronchial Obstruction
/square6Foreign body
/square6Tumor
/square6Stenosis
/square6Enlarged lymph nodes
/square6Impacted secretions
Infections
/square6Childhood pneumonias in measles, whooping
cough
/square6Pulmonary tuberculosis
Figure 2.4

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
2122 /square6Bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
/square6Repeated chest infections due to immunodeficient
states
Miscellaneous
/square6Cystic fibrosis
/square6Kartagener’s syndrome
/square6α1 antitrypsin deficiency
/square6Immotile cilia syndrome
Clinical Features
/square6Persistent or recurrent cough with copious sputumfor several years. There is postural variation tocough and sputum quantity depending on whicharea of the lung is involved. Some patients mayhave no sputum with cough. This entity is called
bronchiectasis sicca .
/square6Sputum is often blood-stained, and occasionally
foul-smelling. Hemoptysis can be massive due toerosion of a hypertrophied bronchial artery.
/square6Patients may have dyspnea and wheezing whenunderlying COPD is also present.
/square6When there is secondary infection, quantity ofsputum increases, becomes more purulent, foulsmelling and often more bloody. Patients may alsohave fever and other constitutional symptoms.
/square6Patients are usually malnourished and in a childthere may be growth retardation.
/square6Physical examination may reveal coarse, leatherycrepitations, rhonchi, and bronchial breath sounds
over the area of bronchiectasis reflecting damaged
airways containing secretions and consolidation.Clubbing is usually present. Patients with severeB/L bronchiectasis may have cor pulmonale andright ventricular failure.
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray may show cystic lesions in cysticbronchiectasis. B/L honeycombing (ring shadows)
can occur reflecting end on view of dilated
bronchi. When seen longitudinally, the dilatedand thickened bronchi appear as “tram tracks”.Chest X-ray may be normal in patients with limiteddisease.
/square6Bronchography is instillation of a radio-opaque dyeinto airways and then taking X-ray images. Thiscan provide excellent visualization of bronchiectaticairways and was once gold standard for the
diagnosis of bronchiectasis. But now this technique
has been replaced by HRCT.
/square6High resolution computed tomography (HRCT) of
the chest is now the preferred method for diagnosis
because it is noninvasive. It can pick up even slightabnormalities missed by chest X-ray.
/square6Bronchoscopy may be done if a foreign body or ade-noma is suspected to be the cause of bronchiectasis./square6In diffuse bilateral bronchiectasis with early age ofonset, measurement of sweat chloride levels to ruleout cystic fibrosis and assessment of nasal orbronchial cilia or sperm for primary ciliary dys-kinesia may be required.
/square6Pulmonary function tests  show both restrictive and
obstructive ventilatory dysfunction. Airwayobstruction is due to retention of secretions andbronchial inflammation, whereas the restrictivechanges are due to atelectasis and scarring of the
lung parenchyma.
Complications
/square6Massive hemoptysis, empyema, respiratory failure,
cor pulmonale, pericarditis, metastatic abscesses,and secondary amyloidosis.
Management
/square6Medical management consists of postural drainageof the secretions, expectorants, bronchodilators andantibiotics. Regular physiotherapy preventsaccumulation of secretions and repeated infections.
Use of mucolytics like N-acetylcystiene and
bromhexine may help in clearing the secretions. Ifsecondary infection is suspected, broad-spectrumantibiotics such as ampicillin, amoxicillin,trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, or cefaclor is giventill the organism is identified. If Pseudomonas
aeruginosa  is suspected a quinolone or amino-
glycoside or third-generation cephalosporin is used.Metronidazole can be added if anaerobic infectionis suspected. Bronchodilators relieve airflowobstruction and aid clearance of secretions.
/square6Surgical resection is considered when bronchiec-tasis is localized and the morbidity is substantialdespite adequate medical therapy.
/square6Bronchial artery embolisation can be considered inpatients with recurrent large hemoptysis.
/square6Influenza vaccination (yearly) and pneumococcalvaccination is recommended for all patients with
bronchiectasis.
/square6Underlying conditions should be treated to slow
the progression of lung disease. For example,replacement therapy in α
1 antitrypsin deficiency.
Q.Cystic fibrosis.
/square6The first known reference to cystic fibrosis (CF) is
an adage from northern European folklore: “Woeto that child which when kissed on the foreheadtastes salty. He is bewitched and soon must die.”This saying describes the salty sweat that is the basis
of an important diagnostic test and early mortality
of cystic fibrosis.
/square6Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a genetic (monogenic)disorder that presents as a multisystem disease. It
is characterized by recurrent airway infection

/square6Diseases of Respiratory System123
2(which leads to bronchiectasis), exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency and intestinal dysfunction, abnormalsweat gland function, and urogenital dysfunction.
/square6It usually presents in childhood but some patients
may present in adulthood.
/square6Earlier, patients used to die in childhood but now
because of improvement in therapy patients reachmore than 30 years of age. Pulmonary involvement
occurs in 90% of patients surviving the neonatal
period. End-stage lung disease is the principal causeof death.
Pathogenesis
/square6Cystic fibrosis (CF) is an autosomal recessivedisease resulting from mutation in a gene locatedon chromosome 7. Mutation in this gene leads toabsent or defective CF transmembrane conductanceregulator (CFTR). The CFTR protein functions bothas a cyclic AMP-regulated Cl
– channel and as
regulator of other ion channels. CFTR is located in
the apical (lumen-facing) membrane of epitheliumin the airways, pancreatic ducts, intestine, biliaryducts, and in the apical and basolateral membranesof the sweat gland duct.
/square6Normally the sweat gland duct absorbs Na throughNa
+ channels and Cl– through CFTR Cl– channels
as sweat flows through it. In CF, loss of CFTRprevents absorption of Cl
– which in turn prevents
absorption of Na+ to maintain electroneutrality. As
a result, sweat contains high Na+ and Cl– concentra-
tions.
/square6In the exocrine pancreas, the absence of the CFTRCl
– channel in the apical membrane of pancreatic
ductal epithelial cells interferes with secretion of
Na+ and bicarbonate into the duct. The failure to
secrete Na+ and bicarbonate and water leads to
retention of enzymes in the pancreas and ultimatelydestruction of pancreas.
/square6In the liver, loss of CFTR Cl– channels disrupts
normal salt and water balance in the small biliaryducts, and causes obstruction.
/square6Obstruction of the small ducts in the male genitaltract also leads to the atrophy, fibrosis, or absenceof the vas deferens, tail and body of the epididymis,and seminal vesicles.
/square6In the ileum, disruption of salt and water secretionproduces thick, dehydrated intestinal contents thatobstruct the ileum in the newborn, causingmeconium ileus and producing meconium ileus-equivalent later in life.
/square6Repeated infections of the airways may be due toimpairment of local defense mechanisms due tohigh NaCl concentration in the mucosa, reducedmucociliary clearance, and defective phagocytosisof bacteria. Thick, viscous, purulent sputum is
formed that obstructs airways and lead to
bronchiectasis.Clinical Manifestations
/square6Patients with CF can present at several ages with avariety of clinical manifestations.
/square6Newborns may present with meconium ileus,infants and children may present with failure tothrive, and older children and adults may presentwith recurrent respiratory tract infections.
/square6Pancreas involvement leads to fat and proteinmalabsorption. Patients have steatorrhea. Childrenmay present with failure to thrive. Generalizededema can occur due to hypoproteinemia.
/square6Cough is the common manifestation of respiratorysystem involvement due to recurrent infections.Episodes of cough tend to persist longer thanexpected for an acute respiratory illness and, withtime, occur more and more frequently. Sputum is
thick, purulent, and often green coloured due to
pseudomonas infection. With recurrent infectionspatient develops symptoms of bronchiectasis.
/square6Other features are infertility due to genitourinary
tract involvement and cholelithiasis due to biliary
tract involvement.
Investigations
/square6The diagnosis of CF is by a combination of clinicalcriteria and analyses of sweat Cl
– values. If sweat Cl–
concentration is ≥60 mEq/L, it suggests cystic fibrosis.
/square6Genetic testing—for the presence of CFTR gene
mutation.
/square6The nasal transepithelial potential difference israised in CF.
/square6Other useful tests include chest X-ray, CT chest,pulmonary function tests, etc.
Treatment
Antibiotics
/square6Lung infections require an intensive course of paren-teral antibiotics for 2 to 3 weeks. The choice of anti-biotics is based on sputum cultures and sensitivity.
Since P. aeruginosa  is a particularly common pathogen,
a combination of an aminoglycoside and a beta-lactam antibiotic are commonly used.
Chest Physiotherapy
/square6Chest percussion and postural drainage are helpfulin clearing purulent secretions.
Bronchodilators
/square6Bronchodilator therapy should be consideredduring exacerbations and in hospitalized patients.
Deoxyribonuclease
/square6DNA released from neutrophils forms long fibrilswhich increases the viscosity of sputum. Deoxyribo-
nuclease can cleave DNA and decrease sputum visco-
sity which helps in clearance of sputum by cough

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
2124 Pancreatic Enzymes
/square6Since pancreatic enzymes are deficient in cystic
fibrosis, pancreatic enzyme supplementation(lipase, trypsin) at mealtimes is recommended. The
fat-soluble vitamins A, D, and E are also given daily
since they also require pancreatic enzymes forabsorption. Vitamin K may be give as requiredbased on prothrombin time.
Ivacaftor
/square6The cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductanceregulator (CFTR), ivacaftor, has been shown toimprove lung function, reduce the risk of
pulmonary exacerbations, and reduce the
concentration of sweat chloride.
Gene Therapy
/square6The best approach to treat this disease would be totransfer a normal CFTR gene or cDNA into theaffected cells. Progress in this area of research hasbeen substantial and it is hoped that successful genetherapy will become a reality.
Other Supportive Measures
/square6Hypertonic saline inhalation has been shown to
increase hydration of airway surface liquid in
patients with CF and improves lung function plusreduces recurrent pulmonary exacerbations.Adequate salt should be taken during hot weathersince excess salt is lost in the sweat. Adequateimmunizations, including influenza, and pneumo-
coccus are mandatory. Smoking should be avoided.
Lung transplantation should be considered forpatients with an FEV1 less than 30% predicted.
Q.Etiology, clinical features and management of lung
abscess.
/square6Lung abscess is defined as necrosis of the pulmo-
nary tissue and formation of cavity containingnecrotic debris or fluid caused by microbial infec-
tion. It is usually single and measures >2 cm in
diameter. The formation of multiple small (<2 cm)abscesses is occasionally referred to as necrotizingpneumonia.
/square6Lung abscess may be acute or chronic, single ormultiple.
Etiology
/square6Lung abscess is caused most frequently by bacteria,usually anaerobes.
/square6The routes of infection include aspiration of oral
secretions, endobronchial obstruction, and hematogenousseeding of the lung.  Lung abscess can also occur due
to secondary infection of a pre-existent cavity, cystor bulla. A lung neoplasm may cavitate and mimic
lung abscess./square6Aspiration of the oropharyngeal secretions is the
most common way of abscess formation. It usuallyoccurs in patients with altered consciousness,anesthesia, alcohol intoxication, sedative drugs, headinjury, cerebrovascular accidents, esophageal stric-ture, and during seizures. Poor oral hygiene and dental
caries is a risk factor for development of abscess.
/square6Bronchial obstruction due to tumor or foreign body
and bronchiectasis may predispose to secondaryinfection and abscess formation. Immunodeficient
state is also a predisposing factor.
/square6Hematogenous seeding of the lungs occur due to
suppurative thromboembolism (e.g. septic embolismdue to IV drug use) or right-sided endocarditis.
Typically multiple lung abscesses occur in such cases.
Organisms Causing Lung Abscess
The most common anaerobic pathogens are:
• Peptostreptococcus• Fusobacterium• Prevotella• Bacteroides
The most common aerobic pathogens are:
• Streptococci• Staphylococci
Other less common organisms are:
• Klebsiella•Pseudomonas aeruginosa,  nocardia, mycobacteria, or fungi
in immunocompromised patients
• Rarely Entamoeba histolytica , paragonimiasis, and
Burkholderia pseudomaleii
Pathology
/square6By definition a lung abscess is more than 2 cm in
diameter and has a wall of variable thickness. Theabscess cavity is usually filled with purulent secretions.
/square6Posterior segments of the right upper lobe andapical segments of the lower lobe of both lungs areaffected commonly after aspiration. Abscesses dueto other mechanisms may involve any segment. Anabscess usually communicates with a bronchus.
Clinical Features
/square6Patients usually present with high-grade fever withchills and rigors. Cough with purulent sputum,dyspnea and chest pain are usually present.Hemoptysis may also be present.
/square6Physical examination may show clubbing. Theremay be amphoric or cavernous bronchial breathsounds over the cavity. Crepitations and pleural rubmay be heard.
Investigations
/square6Blood count shows polymorphonuclear leukocytosis.
/square6X-ray chest shows the abscess cavity with fluid level.
/square6CT scan may be required to differentiate lungabscess from loculated empyema.

/square6Diseases of Respiratory System125
2/square6Smear and culture of sputum or bronchial aspirate
can identify the causative organism.
/square6Bronchoscopy is indicated if foreign body or tumoris suspected.
Complications
/square6Bronchopleural fistula and empyema formation.
/square6Pericarditis.
/square6Massive hemoptysis.
/square6Metastatic infection (brain abscess, purulentmeningitis).
/square6Secondary amyloidosis may develop in chroniclung abscess.
Treatment
/square6Intravenous clindamycin or amoxicillin clavulanatecan be used as initial therapy pending organismidentification. Penicillin plus metronidazole isanother option especially if aspiration is susupected.
/square6Lung abscess which develops in hospital are usually
caused by Klebsiella pneumoniae, Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, S. aureus  and anaerobes, and require
treatment with a combination of a third-generationcephalosporin, aminoglycoside and metronidazole.
/square6Antibiotic therapy should be continued until radio-graphic resolution of the abscess cavity is demon-strated. Usually 6 to 8 weeks of therapy is required.
/square6Physiotherapy in the form of postural drainage canhelp clear the secretions.
/square6Chronic abscesses not responding to medical
therapy require surgical resection.
Q.Empyema.
/square6Empyema is collection of pus in the pleural space.
Etiology
/square6Empyema develops when pyogenic bacteria, fungi,
parasites, or mycobacteria invade the pleural space,either from an adjacent pneumonia or from directinoculation (e.g. penetrating chest injuries) or othersource.
/square6Following are the causes of empyema.
Traumatic Penetrating chest injuries
Iatrogenic Thoracic surgery
Following pleural aspiration, and inter-
costal tube drainage
Infections Pneumonia
Tuberculosis
Bronchiectasis
Lung abscessMediastinitisOsteomyelitis of ribs, vertebrae
Spread from Rupture of subphrenic abscess and liver
other sites abscessClinical Features
/square6Patient usually presents with fever, pleuritic chest
pain, and dyspnea. Cough with purulent sputummay be seen in bronchopleural fistula.
/square6Examination reveals decreased chest movement,stony dull percussion note, absent breath sounds,tenderness and bulging of intercostal spaces on theside of empyema. Clubbing is usually present.
/square6Rarely, empyema can penetrate the pleura andcollect in the subcutaneous tissue forming aswelling on the chest wall which increases oncoughing (cough impulse). This is called “empyema
necessitans”, and is seen in actinomycotic infection.
/square6Patient may be toxic with signs of sepsis. Chronic
empyema leads to pleural thickening, chest defor-mity and scoliosis. Extensive pleural calcification
may occur.
Diagnosis
/square6Empyema should be suspected in any case of
pneumonia with pleural effusion.
/square6Chest X-ray appearance of empyema is the same
as that of pleural effusion, but loculations may be
present more often.
/square6Ultrasound of chest can show fibrin strandssuggesting empyema.
/square6Aspiration of pleural fluid can confirm thediagnosis of empyema. Gram stain, AFB stain andculture should be done from the pleural aspirate.The pleural fluid pH is usually less than 7.2, LDH
level is more than 1000 IU/L and glucose content
is less than 60 mg/dl.
Complications
/square6Sepsis with septic shock.
/square6Pleural thickening with calcification and fibrosis.
/square6Bronchopleural fistula.
/square6Deformities of the thoracic cage.
/square6Chronic discharging sinus.
/square6Secondary amyloidosis.
/square6Metastatic infection.
Management
/square6Antibiotics are given based on culture and sensiti-vity. Pending culture sensitivity results, combination
of penicillin (gram-positive cover), an amino-
glycoside (gram-negative cover) and metronidazole
(anaerobic cover) may be used. The duration oftreatment is usually six weeks.
/square6Empyema due to tuberculosis or other organisms
such as Entamoeba histolytica  and Actinomyces
should be treated with appropriate antibiotics.
/square6Empyema should be drained either by closed oropen methods. Closed drainage is done by needle
aspiration or intercostal tube drainage under a
water seal. ICD can be removed when the drainage

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
2126 is less than 25 to 50 ml in 24 hours for two consecu-
tive days. Open drainage by thoracotomy is required,if there is bronchopleural fistula or multiple  locula-
tions, or the fluid is too thick.
Q.Describe the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical fea-
tures, diagnosis and management of pulmonarytuberculosis.
Q.Describe the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical fea-
tures, diagnosis and management of post primary(reactivation) pulmonary tuberculosis.
Q.Antituberculous drugs.
Q.Newer methods of diagnosis of tuberculosis.
Q.Sequelae of tuberculosis.
/square6Tuberculosis is an infectious disease caused by
Mycobacterium tuberculosis.  It is one of the oldest
infections known. It usually affects the lungs,although in up to one-third of cases other organsare involved. Tuberculosis is curable if properlytreated. Untreated disease can be fatal within
5 years in more than half of cases.
Etiology
/square6M. tuberculosis  is a rod-shaped, non-spore-forming,
aerobic bacterium. Robert Koch discovered thisbacillus.
/square6They do not take up Gram stain because of the highlipid content, but can be stained by the Ziehl-Neelsen (Z-N) stain. After staining with Z-N stainthey resist decolorisation with acid. That is whythey are also known as acid-fast bacilli.
/square6Acid fastness is mainly due to the organism’s highcontent of mycolic acids, long-chain cross-linkedfatty acids, and other cell-wall lipids. Other micro-
organisms which are acid fast are Nocardia,
Rhodococcus, Legionella micdadei , Isospora, and
Cryptosporidium.
/square6Mycobacteria are rapidly destroyed by sunlight andultraviolet light. But if protected from sunlight theycan survive for weeks to months. Tubercle bacilliin milk are killed by pasteurization.
Epidemiology
/square6According to the WHO, there were 10 million casesof TB worldwide in 2018. India is the highest TB
burden country with an estimated incidence of
2.6 million cases. It is estimated that about 40% ofthe Indian population is infected with TB bacteria,the vast majority of whom have latent rather thanactive TB. Recent data on global trends indicate thatincidence is falling in most regions.
/square6The incidence of tuberculosis is highest amongadult men than women. The risk increases in the
elderly, due to waning immunity and comorbidity./square6Genetic factors also play a role in innate non-immune
resistance to infection with M. tuberculosis.  Hence,
susceptibility to tuberculosis differs in differentpopulations.
/square6Tuberculosis spreads by airborne droplet nucleiproduced by patients with active pulmonary tuber-culosis. The risk of infection is directly related tothe duration and intensity of exposure to air conta-minated with infected droplets. Patients whosesputum is smear-positive can have up to 1 lakh
organisms per ml of sputum and are highly
infectious. Respiratory secretions aerosolized bycoughing, sneezing or talking are sufficiently small(1–10 μ) and can remain suspended for long periods.
A cough can produce 3000 infectious droplet nuclei.Talking for 5 minutes can also produce similar
number of droplets, and sneezing produces more
droplets. A single droplet is sufficient to infect aperson if prolonged exposure is there. In hospitalwards, six air changes per hour eliminate infectious-ness; hence, good ventilation is important toprevent infection.
Pathogenesis
/square6Majority of inhaled droplet nuclei are trapped in
the upper airways and expelled by ciliated mucosal
cells. A small fraction reaches the alveoli. There,alveolar macrophages phagocytose the tuberclebacilli. Now two things can happen. Either macro-phages kill the bacilli and clear the infection orthe bacilli multiply within macrophages and kill the
macrophages.
/square6If bacilli multiply within macrophages, they
produce cytokines and chemokines that attractother phagocytic cells, including monocytes, otheralveolar macrophages, and neutrophils, whicheventually form a nodular granulomatous structurecalled the tubercle. Tubercles have central caseative
necrosis. These lesions may heal by fibrosis and
calcification, or undergo further evolution. If theinfection is not controlled, the tubercle enlarges andthe bacilli spread to local lymph nodes. This leadsto local lymphadenopathy. The lesion producedby the expansion of the tubercle into the lung
parenchyma with local lymphadenopathy is called
the Ghon complex.
/square6The caseous center of the lesion liquefies and breaksinto bronchi. Once the lesion empties into bronchi,cavities are formed. Bronchial walls as well as bloodvessels are invaded and destroyed, leading to morecavities and hemoptysis. The liquefied caseous
material, containing large numbers of bacilli, is
brought out as sputum and is infectious to others.
/square6The bacilli continue to multiply until an effectivecell-mediated immunity (CMI) develops usually
two to six weeks after infection. If effective CMI
does not develop, the infection continues to spread

/square6Diseases of Respiratory System127
2and destroy the lung. Bacilli may spread hemato-
genously to produce disseminated TB. Miliary TBis disseminated disease with lesions resemblingmillet seeds.
/square6Even after healing, viable bacilli may remaindormant within macrophages or in the necroticmaterial for many years or throughout the patient’slife. Reactivation TB results when the persistentbacteria in a host begin to multiply due to decreasein host immunity. Immunosuppressive conditions
associated with reactivation TB include: HIV
infection, diabetes mellitus, corticosteroid use andold age.
/square6When immunity develops to tubercle bacilli, the
person also shows reactivity towards PPD skin test.
Hence, PPD skin test positivity suggests M. tuber-
culosis  infection. This reactivity is mainly due to
previously sensitized CD4+ lymphocytes, whichare attracted to the skin-test site.
Risk factors for developing active tuberculosis among
persons who have been infected with tubercle bacilli
/square6HIV infection
/square6Silicosis
/square6Chronic renal failure/hemodialysis
/square6Diabetes
/square6IV drug use
/square6Immunosuppressive treatment
/square6Tobacco smoking
/square6Malnutrition
Clinical Features
/square6Manifestations of pulmonary tuberculosis (TB) canbe divided into 3 stages; primary tuberculosis, latenttuberculosis, and active tuberculosis.
Primary Tuberculosis
/square6Fever is the most common symptom. It is usually
low grade and can last for weeks to months.
/square6Pleuritic chest pain and pleural effusion can be
present. Other symptoms are fatigue, cough,arthralgias and pharyngitis. The physical examina-
tion is usually normal but signs of pleural effusion
may be present.
Active Tuberculosis (Post-primary Disease)
/square6Active TB accounts for most of the adult cases inthe non-HIV-infected population. It results fromreactivation of a previously dormant focus acquiredat the time of the primary infection. It affects apicalposterior segments commonly.
/square6Symptoms begin insidiously and include cough,weight loss and fatigue, fever and night sweats.Patients may present with only fever and nightsweats without cough. Pleuritic chest pain, dyspnea
and hemoptysis are also reported by some patients.
Pleuritic chest pain signifies inflammation abuttingor invading the pleura. Dyspnea occurs when there
is extensive parenchymal involvement, pleuraleffusion, or a pneumothorax. Pleural effusion canprogress to frank empyema.
/square6Initially cough may be dry. But as the diseaseprogresses, cough becomes productive with yellowor yellow-green sputum. Frank hemoptysis, due tocaseous sloughing or endobronchial erosion,typically is present later in the disease and is rarelymassive.
/square6Physical findings include weight loss, signs ofpleural effusion, crepitations and signs of consolida-tion, if large areas are involved. Amphoric breathsounds may be heard over cavities. Clubbing may
be present.
Latent Tuberculosis
/square6Occurs after most primary tuberculosis cases. In
about 95% of cases of primary tuberculosis, thebody’s immune response suppresses bacillaryreplication and contains it. Foci of bacilli in the lungor other sites resolve into epithelioid cell granulomas,which may have caseous and necrotic centers.
Tubercle bacilli can survive in this material for
years. However, patients do not have active diseaseand cannot transmit the organism to others. Activetuberculosis (reactivation) may later develop if thehost immunity is decreased.
Endobronchial Tuberculosis
/square6Endobronchial tuberculosis may develop by directextension to the bronchi from an adjacent
parenchymal focus such as cavity, or spread of
organisms to the bronchi through infected sputum.
/square6Endobronchial TB can cause obstruction, atelectasis,bronchiectasis, and tracheal or bronchial stenosis.
/square6Symptoms of endobronchial TB include cough withsputum and hemoptysis
/square6Physical findings include diminished breath sounds,rhonchi or wheezing due to narrowing of bronchus.
Diagnosis
/square6Chest X-ray:  In primary tuberculosis it may show
pleural effusion, pulmonary infiltrates usually onright side and perihilar region. In post primary
tuberculosis it may show cavities, hilar adenopathy
and fibrosis.
/square6Microscopy:  Sputum is stained by Ziehl-Neelsen
stain. At least three sputum samples should be
tested. Demonstration of acid-fast bacilli on sputum
smear does not confirm the diagnosis of tuberculosis,since saprophytic non-tuberculous mycobacteriamay colonise the airways or cause pulmonarydisease. Cultures of sputum for M. tuberculosis  is
diagnostic. In patients who do not produce sputum
or those whose sputum is negative for AFB but still
TB is suspected, fiberoptic bronchoscopy can be

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
2128 used to obtain specimens. Through fiberoptic
bronchoscopy bronchial washings are obtained andtested for AFB. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy can alsodiagnose endobronchial TB and biopsies also canbe obtained. Early morning aspiration of gastriccontents after an overnight fast is an alternative to
bronchoscopy. Gastric aspirates are suitable only
for culture and not for stained smear, becausenon-tuberculous mycobacteria may be presentin the stomach in the absence of tuberculousinfection.
/square6Culture:  Tubercle bacilli grow slowly in culture.
Hence, it may take 6–8 weeks to grow them in solidmedia. A radiometric culture system ( Bactec ) may
allow detection of mycobacterial growth in as littleas several days. Once M. tuberculosis  is grown in
culture drug sensitivity tests also can be done to
rule out MDR TB. Sensitivity testing is done when
a treatment regimen is failing, and when sputumcultures remain positive even after 3 months oftherapy. M. tuberculosis  may sometimes be cultured
in blood of 15% of patients with tuberculosis.Pleural fluid cultures for M. tuberculosis  are positive
only rarely.
/square6Histopathology:  In patients with TB pleural effusions,
needle biopsy of the pleura reveals granulomas in50% of patients.
/square6Serologic tests: Demonstration of IgG antibody
against mycobacterial antigens by ELISA. This test
is not done routinely.
/square6Polymerase chain reaction:  To detect DNA of TB
bacilli is a useful test but is expensive. It is used todiagnose CNS tuberculosis like TB meningitis.
/square6Adenosine deaminase (ADA):  ADA level of >50 U/L in
pleural fluid is highly suggestive of tuberculous
pleural effusion.
/square6PPD skin testing (Mantoux test):  In the absence of a
history of BCG vaccination, a positive skin testprovides additional support for the diagnosis of
tuberculosis.
Newer Methods of Diagnosis of Tuberculosis
/square6IFN-gamma release assays (IGRA):  These assays
measure T cell release of IFN-gamma in responseto stimulation with TB-specific antigens. A positivetest result suggests that M. tuberculosis  infection is
likely; a negative result suggests that infection isunlikely. An indeterminate result indicates an
uncertain likelihood of M. tuberculosis infection.
There are two commercially available kits T-SPOT.TB and QuantiFERON-TB Gold. IGRAs aremore specific than tuberculin test because of lesscross-reactivity due to BCG vaccination andinfection by nontuberculous mycobacteria. IGRA
does not help differentiate latent tuberculosis
infection from active tuberculosis./square6Nucleic acid based tests:  These are based on the
detection of DNA of Mycobacterium TB. The
available tests in this category are: Line probe assay
(LPA), CB-NAAT (cartridge based nucleic acid
amplification test), and TrueNat.
/square6Line probe assay (LPA):  LPA is a rapid technique
based on polymerase chain reaction (PCR) that is
used to detect Mycobacterium tuberculosis  and its
sensitivity to rifampicin and isoniazid. LPA can be
used for testing culture isolates as well as AFB
smears.
/square6CB-NAAT (cartridge based nucleic acid amplification
test):  This test is marketed as GeneXpert and the
kits are manufactured by a California based
company. CB-NAAT is an automated cartridge-
based molecular technique which not only detects
Mycobacterium tuberculosis  but also rifampicin
resistance within two hours and has been endorsed
by WHO for rapid diagnosis of tuberculosis.
/square6TrueNat: This  is a new molecular test which is
similar to CB-NAAT. It is developed by a Bangalore
based Indian company and can diagnose TB within
3 hours as well as test for resistance to Rifampicin.
The sensitivity and specificity of TrueNAT test is
equal to CB-NAAT. Due to the portability of its
battery-powered testing platform, test can be done
even at remote places. ICMR has recommended the
use of TrueNat for diagnosis of TB and for detecting
resistance to rifampicin. In view of the recommenda-
tions of ICMR and the ease of use of TrueNat in
peripheral settings, it has been planned to use this
test across the country.
Treatment
/square6The aim of treatment is not only to cure patients
but also to prevent transmission to others. At least
three anti-TB drugs should be used to initiate
therapy in order to reduce bacterial resistance.
Antituberculous Drugs
/square6There are five main first-line drugs for the treatment
of tuberculosis: Isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide,
ethambutol, and streptomycin (HRZES). Note that
streptomycin is put under first line drugs by WHO
whereas it is put under second line drugs by CDC
(centre for disease control).
/square6Rifampicin, isoniazid, and streptomycin arebactericidal. Pyrazinamide and ethambutol are
bacteriostatic.
/square6The treatment regimen usually consists of initialintensive treatment for 2 months followed by 4–6
months of continuation phase. Initial phase includes
4 or more drugs and continuation phase 2 or more
drugs.

/square6Diseases of Respiratory System129
2TABLE 2.13: First line drugs
Drug Mechanism of action Dose/day Side effects
Isoniazid Inhibition of mycolic acid synthesis. 5 mg/kg Hepatitis, peripheral neuropathy, drug fever
It also disrupts DNA, lipid, carbo-
hydrate synthesis and metabolism
Rifampicin Inhibits bacterial DNA-dependent RNA 10 mg/kg Hepatitis, flu-like syndrome, thrombocytopenia
polymerase (rare)
Ethambutol Exact mechanism unknown. Thought to 15–20 mg/kg Optic neuritis
inhibit the synthesis of arabinogalactan,
a mycobacterial cell wall constituent
Pyrazinamide Inhibits fatty acid synthetase-I (FASI) of 20–25 mg/kg Hepatitis, hyperuricemia
M. tuberculosis
Streptomycin Inhibits bacterial protein synthesis by 0.75–1 g Ototoxicity, vestibular damage, renal toxicity
binding directly to the 30S ribosomalsubunits
TABLE 2.14: Second line drugs
Drug Mechanism of action Dose/day Side effects
Levofloxacin Inhibit DNA-gyrase 500 mg CNS excitation, seizures, tendon damage in
Moxifloxacin 400–800 mg children
Para-aminosalicylic Impairment of folate synthesis and inhibition 12 g Diarrhea, hepatitis, hypersensitivity reactions
acid (PAS) of iron uptake. PAS is a bacteriostatic drug
Ethionamide Inhibition of the synthesis of oxygenated 1 g Hepatitis
mycolic acid
Cycloserine Inhibits cell wall synthesis 1 g Depression, personality changes, psychosis,
convulsion
Thioacetazone Inhibits cyclopropane mycolic acid 150 mg Exfoliative dermatitis, hepatitis
synthases (CMASs)
Bedaquiline It is a diarylquinoline; inhibits mycobacterial 200 mg once Arthralgia, headache, hepatitis, QT prolongation
(new drug) adenosine 5'-triphosphate (ATP) synthase, daily for the first
an enzyme essential for the generation of 2 weeks, followed
energy in Mycobacterium tuberculosis by 3 times a week
for 22 weeks
Delamanid Inhibits mycolic acid synthesis 200 mg orally QT prolongation
(new drug) daily
Pretomanid Inhibits mycolic acid synthesis 200 mg orally Peripheral neuropathy, hepatitis, acne, head-
(new drug) daily ache, QT prolongation
Three new TB drugs, bedaquiline, delamanid, and pretomanid have become available. These are
recommended by the World Health Organisation (WHO) for the treatment of drug-resistant TB along with
other drugs.
WHO guidelines for the treatment of tuberculosis
TABLE 2.15: WHO guidelines for the treatment of tuberculosis
Category Treatment guidelines
New patients Recommended regimen
Those who have never had treatment for TB, or 2HRZE/4HR
have taken anti-TB drugs for less than 1 month. (2 months of HRZE daily followed by 4 months of HR daily)New patients may have positive or negative Alternative regimens
bacteriology and may have disease at any 2HRZE/4(HR) 3 (2 months of HRZE daily followed by 4 months of HR
anatomical site. thrice a week, or
2(HRZE) 3/4(HR) 3 (2 months of HRZE thrice a week followed by 4 months
of HR thrice a week).
(Contd.)

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
2130
DOT (Directly Observed Therapy)
/square6Treatment default is a major problem in TB
treatment. To improve this DOT has been designed.DOT is defined as “observation of the patient by ahealthcare provider or other responsible person asthe patient ingests anti-TB medications.” Drugs can
be given only two or three times per week. DOTS
refers to directly observed therapy short course.
/square6Although DOT programs require significantresources, they are very effective. DOT programs
have been found to improve cure rate while
decreasing the incidence of drug resistance andtreatment failure.
/square6The Center for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC) and the American Thoracic Society (ATS)
recommend that DOT be considered for all patients.In addition, all patients with drug resistant tuber-culosis should receive DOT. Read more details onDOT in the next page.
Monitoring Treatment
/square6Sputum should be examined monthly until AFBsmears and cultures are negative in patients with
pulmonary TB. By the end of the second month of
treatment >80% of patients will have negativesputum cultures. By the end of the third month,almost all patients should be culture-negative. AFBsmear becomes negative little later than culture dueto the presence of dead bacilli in the sputum. If
the patient’s sputum culture remains positive at
≥3 months, treatment failure and drug resistance
should be suspected. If cultures cannot be done,then AFB smear examination should be done at 2,5, and 6 months. Smears positive after 5 monthsare indicative of treatment failure.
/square6AFB smear and culture is difficult in patients withextrapulmonary tuberculosis. In these cases, theresponse to treatment should be assessed clinically.
/square6Serial chest radiographs are not recommended tomonitor response to treatment, as radiographicchanges may lag behind bacteriologic response.
However, a chest radiograph may be obtained at
the end of treatment and used for comparativepurposes should the patient develop symptoms of
recurrent tuberculosis months or years later.
/square6During treatment, patients should be monitored fordrug side effects. The most important side effect ishepatitis. Baseline LFT should be done for all patientsbefore starting ATT. LFT should be monitored
monthly thereafter. Up to 20% of patients have
small increases in AST (aspartate aminotransferase)up to three times the upper limit of normal withoutany symptoms. This is of no consequence. Forpatients with symptomatic hepatitis and those withmarked (five to six folds) elevations in serum levels
of AST, treatment should be stopped and drugs
reintroduced one at a time after liver function testshave returned to normal.
/square6Pyrazinamide should be stopped if the patient
develops gouty arthritis. Individuals who develop
autoimmune thrombocytopenia secondary torifampicin should not receive the drug thereafter.Similarly, the occurrence of optic neuritis withethambutol is an indication for permanent dis-continuation of this drug.
Treatment Failure and Relapse
/square6As mentioned above, treatment failure is suspected
when a patient’s sputum cultures remain positive
after 3 months or when AFB smears remain positiveafter 5 months. In such cases a drug susceptibilitytest to first- and second-line agents should be done.Drugs should be chosen based on susceptibilitytesting. Pending the results, same treatment can be
continued. However, if the patient’s clinical condi-
tion is deteriorating, treatment should be changedeven before the susceptibility test report becomesavailable. If so, at least two and preferably threedrugs that have never been used and to which thebacilli are likely to be susceptible should be added
while continuing isoniazid and rifampicn.
Sequelae of Pulmonary Tuberculosis
/square6Fibrosis and destruction of the lung.
/square6Bronchiectasis.
/square6Lung abscess.TABLE 2.15: WHO guidelines for the treatment of tuberculosis (contd.)
Category Treatment guidelines
Previously treated patients In settings where rapid molecular-based drug susceptibility testing (DST)
Those who have received 1 month or more of is available, the results should guide the choice of regimen. In settingsanti-TB drugs in the past, may have positive or where rapid molecular-based DST results are not available, empiric
negative bacteriology and may have disease at treatment should be started as follows:
any anatomical site. TB patients whose treatment has failed  or other patient groups with high
likelihood of MDR-TB should be started on an empirical MDR regimen
TB patients returning after defaulting or relapsing from their first treat-
ment course may receive the retreatment regimen containing first-line drugs
2HRZES/1HRZE/5HRE if country-specific data show low or medium levelsof MDR in these patients or if such data are not available. When DST
results become available, regimens should be adjusted appropriately.

/square6Diseases of Respiratory System131
2/square6Aspergilloma (fungal ball).
/square6Scar carcinoma.
/square6Chronic respiratory failure and cor pulmonale.
/square6Chronic tuberculous empyema and fibrothorax.
/square6Amyloidosis.
Prevention
/square6Early diagnosis and treatment:  TB should be
diagnosed and treated early in order to preventdeterioration of the disease and spread of theinfection.
/square6Examination of close contacts:  The close contacts of
TB patients, usually the household contacts, shouldbe examined. Tuberculin skin testing and/or chestX-ray examination is done for close contacts.
/square6Leading a healthy life style : Smoking and alcohol
intake should be stopped. Balanced diet should betaken. Adequate exercise, enough rest and sleepshould be encouraged.
/square6Chemoprophylaxis:  For household contacts of TB
patients and those with AIDS infection andHodgkin’s lymphoma, isoniazid, 300 mg/day for1 year, can reduce the incidence of tuberculosis.
/square6BCG (Bacillus Calmette-Guérin) vaccination:  All
newborn babies should be vaccinated to protectthem against tuberculosis.
Q.MDR tuberculosis.
Q.XDR tuberculosis.
/square6Multidrug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) refers
to tuberculosis resistant to at least isoniazid and
rifampicin, and possibly more drugs.
/square6Extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis (XDR-TB)
refers to tuberculosis resistant to at least isoniazid,rifampin, fluoroquinolones, and any of the inject-
able drugs used in treatment with second-line anti-
tuberculosis drugs (amikacin, capreomycin, andkanamycin).
/square6Primary drug-resistance occurs in a patient who has
never received antituberculosis therapy. Secondary
resistance refers to the development of resistanceduring or following chemotherapy, for what hadpreviously been drug-susceptible tuberculosis.
Diagnosis
/square6Sputum should be sent for culture and sensitivity.If a patient cannot produce sputum, sputuminduction should be done by hypertonic saline
nebulization. If an adequate sample is still not
produced, bronchoscopy may be used to obtainsputum samples or other specimens. In extra-pulmonary tuberculosis, samples of involved tissue(e.g. lymph nodes, bone, blood) should be obtainedfor culture and sensitivity testing as well as
pathology./square6Susceptibility testing for first- and second-line agents
should be performed at a reliable reference laboratory.
/square6There are many historical features which suggestdrug-resistant tuberculosis. These include:
– Previous treatment for active tuberculosis
– Tuberculosis treatment failure or relapse in a
patient with advanced HIV infection
– Contact with a case of drug-resistant tuberculosis
– Failure to respond to empiric therapy
Drugs used in MDR TB Treatment
/square6Latest WHO classification of drugs used to treat
drug resistant TB is as follows. Note that kanamycinand capreomycin are no longer recommended fortreatment of drug resistant TB.
TABLE 2.16: Drugs used in MDR TB treatment
Group A  (first choice Levofloxacin or moxifloxacin
drugs) Bedaquiline
Linezolid
Group B  (second choice Clofazimine
drugs) Cycloserine or terizidone
Group C  (includes all other Ethambutol
medicines that can be used Delamanid
when a regimen cannot be Pyrazinamide
composed with Group A Imipenem–cilastatin or
and B agents) meropenem
Amikacin ( or streptomycin)
Ethionamide or prothionamide
P-aminosalicylic acid (PAS)
Treatment of MDR-TB
/square6MDR TB should be managed by medical personnel
with expertise and experience in treating such cases.Laboratory facilities to document drug suscepti-bility and monitor response should be available.Each dose in an MDR regimen is given as DOT
throughout the treatment.
/square6When MDR TB is suspected, sputum for culture anddrug susceptibility testing (DST) should be sent and
patient should be started on empirical MDRregimen till the DST results are available.
Regimens for isoniazid-resistant tuberculosis
/square6In patients with confirmed isoniazid-resistant
tuberculosis, treatment with rifampicin, ethambutol,
pyrazinamide and levofloxacin is recommendedfor a duration of 6 months. There is no need to addstreptomycin or other injectable agents to the treat-ment regimen.
Regimens for rifampicin resistant TB (RRTB) and
MDR-TB
/square6Usually longer regimens (duration of 18–20 months)are used in the treatment of RRTB and MDR TB.
All three Group A agents and at least one Group B
agent should be included to ensure that treatmentstarts with at least four effective drugs and at least

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
2132 three drugs are included for the rest of the treatment
after bedaquiline is stopped.
/square6If only one or two Group A agents are used, bothGroup B agents are to be included.
/square6If the regimen cannot be composed with agentsfrom Groups A and B alone, Group C agents are
added to complete it.
/square6Diagnosis and management of XDR TB is same asMDR-TB.
Monitoring of Patients on MDR Regimen
/square6Close monitoring is essential during treatment ofMDR-TB patients. To assess treatment response,
sputum smears and cultures should be done monthly
until smear and culture conversion. (Conversion isdefined as two consecutive negative smears and
cultures taken 30 days apart.) After conversion,
monitoring is at least monthly for smears andquarterly for cultures.
Adjunctive Therapies
/square6Some trials have shown that interferon gamma(IFN γ) is useful in the management of MDR-TB.
Interferon-gamma is normally produced by CD4+
T lymphocytes and serves to activate alveolarmacrophages.
Surgery
/square6Surgery can be considered in patients with sputumcultures positive for longer than three months
despite appropriate therapy or with isolates
resistant to all of the first-line oral agents. Patientswith localized pulmonary disease, which can be
completely removed at operation, are most likely
to benefit from surgery. However, drugs should becontinued for at least 18 months after surgery.
Q.DOTS (directly observed therapy short course).
/square6DOTS is an internationally recommended strategy
by WHO to treat TB. DOTS plus is to treat MDR-TB. The WHO-recommended DOTS strategy was
launched formally as Revised National TB Control
Programme (RNTCP) in India in 1997. Since then,it has played an important role in controlling the
incidence and prevalence of TB in India.
/square6The five key components of DOTS are:
– Political commitment to control TB;– Case detection by sputum smear microscopy
examination among symptomatic patients;
– Patients are given anti-TB drugs under the
direct observation of the healthcare provider/community DOT provider;
– Regular, uninterrupted supply of anti-TB drugs;
and
– Systematic recording and reporting system that
allows assessment of treatment results of each and
every patient and of whole TB control programme./square6In DOTS, the responsibility of ensuring regular and
complete treatment of the patient lies with thehealth system.
/square6Earlier anti-TB regimen consisted of initial 2 months
of intensive phase consisting of 4 drugs (INH,
rifampicin, pyrazinamide and ethambutol) giventhrice weekly followed by 4 months of continuationphase consisting of INH and rifampicin, giventhrice weekly with appropriate supervision.
/square6However, WHO recommends that daily treatmentshould be used throughout the course of treatmentand this has been implemented in India and othercountries.
/square6Recently the effectiveness of DOTS strategy hasbeen questioned because it requires lot of manpower
to implement DOTS and also requires multiplevisits by the patient to a healthcare facility. Hencenowadays self-administration of anti-TB drugs by
the patient is preferred and this is tracked by using
latest technologies such as printing a code numberon the drug packet which the patient has to send tothe healthcare facility.
/square6RNTCP program has now introduced dailyregimen for treating TB. For newly diagnosed TBcases, treatment in intensive phase will consist of2 months of INH, rifampicin, pyrazinamide andEthambutol in daily dosage. This is followed bycontinuation phase of 4 months where 3 drugs
(INH, rifampicin, and ethambutol) are given daily.
In the previously treated TB cases, intensive phasewill be of 3 months. For the initial 2 months, 5 drugsare used (INH, rifampicin, pyrazinamide andethambutol plus injection streptomycin). After2 months, injection streptomycin is stopped and the
remaining 4 drugs are given daily for another
1 month. Continuation phase will be for 5 monthsconsisting of 3 drugs daily (INH, rifampicin, andethambutol).
/square6Recently Govt of India has renamed RNTCP asNational Tuberculosis Elimination Program(NTEP).
Q.Tuberculin test (Mantoux test).
/square6The Mantoux test is done by intradermal injection
of 0.1 ml of PPD-5 (purified protein derivativeof Siebert stabilized with tween 80) or 1 tuberculinunit of PPD-RT 23 into the volar aspect of the
forearm.
/square6Test is read after 48–72 hours. If the test is positive
an induration surrounded by erythema is formed.The maximum diameter of the induration (not
redness) is recorded and interpreted as follows:
– >15 mm or ulceration—strongly positive
– >10 mm—positive
– 5 to 9 mm—indeterminate
– <5 mm—negative

/square6Diseases of Respiratory System133
2/square6Induration of 5 mm or more is considered positive
in HIV infected and other immunosuppressedpatients.
/square6Its negative predictive value is higher than positivepredictive value. Hence, tuberculin test is moreuseful to exclude the diagnosis of tuberculosisrather than to diagnose it.
/square6A positive reaction indicates that the individual hasbeen exposed to Mycobacterium ( M. tuberculosis )
but the individual may or may not be suffering from
active disease. A strongly positive test may indicate
recent infection. The test is positive in 85% ofinfected individuals.
/square610% of recent tuberculin converters may developactive disease in their lifetime and 5% do so withinthe first two years of infection.
/square6The test is of limited value in the diagnosis of activeTB because of its relatively low sensitivity andspecificity and its inability to discriminate betweenlatent infection and active disease.
/square6It may be false negative in miliary tuberculosis,sarcoidosis, immunosuppressed conditions and
viral fevers. False-positive reactions may be caused
by infections with nontuberculous mycobacteriaand by BCG vaccination.
Q.Miliary tuberculosis.
Or
Q.Disseminated tuberculosis.
/square6Miliary tuberculosis (TB) refers to clinical disease
resulting from the uncontrolled hematogenous
dissemination of Mycobacterium tuberculosis . It is so
called because of the resemblance of lesions to milletseeds.
/square6Miliary tuberculosis is a more common conse-
quence of primary tuberculosis infection than
reactivation. Miliary TB may occur in an individualorgan (rare), in several organs, or throughout theentire body (>90%), including the brain.
/square6Risk factors for miliary tuberculosis includeimmunosuppression and conditions associatedwith immunosupression such as: HIV infection;cancer; transplantation; malnutrition; diabetes; end-stage renal disease. It is more common in childrenand very old individuals.
Clinical Features
/square6Symptoms are fever, night sweats, anorexia, weak-
ness, weight loss and cough.
/square6Rarely elderly persons may present with inter-
mittent fever, anemia and meningeal involve-ment.
/square6Patients may present with multiorgan dysfunction.
/square6Adrenal insufficiency can occur due to adrenal
gland involvement./square6Examination may show hepatosplenomegaly,
lymphadenopathy. Eye examination may showchoroidal tubercles. Meningismus may be presentin some cases.
Diagnosis
/square6Chest X-ray:  Often shows miliary reticulonodular
pattern. Pleural effusion may be present.
/square6CT chest:  It has higher sensitivity and specificity
than chest radiography in displaying randomlydistributed nodules.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen:  May reveal diffuse liver
disease, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, or para-aortic lymph nodes.
/square6Tuberculin test:  It is frequently negative.
/square6Sputum microscopy:  It is negative for AFB in most
cases.
/square6Bronchoalveolar lavage and transbronchial biopsy:May be required in some cases to establish diag-nosis.
/square6Liver or bone-marrow biopsy:  May show tuberculous
granulomas.
Treatment
/square6Miliary tuberculosis is treated with standard anti-
tuberculous therapy.
Q.Causes of hemoptyisis in pulmonary tuberculosis.
/square6Active tuberculosis.
/square6Rupture of Rasmussen’s aneurysm (arises from
bronchial arteries when TB extends into the adven-titia and media causing thinning of the vessel wall).
/square6Post tubercular bronchiectasis.
/square6Aspergilloma invading an old healed cavity.
/square6Scar carcinoma arising from the healed scar of TB.
Q.Fall and rise phenomenon.
/square6It is seen in patients who are treated with ineffective
antituberculous therapy.
/square6Initially after the commencement of treatment thereis fall in sputum bacillary content. Sputum becomesnegative on microscopy. Later as the treatment iscontinued there is again a rise in sputum bacillarycontent. This is called the fall and rise phenomenon.
/square6The “fall” happens due to the killing of drugsensitive tuberculous bacteria. The “rise” happensdue to the multiplication of drug resistant bacillias the treatment is continued.
/square6The fall and rise phenomenon leads to treatmentfailure.
Q.Extrapulmonary tuberculosis.
/square6Extrapulmonary tuberculosis is defined as disease
outside the lung parenchyma.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
2134 /square6During the initial seeding of infection with M.
tuberculosis , hematogenous dissemination of bacilli
to a number of organs can occur. These localizedinfections can progress to primary tuberculosis orremain dormant and get activated later. Extra-pulmonary tuberculosis, therefore, can either be a
presentation of primary or reactivation tuber-
culosis.
/square6Extrapulmonary tuberculosis may be generalizedor confined to a single organ. Extrapulmonarytuberculosis is found in 15 to 20% of all tuberculosiscases. The icidence is higher in young children andimmunocompromised patients.
/square6Extrapulmonary sites most commonly involved, in
descending order of frequency are:
– Lymph nodes– Pleura– Upper airways– Genitourinary tract– Bones/joints– Meninges– Peritoneum– Pericardium
Lymph node TB (tuberculous lymphadenitis; scrofula)
/square6Painless swelling of lymph nodes, usually at cervical
and supraclavicular sites. Lymph nodes may beinflamed and tender and may have a fistulous tractto skin draining caseous material. Multiple lymphnodes may get matted together. Systemic symp-toms are usually absent except in immunocompro-
mised patients.
/square6Other lymph nodes which can get involved are
axillary, inguinal, mesenteric, and mediastinallymph nodes./square6Tuberculous mediastinal lymphadenopathy canpresent with dysphagia, esophageal perforationand vocal cord paralysis due to recurrent laryngealnerve involvement.
TB of upper airways (epiglottis, pharynx, larynx)
/square6Clinical features include hoarseness, dysphagia and
chronic productive cough.
Genitourinary tract TB
/square6Clinical features include increased urinary fre-
quency, dysuria, hematuria, flank pain. In the initialstages patients may be asymptomatic.
/square6In men, epididymo-orchitis and prostatitis maydevelop. Sinus tracts may form draining pusexternally.
/square6In women, it may present as pelvic pain, infertility,and menstrual abnormalities.
Skeletal TB
/square6Weight-bearing joints (spine, hips, and knees—in
that order) are involved often.
/square6Spinal TB (Pott’s disease, tuberculous spondylitis)
often involves ≥ 2 adjacent vertebral bodies. Upper
thoracic spine is affected commonly in children.Lower thoracic and upper lumbar vertebrae areusually affected in adults. Clinical features includeback pain, low grade fever and night sweats. Spinalcord compression produces paraplegia. Kyphosis
develops in advanced disease due to vertebral body
collapse.
/square6Joint involvement leads to pain and swelling,difficulty in walking.
CNS tuberculosis
/square6Tuberculous meningitis:  It presents as subacute
febrile illness which evolves over 1–2 weeks but
may present acutely. Clinical features includeheadache, altered mental status (confusion/lethargy), and neck rigidity. Cranial nerve palsiesmay be present particularly ocular nerve palsiesproducing diplopia. Involvement of cerebral
arteries (vasculitis) leads to occlusion and focal
neurological signs including stroke. Obstructivehydrocephalus can develop due to fibrin depositionin the subarachnoid space.
/square6Tuberculoma: Tuberculomas are caseous foci within
the substance of the brain that develop from deep-seated tubercles acquired during hematogenousdissemination. They act like intracranial spaceoccupying lesions (ICSOL) and present withseizures and focal neurological deficits
/square6Spinal tuberculous arachnoiditis:  It is characterized
by focal inflammatory disease at single or multiplelevels in the subarachnoid space producing gradualencasement of the spinal cord by a gelatinous or
fibrous exudate. Patients present with signs and
symptoms of nerve root and cord compression suchas radicular pain, hyperesthesia or paresthesias;
Figure 2.5 Sites of extrapulmonary tuberculosis


/square6Diseases of Respiratory System135
2lower motor neuron paralysis; and bladder or rectal
sphincter dysfunction. Vasculitis may lead tothrombosis of the anterior spinal artery andinfarction of the spinal cord.
Gastrointestinal (GI) TB
/square6It can involve bowel or peritoneum.
/square6Bowel involvement (ileocecal region involved
commonly) produces abdominal pain oftenmimicking appendicitis. Other features arediarrhea, obstruction, hematochezia and palpableabdominal mass. Constitutional symptoms such asfever, weight loss, and night sweats are common.
Bowel wall involvement produces ulcerations/
fistulae simulating Crohn’s disease. Anal fistulaecan develop due to rectal involvement.
/square6Tuberculous peritonitis produces abdominal pain,
fever and ascites. The classic doughy abdomen on
palpation is rarely observed in tuberculousperitonitis.
Pericardial TB (tuberculous pericarditis)
/square6Onset is usually subacute. Clinical features include
fever, retrosternal pain and pericardial friction rub.Pericardial effusion may develop and lead tocardiac tamponade. Constrictive pericarditis may
ultimately appear.
Less common sites
/square6Eyes:  Chorioretinitis, uveitis, phlyctenular conjunc-
tivitis.
/square6Tuberculous otitis:  Hearing loss, otorrhea, tympanic
membrane perforation.
/square6Skin: Abscesses, chronic ulcers, scrofuloderma,
lupus vulgaris, erythema nodosum.
/square6Adrenal glands: Signs of adrenal insufficiency such
as weight loss, weakness, hypotension, hyper-pigmentation.
Treatment of Extrapulmonary Tuberculosis
/square6Treatment of extrapulmonary TB is same as that ofpulmonary tuberculosis.
Q.Indications for corticosteroids in tuberculosis
treatment.
/square6There are some situations where steroids are given
along with antituberculous therapy (ATT) to
improve the final outcome.
Indications
/square6Allergic reactions to antituberculous drugs.
/square6Pericardial tuberculosis (reduces inflammation,scarring, amount of effusion and development of
constrictive tuberculosis).
/square6Tuberculosis of the eye, larynx and ureteric involve-ment in genitourinary TB (reduces inflammation,
tissue destruction and scarring)./square6Tuberculous meningitis (reduces adhesions,
obstructive hydrocephalus and improves finaloutcome).
/square6Adrenal tuberculosis (need to replace steroids).
Dosage
/square6TB meningitis requires a dose of 40 to 60 mg
prednisolone per day for 4–6 weeks and then
gradually tapered off.
/square6For other indications 10 mg of prednisolone twicedaily is given for 4–6 weeks and then gradually
tapered off.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and treatment of interstitial lung disease (ILD).
Q.Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (cryptogenic fibrosing
alveolitis).
/square6The interstitial lung diseases (ILDs) also known as
diffuse lung diseases (DLD) are a heterogeneous
group of disorders characterized by diffuse
parenchymal lung involvement. Parenchyma of thelung includes—the alveoli, the alveolar epithelium,the capillary endothelium, and the spaces betweenthese structures.
/square6Interstitial lung diseases (ILD) produce a restrictiveventilatory defect without airway obstruction,decreased pulmonary diffusing capacity, andhypoxemia.
/square6Two histopathological patterns of ILDs arerecognized (1) those with predominant inflamma-tion and fibrosis, and (2) those with predominantgranulomatous reaction in interstitium.
Causes of ILD
/square6There are numerous causes of ILD. But only a fewcauses account for majority of ILDs. When the causeis unknown it is called idiopathic pulmonaryfibrosis (cryptogenic fibrosing alveolitis).
Clinical Features
/square6Chronic dyspnea (most common complaint).Dyspnea is progressive and worsened by exertion.Sudden worsening of dyspnea, especially if associa-ted with acute chest pain, may indicate spontaneouspneumothorax.
/square6Dry cough
/square6Wheezing and chest pain are rarely seen.
/square6There may be history of occupational exposure toorganic or inorganic dust.
/square6General examination may show clubbing, cyanosis,
tachypnea, and use of accessory respiratory
muscles.
/square6Examination of the chest may show decreasedexpansion bilaterally and fine end inspiratory
crepitations bilaterally usually at the base of the

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
2136
lungs. Advanced disease may show findings of
pulmonary hypertension and cor-pulmonale.
/square6In addition to the above findings patients may have
features of underlying disease causing ILD. Forexample, patients with systemic sclerosis may have
Raynaud’s phenomenon; those with rheumatoid
arthritis may have joint involvement. Those withSLE may have malar rash.
Investigations
Chest X-ray
/square6Reticulonodular shadows and honeycombingmay be seen diffusely and bilaterally more in basalareas.
/square6Chest X-ray may also show features of underlyingdisease. For example, bilateral hilar lymphadeno-pathy may be seen in sarcoidosis and egg-shellcalcification of hilar lymph may be seen in silicosis.
CT Scan
/square6HRCT (high resolution computed tomography) is
superior to chest X-ray for early detection and
confirmation of ILD. It shows the reticulonodularpattern and honeycombing. It can also identify anyunderlying disease like sarcoidosis better than chestX-ray. HRCT allows better assessment of the extentand distribution of disease. If lung biopsy is
planned HRCT is useful to know from which area
biopsy should be taken.
Lung Biopsy
/square6Lung biopsy is the most definitive method fordiagnosing ILD. Biopsy should be done beforestarting treatment. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy withmultiple transbronchial lung biopsies (four to eightsamples) is the procedure of choice. If a specificdiagnosis is not possible by transbronchial biopsy,
then surgical lung biopsy by video-assisted thoracic
surgery or open thoracotomy is indicated.Pulmonary Function Tests
/square6Spirometry shows a restrictive defect with reducedtotal lung capacity (TLC), functional residualcapacity, and residual volume. FEV
1 and forced
vital capacity (FVC) are reduced due to decreased
TLC. The FEV1/FVC ratio is usually normal or
increased.
/square6Diffusing capacity of the lung for carbon monoxide(DL
CO) is decreased.
/square6Arterial blood gas analysis may reveal hypoxemiaand respiratory alkalosis (due to hyperventilation).CO
2 retention occurs in end-stage disease.
Other Investigations
/square6Investigations to find out the cause for ILD shouldbe done based on clinical features of the patient.
/square6ANA should be done if SLE or other connectivetissue disease is suspected. RA factor may bepositive in rheumatoid arthritis. Antineutrophiliccytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) may be positive in
Wegener’s granulomatosis. Patients with extrinsic
allergic alveolitis have precipitable antibodiesagainst the offending antigen.
/square6Lymph node biopsies are helpful in diagnosing
tuberculosis, sarcoidosis or histiocytosis-X.
Treatment
/square6ILD progresses slowly and results in respiratory
failure. Treatable causes should be identified andtreated. Treatment is mainly directed at suppressinginflammatory process, thereby reducing furtherlung damage. Existing fibrosis cannot be reversedby treatment.
/square6Glucocorticoids are the mainstay of therapy, butthe success rate is low. A common starting dose is,prednisolone 0.5 to 1 mg/kg once-daily orally. Thisdose is continued for 1 to 3 months, and the patient
is reassessed. If the patient is stable or improved,
the dose is tapered to 0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg and isTABLE 2.17: Causes of ILD
• Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (cryptogenic fibrosing  alveolitis) • Idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis
• Sarcoidosis • Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis
• Connective tissue disease associated ILD • Histiocytosis-X
–Systemic sclerosis • Infections:
–Rheumatoid arthritis –Viral pneumonias
–Systemic lupus erythematosus –Miliary tuberculosis
–Sjögren’s syndrome –Histoplasmosis
–Polymyositis-dermatomyositis –Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia
• Pneumoconiosis: Silicosis, asbestosis, siderosis, berylliosis, – Aspiration pneumonia
talcosis – Following ARDS
• Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia • Radiation injury: Radiation pneumonitis• Hypersensitive pneumonitis (extrinsic allergic alveolitis), • Carcinomatosis lymphangitis
e.g. farmer’s lung • Disorders caused by inhalation of toxic gases
• Pulmonary vasculitis • Oxygen toxicity
–Wegener’s granulomatosis • Drugs: Amiodarone, gold and chemotherapy drugs
–Goodpasture’s syndrome • Poisons: Paraquat

/square6Diseases of Respiratory System137
2maintained at this level for an additional 1 to
3 months. If the patient’s condition continues toworsen even on glucocorticoids, another drug(cyclophosphamide or azathioprine) is added. If allthese therapies fail, lung transplantation may beconsidered.
/square6Hypoxemia (PaO2 < 55 mmHg) should be managed
by supplemental oxygen.
Q.Farmer’s lung (hypersensitivity pneumonitis).
/square6Farmer’s lung is a type of hypersensitivity pneumo-
nitis induced by the inhalation of biologic dusts
coming from hay dust or mold spores or any other
agricultural products. It results in a type III hyper-sensitivity inflammatory response and can lead topermanent lung damage.
Pathophysiology
/square6The growth of mold spores occurs when hay is notdried properly. Incidence of Farmer’s Lung peaksduring late winter and early spring and is mostly
seen after the harvest season. It is most prevalent
in damp climates. When the farmer inhales the mold
spores and other particles they induce an allergicreaction in the alveoli which leads to accumulationof fluid, protein, and inflammatory cells in thealveoli. This leads to impaired gas exchange andcompromise in lung function. Chronic exposure
leads to fibrotic changes in the lungs and permanent
damage. This allergic reaction is most often initiatedby exposure to thermophilic actinomycetes (mostcommonly Saccharopolyspora rectivirgula ).
Clinical Features
Acute Stage
/square6This occurs after  four to eight hours after exposure.
Symptoms includes headache, irritating cough, andshortness of breath upon physical exertion.
Subacute Stage
/square6This occurs after repeated exposure.  Symptoms
persist without further exposure, and increase inseverity. Symptoms include shortness of breath uponexertion, chronic cough, fatigue, occasional fever and
sweating, decrease in appetite, aches and pains.
Chronic Stage
/square6Symptoms persist for long time.
Diagnosis
/square6Often difficult to diagnose because it resembles flu.
Flowing clues may help in diagnosing farmers lung.
/square6History of symptoms such as cough, fever, andshortness of breath when exposed to mold in work
environment./square6The presence of diffuse lung disease in chronic
cases.
/square6Investigations include chest X-ray, blood tests,spirometry, inhalation challenge test, etc.
Prevention
/square6Chronic Farmer’s lung disease is permanent and
cannot be reversed; hence appropriate measures
should be taken to prevent it.
/square6Provision of good ventilation at work areas.
/square6Proper drying of agricultural products.
/square6Use of a mask while working with moldy hay orcrops.
Treatment
/square6Adequate rest and reducing the exposure to the
antigens through masks and increased ventilation.
/square6Bronchodilators and inhaled steroids.
Q.Pneumoconioses.
/square6Pneumoconioses (dusty lungs) refers to a group of
lung diseases caused by inhalation of inorganic
dust. After inhalation, dust particles get deposited
in the alveoli and cause inflammation and fibrosis(interstitial fibrosis).
/square6The principal cause of the pneumoconioses is work-
place exposure; environmental exposures have
rarely given rise to these diseases.
/square6Pneumoconioses take many years to develop andmanifest, although in some cases (e.g. silicosis)rapidly progressive forms can occur after short
periods of intense exposure. When severe, the
diseases lead to lung impairment, disability, andpremature death. From a public health perspective,these conditions are entirely man-made, and canbe avoided through appropriate dust control.
/square6Other forms of pneumoconioses can be caused byinhaling dusts containing aluminum, antimony,barium, graphite, iron, kaolin, mica, talc, amongother dusts. Overall, most physicians do not en-counter these diseases very frequently. Byssinosis,
caused by exposure to cotton dust, is sometimes
included among the pneumoconioses, although itspattern of lung abnormality is different from otherpneumoconioses.
Common Causes of Pneumoconiosis
TABLE 2.18: Common causes of pneumoconiosis
Pneumoconiosis Caused by
Silicosis Silica dust
Asbestosis Asbestos
Coal workers pneumoconiosis Coal dust
Berylliosis Beryllium
Siderosis Iron oxide
Stannosis Tin oxide

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
2138 Q.Silicosis.
/square6Silicosis is the most common occupational lung
disease caused by inhalation of crystalline silica
(quartz). Less commonly, by inhalation of silicates,
minerals containing silicon dioxide bound to talc.Workers at greatest risk are those who move or blastrock and sand (miners, quarry workers, stone-cutters) or who use silica-containing rock or sandabrasives (sand blasters; glass makers; foundry,
gemstone, and ceramic workers; potters).
Pathogenesis
/square6After inhalation, silica particles are deposited in the
distal airways. Alveolar macrophages ingest thesilica particles and enter lymphatics and interstitialtissue. The macrophages cause release of cytokines(tumor necrosis factor-alpha, IL-1), growth factors(tumor growth factor), and oxidants, stimulating
parenchymal inflammation, collagen synthesis,
and, ultimately, fibrosis.
/square6When the macrophages die, they release the silicainto interstitial tissue around the small bronchioles,
causing formation of the pathognomonic silicotic
nodule.
Clinical Presentation and Investigations
Acute Silicosis
/square6Occurs after exposure to high concentrations ofcrystalline silica. Symptoms develop within a fewmonths to years after the exposure. It is charac-
terized by rapid onset of symptoms including
cough, weight loss, fatigue, and sometimes pleuriticpain. Examination may show lung crepitations andrhonchi. The prognosis of patients with acutesilicosis is very poor. Patients die of respiratoryfailure usually within four years after the onset of
symptoms. Mycobacterial and fungal infections
frequently complicate the clinical course.
Chronic Silicosis
/square6It develops slowly, usually appearing 10 to 30 yearsafter first exposure. Symptoms are chronic dys-pnoea, cough and sputum production.
/square6Severe lung disease may lead to cor pulmonale with
associated right ventricular heave, raised JVP,hepatomegaly, and peripheral edema.
Conglomerate Silicosis (Complicated Silicosis)
/square6This is the advanced form of acute or chronicsilicosis and is characterized by widespread massesof fibrosis, typically in the upper lung zones.
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray:  Most commonly silicosis is diagnosed
by a routine chest radiograph. Chest X-ray shows
round opacities ranging from 1 to 10 mm size seenpredominantly in the upper lung zones initially and
in advanced disease all over the lungs. Progressivemassive fibrosis (PMF) manifests as bilateral upperlobe masses, which are formed by the coalescenceof nodules. The hilar lymph nodes may show ‘eggshell calcification’.
/square6CT/HRCT chest:  This is more sensitive than chest
X-ray in picking up nodules, fibrosis and pleuralthickening.
/square6Pulmonary function tests:  Show restrictive ventilatory
impairment and arterial hypoxemia. Advanceddisease may cause pulmonary HTN, cor pulmonaleand respiratory failure.
/square6Lung biopsy:  This is usually not necessary because
diagnosis can be made by clinical features andabove investigations. However, if the diagnosis isin doubt, lung biopsy may be considered.
/square6Tuberculin skin test:  Using purified protein deriva-
tive (PPD) is indicated in all persons with silicosisas they are prone to develop tuberculosis.
Treatment
/square6There is no specific treatment for silicosis. Patientshould be advised to avoid further exposure to silicadust and quit smoking.
/square6Bronchodilators may be helpful to relieve bronchialobstruction.
/square6Corticosteroid therapy (prednisolone) has beenshown to produce significant improvements in lungvolumes, carbon monoxide diffusing capacity, andpartial pressure of arterial oxygen.
/square6Lung transplantation should be considered in end-stage silicosis with respiratory failure.
/square6Experimental approaches to treatment includewhole-lung lavage and aluminum inhalation.
Prevention
/square6Silicosis can be prevented by controlling the dust
levels at work, and by providing exhaust ventilation
at points of dust generation.
Q.Coal worker’s pneumoconiosis (CWP).
Etiology
/square6Coal workers’ pneumoconiosis (CWP) is a paren-
chymal lung disease caused by inhaling high-
carbon coal mine dust (anthracite and bituminous).
Anthracosis is the asymptomatic accumulation ofcarbon without a consequent cellular reaction. Suchaccumulation can be found in most urban dwellersand tobacco smokers. Inhaled coal dust becomes aproblem when body reacts to it with consequent
fibrosis in the lungs. The risk of CWP increases with
dust level in the mine and cumulative exposure tocoal mine dust.
/square6Lung diseases caused by coal mine dust are also
referred to as “black lung.” CWP is called “simple”

/square6Diseases of Respiratory System139
2if all radiographic opacities are less than 1 cm in
diameter. If any opacity is 1cm or more on chest X-ray, it is termed progressive massive fibrosis (PMF).Exposure to coal mine dust is also associated withbronchitis.
Pathology
/square6The inhaled coal dust causes an inflammatoryreaction in the lungs leading to accumulation of
macrophages and other inflammatory cells. Chronic
inflammation leads to fibrosis. The characteristiclesion of CWP is coal macule, which is focal collec-tion of coal dust and pigment-laden macrophages.As these macules extend, they join other maculesin the vicinity, forming discrete areas of interstitial
fibrosis. This growing collagen network causes
distention of the respiratory bronchioles, formingfocal areas of emphysema (commonly centrilobularemphysema).
/square6Macules may arrest or may enlarge and formnodules which may join together to produceprogressive massive fibrosis. Progressive massivefibrosis is diagnosed pathologically if nodules reachat least 2 cm (or X-ray wise 1 cm or more). Theselesions are rich in collagen and disrupt the lung’s
architecture.
/square6Progressive massive fibrosis in association with
rheumatoid arthritis is known as Caplan syndromeand is characterized by multiple nodules, ranging
from 1 to 5 cm, in the periphery of lungs.
Clinical Manifestations
/square6Many patients are asymptomatic in early stages of
disease and incidentally diagnosed by chest X-ray.
/square6Patients may present with cough and black sputumproduction.
/square6Dyspnea may occur in advanced disease.
/square6Severe lung disease may lead to cor pulmonale with
associated right ventricular heave, raised JVP,
hepatomegaly, and peripheral edema.
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray:  In simple disease, the chest radiograph
typically shows small nodules that tend to pre-dominate in the upper lung zones. Reticularopacities may also be present, more often incigarette smokers. X-ray findings and clinical
symptoms do not correlate with each other because
there can be significant symptoms with little or noradiographic abnormality. Progressive massivefibrosis is associated with progressive dyspnea,pulmonary hypertension, cor pulmonale andrespiratory failure.
/square6Other tests  are same as those done for silicosis.
Treatment
/square6Same as that of silicosis.Prognosis
/square6Simple pneumoconiosis alone does not increase
mortality. Progressive massive fibrosis is associatedwith more severe morbidity and increased mortality.
Q.Beryllium disease.
/square6Beryllium is used in industries because of its light
weight and high tensile strength. Exposure toberyllium occurs in beryllium mining and extrac-tion, alloy production, metal alloy machining,electronics, telecommunications, nuclear weaponmanufacture, defense, aircraft, automotive, aero-
space, computer, and electronics recycling.
Pathogenesis
/square6Inhaled beryllium elicits inflammation and chemical
pneumonitis in the acute form. In chronic form itacts as an antigen and elicits cell mediated delayedtype of hypersensitivity reaction leading to forma-tion of non-caseating granulomas. Beryllium istransported to extrapulmonary sites such as the
liver, spleen, skin and lymph nodes where
granulomas are formed.
Clinical Features
/square6Acute beryllium disease occurs from exposure toa high concentration of dust or fumes. Patientpresents with pharyngitis, tracheobronchitis andchemical pneumonitis. Chest X-ray shows diffuseor localized infiltrate.
/square6Chronic beryllium disease resembles sarcoidosisand is characterized by formation of granulomasin the lung and other organs. It differs from mostpneumoconioses in that it is a cell-mediated hyper-sensitivity disease. Patients present with exertional
dyspnea, dry cough, weight loss, fatigue, and chest
pain. Physical examination shows crepitations inthe lungs, lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly,and skin rash.
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray or CT scan may show reticulonodularopacities and hilar adenopathy. In advanceddisease there is honeycomb appearance of lung.
/square6Pulmonary function studies show a restrictive venti-latory defect and decrease in diffusion capacity.
/square6Beryllium-specific lymphocyte transformation testis helpful to differentiate from sarcoidosis. Thistest demonstrates the proliferation of lymphocytesfrom blood or lungs in response to beryllium saltsin vitro .
Treatment
/square6Consists of removal from exposure, oxygen and
corticosteroids for both acute and chronic beryllium
disease.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
2140 Q.Asbestosis.
Definition
/square6Asbestosis specifically refers to the pneumoconiosis
caused by inhalation of asbestos fibers. The diseaseis characterized by slowly progressive, diffusepulmonary fibrosis.
Etiology
/square6Asbestos refers to a group of naturally occurring,heat-resistant fibrous silicates. Because of its heat-resistant and structural properties asbestos is usedin construction and shipbuilding materials, auto-mobile brakes, and some textiles. Chrysotile (aserpentine fiber), crocidolite, and amosite (amphibole,or straight fibers) are the 3 main types of asbestosthat cause disease. All types of asbestos fibers causeasbestosis, pleural disease, and lung cancer.
Epidemiology
/square6People working in asbestos mines, textiles andbrake lining factories, construction trades andworkers using insulators are exposed to asbestos.Since a large number of buildings now haveasbestos-containing materials, maintenance anddemolition workers also get exposed to asbestos.However, exposure of building occupants toasbestos is quite low. The risk of asbestosis increaseswith cumulative exposure to asbestos fibers andmanifestations usually appear after 15 to 20 yearsof exposure.
Pathology
/square6After inhalation asbestos fibers get deposited in thesmall airways (alveolar ducts, and peribronchiolarregions). Macrophages are attracted to these sitesand an inflammatory reaction begins which resultsin fibrosis. Initially this fibrotic reaction is found insmall airways but later involves the whole lung. Inadvanced cases, extensive fibrosis destroys thenormal architecture of the lung and causeshoneycombing (cystic spaces bounded by fibrosis).Lungs become small and stiff with macroscopicallyvisible fibrosis and honeycombing. Asbestos bodiesare visible under microscopy.
Clinical Manifestations
/square6Patients present with dry cough and exertionaldyspnea. Fine crepitations are heard on ausculta-tion of the chest in basal areas bilaterally. Cyanosisand clubbing may be present in advanced cases.Involvement of small airways produces airflowobstruction.
/square6In advanced cases, features of cor pulmonale suchas right ventricular heave, raised JVP, hepato-megaly, and peripheral edema may be present.Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray shows irregular opacities most promi-
nent in the basal areas. Pleural thickening andcalcified pleural plaques may also be present.
/square6High-resolution CT is more sensitive to detect thepleural and pulmonary disease.
/square6Spirometry typically shows a reduced forced vitalcapacity (FVC) with preservation of the ratio of theforced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) toFVC, and reduced TLC and diffusing capacity.
/square6Lung biopsy is usually not required but can helpin definitive diagnosis. Both fibrosis and asbestosbodies can be visualized through microscopy.
Treatment
/square6There is no specific treatment for asbestosis. Furtherexposure should be avoided. Oxygen supplementa-tion is needed if there is hypoxemia. Smokingshould be stopped. Lung transplantation may be
considered for advanced disease.
Q.Byssinosis (Monday fever).
/square6Byssinosis is a form of reactive airways disease
characterized by bronchoconstriction that occursdue to cotton dust. The etiologic agent is bacterialendotoxin in cotton dust.
Clinical Features
/square6Patient presents with asthma like symptoms on thefirst day of work (Monday) after a weekend whichdiminish by the weekend. With repeated exposure
over a period of years, symptoms may continue till
midweek or end of the week.
Diagnosis
/square6Diagnosis should be suspected in any patient withasthma like symptoms (chest tightness, dyspnea,wheezing) and history of exposure to raw cotton.
/square6Pulmonary function tests show airflow obstructionand a reduction in ventilatory capacity.
Treatment
/square6Avoidance or reduction of exposure to raw cottondust.
/square6Bronchodilators and inhaled steroids.
Q.Write a brief note on obesity–hypoventilation
syndrome (Pickwickian syndrome).
/square6Obesity hypoventilation syndrome (OHS) is
defined as the presence of awake alveolar hypo-ventilation in an obese individual which cannot beattributed to other conditions associated withalveolar hypoventilation.
/square6Obesity hypoventilation syndrome (OHS) exists whenan obese individual (body mass index >30 kg/m
2)

/square6Diseases of Respiratory System141
2develops awake alveolar hypoventilation (PaCO2
>45 mmHg). Other conditions which cause alveolar
hypoventilation such as pulmonary disease,skeletal restriction, neuromuscular weakness,hypothyroidism, or pleural pathology should beruled out before diagnosing OHS.
/square6Obesity is the hallmark of OHS (BMI >30 kg/m2)
and the prevalence of this disorder increaseswith increasing BMI. About 90% of OHS indivi-duals will have coexisting obstructive sleep apnea
(OSA).
Pathophysiology
/square6Obesity puts extra mechanical load on rib cage and
abdomen and reduces the compliance of the chest
wall. As a result the FRC (functional residual
capacity) is reduced, particularly on lying down.
/square6Most patients have a defect in the central respiratorycontrol system. These patients have been shown to
have a decreased responsiveness to carbon dioxide
rebreathing, hypoxia, or both.
/square6Chronic hypercapnia and hypoxemia leads topolycythemia, pulmonary hypertension and cor
pulmonale.
Clinical Features
/square6Patients are usually middle-aged and very obese.
Both sexes are equally affected. Patients are usually
hypersomnolent and fall asleep when inactive.
There may be cyanosis, secondary polycythemia,and cor pulmonale.
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray reveals cardiomegaly.
/square6ECG shows evidence of right ventricular hyper-trophy.
/square6ABG may show hypoxemia and hypercapnia (type-II respiratory failure).
/square6Pulmonary function tests: Usually restrictive
pattern is seen.
/square6Thyroid function tests to rule out hypothyroidism
which can be contribute to hypoventilation andobesity.
/square6A nocturnal polysomnogram shows high frequencyof sleep apnea in these patients.
Treatment
/square6The most important measure is to make the patientlose weight. Sometimes surgery is needed (e.g.gastric bypass surgery) to help with weight loss.
/square6Use of sedatives, and alcohol should be avoided
because they aggravate hypoventilation.
/square6Oral medroxyprogesterone acetate and acetazola-
mide can be used to increase respiratory drive.
/square6Noninvasive ventilation (NIV) can be used inpatients with chronic respiratory failure. This canbe used at home during nighttime or if required
even during daytime. Two types of NIV that canbe used are bilevel positive airway pressureventilation (BPAP) or continuous positive airwaypressure (CPAP).
Q.Sleep apnea.
Q.Obstructive sleep apnea.
Q.Central sleep apnea.
/square6Sleep apnea is defined as intermittent cessation of
the airflow at the nose and mouth during sleep forat least 10 seconds. Most patients have apnea for20 to 30 seconds, and it may even last as long as2–3 minutes.
/square6Sleep apnea has been classified into 2 types:
1. Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA)
2. Central sleep apnea (CSA)
Obstructive Sleep Apnoea (OSA)
/square6Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is a sleep disorder
that involves cessation or significant decrease inairflow in the presence of breathing effort. In thisdisorder airflow ceases because of occlusion of the
upper airway, usually at the level of the oro-
pharynx. The respiratory drive is normal.
/square6The obstruction results in progressive asphyxiauntil there is a brief arousal from sleep, where uponthe airway patency is restored and airflow resumes.
The patient again returns to sleep. This sequence
of events may occur many times in the night causingfragmentation of sleep which causes daytimesomnolence.
/square6The upper airway collapses because of pressuredrop during inspiration that exceeds the ability ofairway dilator and abductor muscles to keep theairway open. During deep sleep there is reducedactivity of muscles of the upper airway resulting inairway collapse. In many patients upper airway
may be structurally narrow due to enlarged
adenoids, and obesity. Thus obesity is an importantcause of obstructive sleep apnea.
Criteria for diagnosing obstructive sleep apnea
Episodes of upper airway obstruction during sleep result in
recurrent arousals associated with:
Excessive daytime sleepiness, unexplained by other factors,
and two or more of the following:
• Loud disruptive snoring• Nocturnal choking/gasping/snort• Recurrent nocturnal awakening• Unrefreshing sleep• Daytime fatigue• Impaired concentrationAndOvernight sleep monitoring documenting >5 episodes of
hypopnea and apnea per hour

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
2142 Clinical Features
/square6Many patients have snoring which precedes the
onset of OSA by many years. Snoring is also due tonarrowing of the upper airways during sleep.
However, snoring alone does not warrant an
investigation for OSA.
/square6Patients are usually obese and are between 30 and60 years of age. Patients complain of daytime
somnolence, intellectual impairment, memory loss,
personality disturbances and impotence due tofragmentation of sleep.
/square6There may be cyclical slowing of the heart rate to
30–50 beats/minute followed by tachycardia of
90–120 beats/minute during apnea episodes.Asystole or dangerous arrhythmias can occurduring the hypoventilatory phase.
/square6Some patients develop pulmonary hypertension,right ventricular failure, and secondary poly-cythemia.
Investigations
/square6Polysomnography is the definitive investigationof choice. It is a detailed overnight sleep study thatincludes recording of multiple parameters simulta-neously. These include ECG to detect arrhythmias,electroencephalogram (EEG) to know sleep stages,the chin electromyogram (activity decreases in REM),
and the electro-oculogram (EOG) to detect REM
sleep. Pulse oximetry can be used to know oxygensaturation during apnea episodes.
Treatment
/square6General:  Weight reduction if obese, avoidance of
alcohol and CNS depressant drugs, and avoidance
of sleeping in the supine position.
/square6Oral appliance therapy:  Oral appliances act by
moving (pulling) the tongue forward or by movingthe mandible and soft palate anteriorly, enlarging
the posterior airspace. They open or dilate the upper
airway.
/square6Specific:  Nasal CPAP (continuous positive airway
pressure) ventilation is the definitive treatment
for OSA. It prevents upper airway occlusion by
splinting the pharyngeal airway with a positivepressure delivered through a nose mask. If patientscannot tolerate CPAP, surgical procedures aimedat increasing the upper airway dimensions (uvulo-palatopharyngoplasty, linguoplasty, mandibular
advancement), etc. can be considered. Tracheos-
tomy should be considered in patients with severeOSA.
Central Sleep Apnea (CSA)
/square6Central sleep apnea is due to transient abolition ofcentral drive to the ventilatory muscles.
/square6This usually happens due to fall of pCO2 during
sleep below the critical level required for respiratorystimulation. As a result apnea develops until pCO2
rises and again stimulates respiration.
Causes of CSA
/square6Central respiratory drive can be abnormal in CNS
diseases like brainstem tumor, infarction, or
infection, Parkinson disease, encephalitis and highcervical cord compression.
/square6Primary central sleep apnea.
/square6Diabetes mellitus.
/square6Hypothyroidism.
/square6Heart failure.
/square6Use of opiates and other CNS depressants.
Clinical Features
/square6Patients complain of sleeping poorly, nocturnalawakenings, morning headache, daytime fatigueand sleepiness.
/square6Patients may also present with history of recurrentrespiratory failure, polycythemia, pulmonary hyper-tension and right-sided heart failure.
Investigations
/square6Polysomnography is the investigation of choice andshows recurrent apnea with absent respiratory effort(whereas respiratory effort is present in obstructivesleep apnea).
Treatment
/square6Patients with hypoxemia benefit from nocturnalsupplemental oxygen.
/square6Respiratory stimulation with acetazolamide ortheophylline may help but results are variable andefficacy has not been established.
/square6Nasal CPAP (as for OSA) can be effective, althoughthe treatment is less well tolerated than in patientswith OSA.
Q.Enumerate the causes of pleural effusion. Give the
differential diagnosis, clinical features, investiga-
tions and management of pleural effusion.
/square6A pleural effusion is an abnormal collection of fluid
in the pleural space resulting from excess fluid
production or decreased absorption or both.
/square6Normally about 10 to 20 ml of fluid is present in
the pleural space which is similar in compositionto plasma except low protein (<1.5 gm/dL). Pleural
fluid accumulates as a result of
1. Increase in vascular permeability (e.g. pneumonia)
2. Increase in hydrostatic pressure (e.g. cardiac
failure)
3. Decrease in pleural pressure (e.g. atelectasis)
4. Decrease in plasma osmotic pressure (e.g.
nephrotic syndrome)
/square6Pleural effusion can be exudative or transudative
based on lights criteria

/square6Diseases of Respiratory System143
2Light’s Criteria to distinguish Pleural
Transudate from Exudate
Pleural fluid is an exudate if one or more of the following criteria
are met:
• Pleural fluid protein: Serum protein ratio >0.5
• Pleural fluid LDH: Serum LDH ratio >0.6
• Pleural fluid LDH > two-thirds of the upper limit of normal
serum LDH
Causes of Pleural Effusion
Transudative Pleural Effusion
/square6Congestive heart failure.
/square6Cirrhosis with portal HTN.
/square6Nephrotic syndrome.
/square6Peritoneal dialysis.
/square6Hypoalbuminemia.
/square6Atelectasis.
/square6Constrictive pericarditis.
/square6Superior vena caval obstruction.
Exudative Pleural Effusion
/square6Pneumonia.
/square6Tuberculosis.
/square6Subphrenic abscess.
/square6Hepatic abscess.
/square6Esophageal perforation.
/square6Malignancy.
/square6Pancreatitis (acute, chronic).
/square6Pulmonary embolism.
/square6Sarcoidosis.
/square6Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).
/square6Connective tissue diseases (SLE, rheumatoid
arthritis).
/square6Hypothyroidism.
/square6Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome.
/square6Chylothorax.
/square6Meigs syndrome.
Clinical Features
/square6Patients may be asymptomatic in mild pleural
effusion.
/square6Dyspnea:  It is the most common symptom asso-
ciated with effusion.
/square6Cough:  Cough is often mild and nonproductive.
More severe cough with sputum suggests anunderlying pneumonia or endobronchial lesion.
/square6Chest pain:  Chest pain indicates pleural irritation,
and occurs in pleural infection, mesothelioma, orpulmonary infarction. Pain is pleuritic in nature andis typically described as sharp or stabbing and isexacerbated with deep inspiration. Pain may belocalized to the chest wall or referred to the
ipsilateral shoulder or upper abdomen because
of diaphragmatic irritation. Pain may diminishas the pleural effusion increases which separates
inflammed pleural surfaces from each other.
/square6Other symptoms: Symptoms of underlying disease
may be present. Lower limb edema, orthopnea, and
paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea may suggest
congestive cardiac failure as the cause of pleuraleffusion. Night sweats, fever, hemoptysis, andweight loss should suggest TB. Hemoptysis alsosuggests the possibility of malignancy or endo-bronchial pathology, or pulmonary infarction. An
acute febrile episode, purulent sputum production,
and pleuritic chest pain may suggest effusion asso-ciated with pneumonia (synpneumonic effusion).
/square6Examination shows decreased chest movements,
stony dull percussion note, and absent breath sound
on the affected side. Vocal fremitus and vocalresonance are decreased. Pleural rub may be heardsometimes. Medastinal shift may be seen in massivepleural effusion. There may be signs and symptomsof underlying disease causing pleural effusion.
Peripheral edema, distended neck veins, and S
3
gallop suggest congestive cardiac failure. Presence
of jaundice and ascites suggest liver disease(cirrhosis with portal HTN). Lymphadenopathy ora palpable mass suggests malignancy.
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray:  Pleural effusion appears as a curved
shadow at the lung base, blunting the costophrenic
angle and ascending towards the axilla on the erect
chest X-ray. Minimum 200 ml of fluid is requiredto produce a shadow on chest X-ray, but smallereffusions can be identified by ultrasound or CTscanning.
/square6Ultrasound chest:  It is more accurate than chest
X-ray to detect pleural effusion. It can also be usedto guide pleural aspiration and pleural biopsy. Itcan also distinguish pleural fluid from pleuralthickening.
/square6CT scan:  It is better than both X-ray and ultrasound
in showing pleural abnormalities and underlyingdisease. It is also helpful to distinguish benign from
malignant pleural disease.
/square6Pleural fluid aspiration and analysis:  If the cause of
effusion is obvious (e.g. left ventricular failure)it may not be necessary to do diagnostic pleural
aspiration. Most bilateral pleural effusions are
transudates and do not require aspiration foranalysis. However, if the cause is not obvious andeffusion is unilateral, aspiration is necessary toestablish a diagnosis.
/square6Color and texture of fluid can give clue about thepossible diagnosis. It is straw colored in transudates,turbid and purulent in empyema and hemorrhagicin pulmonary infarction or malignancy. A milky,
opalescent fluid suggests a chylothorax. Black
pleural fluid is seen in infection with Aspergillus

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
2144 niger  or rizopus oryzae , malignant melanoma, and
charcoal-containing empyema.
/square6Biochemical analysis allows classification intotransudate and exudates ( see lights criteria).
Measurement of adenosine deaminase level (ADA)
in pleural fluid is very helpful in the diagnosis oftuberculosis. ADA level of >50 U/L is highlysuggestive of TB. Increased interferon-gammaconcentrations (>140 pg/mL) also support thediagnosis of tuberculous pleuritis. Increased
triglyceride and cholesterol levels are seen in
chylothorax. Increased amylase level is seen ineffusion due to pancreatitis. A low pH suggestsinfection but may also be seen in rheumatoidarthritis, and ruptured esophagus.
/square6Microbiological investigations should be done suchas Gram’s stain, culture sensitivity and AFB stain.PCR for tuberculosis should be done in most casesof pleural effusion.
/square6Cell count, cell type and malignant cytology shouldalso be requested.
/square6Pleural biopsy:  Combining pleural aspiration with
biopsy increases the diagnostic yield. An Abrams
needle is used for pleural biopsy. Pleural biopsy isbetter obtained under ultrasound or CT guidance.Video-assisted thoracoscopy allows the operator todirectly visualize the pleura and obtain biopsy.
Management
/square6Asymptomatic transudative effusions need not bedrained.
/square6Therapeutic aspiration  should be considered in
symptomatic patients (e.g. dyspnea).
/square6Tube thoracostomy : Insertion of intercostal drainage
(ICD) tube is required in complicated parapneu-monic effusions and empyema.
/square6Pleurodesis:  Involves instilling an irritant (such as
talc, doxycycline) into the pleural space to cause
inflammatory changes that result in bridgingfibrosis between the visceral and parietal pleuralsurfaces, obliterating the pleural space. Pleurodesisis used for recurrent malignant effusions.
/square6Treatment of the underlying cause:  For example, heart
failure, nephritic syndrome, pneumonia, etc. willoften be followed by resolution of the effusion.
Q.Bronchogenic carcinoma (lung cancer).
Q.Paraneoplastic syndrome.
/square6The term lung cancer is used for tumors arising
from the respiratory epithelium (bronchi,
bronchioles, and alveoli).
/square6Bronchogenic carcinoma can be divided into
following types.
–Small cell lung cancer (SCLC)
•Oat cell carcinoma–Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
• Adenocarcinoma• Squamous cell carcinoma• Large cell carcinoma
/square6NSCLC accounts for approximately 85% of all lung
cancers. Identifying the type of cancer is important,
because SCLC has a high response rate to
chemotherapy and radiation whereas NSCLC can
be cured by surgery in certain stages and is not
curable by chemotherapy alone.
Incidence and Prevalence
/square6Bronchogenic ca is the most common cancer in men.It is one of the leading causes of cancer death in
both men and women. The incidence of lung cancer
peaks between ages 55 and 65 years.
/square6Males are affected more often than females probably
due to smoking habits. However, incidence in
females is also increasing because of increased
smoking habits in women also.
/square6Incidence is higher in urban than in rural areas,probably due to air pollution. The precise incidence
of lung cancer in India is not known.
/square6Adenocarcinoma, arising from the bronchialmucosal glands, is the most common NSCLC cancer
in the United States (35–40% of all lung cancers).
Squamous cell carcinoma is the next common ca.
Etiology
/square6Smoking is the main cause of bronchogenic carci-noma. Ninety percent of patients with lung cancer
are current or former cigarette smokers. The relative
risk of developing lung cancer is increased by about
13-fold in smokers. There is a significant dose-
response relationship between the risk of lung
cancer and the number of cigarettes smoked per
day. The risk is increased 60- to 70-fold for a man
smoking two packs a day for 20 years as compared
with a nonsmoker. Besides the dose, the form of
tobacco smoked is also believed to be important.
Those who smoke only pipes or cigars have a lower
risk. Bidi smoking is equally harmful. The risk of
lung cancer is lower among users of filter than non-
filter cigarettes. The risk decreases after stopping
smoking. Passive smoking can also increase the risk
of lung cancer. The risk may be about twice as
compared to non-smokers without such exposure.
/square6Cigarette smoke contains many carcinogenic poly-
cyclic hydrocarbons like 3, 4 benzopyrine. Squamous
cell carcinoma and oat cell carcinoma are common
in smokers, whereas adenocarcinoma is common
in nonsmokers.
/square6Other risk factors for developing lung cancerinclude air pollution, ionizing radiation, chromates,
metallic iron and iron oxides, arsenic, nickel,
beryllium, asbestos, petrochemicals, hematite and
mustard gas. Adenocarcinoma can develop in areas
of chronic scarring (scar carcinoma).

/square6Diseases of Respiratory System145
2/square6Genetic factors like mutations in oncogenes may
play an important role in the development ofcarcinoma (Ca) all other risk factors may work byinducing tumor oncogenes.
Pathology
/square6Squamous cell ca grows relatively slowly and often
presents with local symptoms. Small cell carcinoma
grows faster and proves rapidly fatal due to earlymetastasis. Small cell ca is more often central thanperipheral. The classical oat cell type is charac-terized by round or oval nuclei with scantycytoplasm. Adenocarcinomas commonly present as
mid-zone or peripheral mass lesions. Poorly
differentiated adenocarcinomas tend to metastasizeearly and have a poor prognosis. Large cellcarcinomas are made up of large malignant cellswith abundant cytoplasm.
Clinical Features
/square6The signs and symptoms of lung cancer are due tolocal tumor growth, invasion or obstruction ofadjacent struc tures, regional lymph node involve-
ment, metastases and remote effects of tumorproducts (paraneoplastic syndromes). The patientmay be asymptomatic and may be diagnosed
incidentally by a chest X-ray.
Symptoms due to Local Growth
/square6Central or endobronchial tumor may cause cough,
hemoptysis, wheeze and stridor, dyspnea, andobstructive pneumonia. Obstruction of airways canproduce wheezing, and unilateral wheezingsuggests a localized obstruction.
/square6Peripheral tumor may cause pain from pleural orchest wall involvement, cough, and dyspnea.
/square6Bronchogenic carcinomas may cavitate and lead to
lung abscess formation.
Symptoms due to Local Invasion
/square6Local spread of tumor into the mediastinum or
involvement of mediastinal lymph nodes may causetracheal compression, dysphagia due to esophagealcompression, hoarseness due to recurrent laryngealnerve paralysis, elevation of the hemidiaphragmand dyspnea due to phrenic nerve paralysis and
Horner’s syndrome (enophthalmos, ptosis, miosis,
and ipsilateral loss of sweating) due to sympatheticchain compression. Pleural effusion can occur.
/square6Pancoast syndrome results due to a tumor in the
apex or in the superior sulcus of the lung with
involvement of the C8 and T1 nerves, cervicalsympathetic chain with consequent pain radiatingto medial side of arm and forearm, shoulder painand Horner’s syndrome.
/square6Other problems of local spread include superiorvena cava compression, cardiac involvement withresultant malignant pericardial effusion and
tamponade, arrhythmia, or cardiac failure.
Symptoms due to Metastases
/square6Common sites of metastases of lung carcinoma
include brain, bone, adrenals, and liver.
/square6Symptoms are referable to the organ system invol-
ved. Brain metastases produce neurologic deficits,
bone metastases produce pain and pathologic
fractures, bone marrow invasion presents with
pancytopenia, liver metastases produces jaundice,
and biliary obstruction, spine metastases produces
cord compression.
Paraneoplastic Syndromes
/square6Paraneoplastic syndromes are clinical syndromes
due to nonmetastatic systemic effects of a cancer.
They are not due to the local effect of tumor and
not due to its metastases. These syndromes result
from substances produced by the tumor, and they
occur remotely from the tumor itself.
/square6Paraneoplastic syndromes occur in approximately10% of patients with bronchogenic carcinoma and
occasionally are the presenting symptom. Para-
neoplastic manifestations of lung cancer include
cachexia, weight loss, hypercalcemia, SIADH,
Lambert-Eaton syndrome, etc.
Physical Signs
/square6Physical examination may reveal clubbing,
osteoarthro pathy of the wrists and ankles, and
lymphadenopathy especially in the supraclavicular
regions. RS examination may be normal or show
collapse, or consolidation. Pleural effusion may be
present. Monophonic wheeze may be heard in
localized airway obstruction.
Investigations
Imaging Studies
/square6Chest X-ray  may show  an isolated solitary mass
lesion. Cavitation or abscess formation may be seen.
Doubling time of more than 18 months and pre-
sence of calcification strongly suggest a benign
diagnosis. Segmental, lobar or massive collapse of
the lung may be present. Associated hilar and
mediastinal lymphadenopathy may be present.
Pleural and pericardial effusion may be present due
to invasion of the pleura and pericardium. An
elevated diaphragm suggests phrenic nerve
involvement. Secondary deposits in the ribs and
other bones may be present.
/square6CT scan of the chest is very useful and helps in
differentiating malignant leisons from benign ones.
It can also pick up mediastinal lymphadenopathy
and metastatic disease in the brain, liver, adrenal,
kidney and lymph nodes of the abdomen.
/square6MRI is particularly useful to detect vertebral, spinal
cord, and mediastinal invasion.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
2146 Bronchoscopy
/square6Fiberoptic bronchoscopy is useful to diagnose and
obtain biopsy in case of centrally located and endo-bronchial tumors. When the lesion is endoscopically
visualized, diagnosis can be established in more
than 90% of cases. Bronchoscopy can also revealparalysed vocal cords and bronchial aspirate andbronchial washings can be obtained to test formalignant cells.
Cytology
/square6Cytological examination of sputum may showmalignant cells. If pleural effusion is present, it
should be aspirated and examined for malignant
cells. CT-guided FNAC or biopsy from the mass isalso helpful for cytological examination.
Mediastinoscopy and Thoracoscopy
/square6These are sometimes used to take biopsy fromlesions and lymph nodes.
Other Diagnostic Techniques
/square6Biopsy of involved lymph nodes or of a metastaticnodule in the skin, liver, bone or pleura can help indiagnosis.
Management
Surgical Resection
/square6Surgical resection of the primary tumor andregional lymph nodes is the treatment of choice forNSCLC, if the tumor is localized without distantmetastases. It is not useful in SCLC.
Radiotherapy
/square6Radiotherapy is used both for curative purposes
as well as for palliative therapy. High-dose
radiotherapy can produce equal results as that ofsurgery in squamous cell carcinoma. It is the treat-
ment of choice for unresectable tumors. It can alsobe used as adjuvant therapy before or after surgery.
Chemotherapy
/square6It is being increasingly used in induction (neo-adjuvant) therapy in locally advanced, surgicallyresectable disease. Combined chemotherapy andradiotherapy is useful in small cell Ca. Drugs which
are useful include mitomycin-C, ifosfamide cisplatin,
carboplatin, and etoposide (remember MICE).Chemotherapy is also of great value in malignantpleural effusion and superior mediastinal com-pression syndrome.
Q.Tumors of the mediastinum.
/square6Mediastinum can be divided into four major
compartments (Fig. 2.6): Superior, anterior, middle
and posterior.
/square6The location of each compartment and the tumorsthat can occur within them are given below.
(Contd.)TABLE 2.19: Tumors of mediastinum
Divisions of mediastinum Loc ation Tumors
Superior mediastinum Above a line joining the lower border of the • Retrosternal goiter
4th thoracic vertebra and the upper end of • Persistent left superior vena cavathe sternum • Enlarged lymph nodes due to TB
• Prominent left subclavian artery• Tumors of thymus• Dermoid cyst• Lymphoma• Aortic aneurysm
Anterior mediastinum In front of the heart • Retrosternal goitre
• Dermoid cyst• Tumors of thymus• Lymphoma• Enlarged lymph nodes due to TB• Hiatus herniaFigure 2.6 Divisions of mediastinum


/square6Diseases of Respiratory System147
2TABLE 2.19: Tumors of mediastinum (contd.)
Divisions of mediastinum Loc ation Tumors
Middle mediastinum Between the anterior and posterior compartments • Pericardial cyst
• Bronchogenic cyst• Aortic aneurysm• Bronchial carcinoma• Lymphoma• Sarcoidosis
Posterior mediastinum Behind the heart • Neurogenic tumors
• Meningocele• Paravertebral abscess• Esophageal lesion• Diaphragmatic hernia• Aortic aneurysm• Foregut duplication
Clinical Features of Mediastinal Tumors
/square6Benign tumors can cause pressure effect on trachea
or superior vena cava. But most of the time benigntumors are asymptomatic and are diagnosed whenchest X-ray is taken for some other reason.
/square6Malignant tumors can invade and compressadjacent structures. Symptoms and signs dependon the structure compressed which are as follows.
/square6Trachea and bronchi : Stridor, breathlessness, cough,
pulmonary collapse.
/square6Esophagus:  Dysphagia.
/square6Phrenic nerve:  Diaphragmatic paralysis, paradoxical
chest movement.
/square6Recurrent laryngeal nerve:  Hoarseness of voice and
‘bovine’ cough.
/square6Sympathetic trunk:  Horner’s syndrome.
/square6Superior vena cava:  Elevation of JVP, edema of the
head and neck and upper limbs. Dilated veins seenon chest wall.
/square6Pericardium:  Pericarditis and/or pericardial effusion.
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray: Tumor may be visualized. Mediastinal
widening may be present.
/square6CT chest: This can easily pick up mediastinal growths,
the extent of spread and enlarged lymph nodes./square6Bronchoscopy:  May show intrabronchial lesion
which has spread to mediastinum.
/square6Mediastincopy:  This can directly visualize the tumors
and take biopsy also.
Management
/square6Treatment depends on the nature of mediastinalpathology. Benign tumors should be removedsurgically because they may cause symptomslater.
Q.Miliary mottling in chest X-ray.
/square6The term miliary mottling refers to innumerable,
small 1–2 mm nodules (resembling millet seeds)
scattered throughout the lungs. Causes of miliarymottling can be remembered by the mnemonic “HiSTOP MAC”.
Hi—Histoplasmosis, Histicytosis X, Hemosiderosis
S—Sarcoidosis
T—TB
O—Oil embolism
P—Pneumoconiosis
M—Metastasis
A—Alveolar microlithiasis
C—Coccidioidomycosis

3
148Q.Describe the blood supply and venous drainage
of the heart.ventricle. A posterior descending artery which is a
branch of RCA runs in the posterior interventriculargroove and supplies the inferior part of the
interventricular septum.
/square6RCA supplies the sinoatrial (SA) node in about 60%
of people, and the atrioventricular (AV) node inabout 90%. Proximal occlusion of the RCA thereforecan cause sinus bradycardia and AV nodal block.
Occlusion of RCA also causes infarction of the right
ventricle and inferior part of the left ventricle.Occlusion of the LAD or CX causes infarction ofthe left ventricular areas supplied by them.Occlusion of the left main coronary artery is usuallyfatal.
/square6Venous system of the heart mainly consists ofcoronary sinus with its draining veins, the anteriorright ventricular veins and the Thebesian veins. Thecoronary sinus lies in the posterior AV groove anddrains into the right atrium. Thebesian veins are
small veins which drain directly into the cardiac
chambers.
/square6Lymphatics from the heart travel with the coronaryvessels and then drain into the thoracic duct.
Q.Nerve supply of the heart.
/square6The heart is supplied by both sympathetic and para-
sympathetic fibers.
/square6Sympathetic fibers arise in the spinal cord and passthrough cervical ganglia. The superior, middle andinferior cardiac nerves arise from the respectivecervical ganglia and pass through the superficialand deep cardiac plexus to the heart. Sympatheticsystem supplies muscle fibers in the atria and
ventricles and the electrical conducting system.
Stimulation of sympathetic fibers produces positiveinotropic and chronotropic effect through β1-
adrenoceptors. β2-adrenoceptors predominate in
Figure 3.1 Blood supply of heart
/square6Heart is supplied by mainly by two coronary
arteries (left main and right coronary arteries)which arise from the aorta just distal to the aortic
valve.
/square6The left main coronary artery divides into the left
anterior descending artery (LAD) and leftcircumflex artery (CX) within 2.5 cm of its origin.
LAD runs in the anterior interventricular groove,
and the left circumflex artery (CX) runs posteriorlyin the atrioventricular groove.
/square6LAD gives diagonal branches and septal perfora-
tion branches which supply the anterior part of the
septum, anterior wall and apex of the left ventricle.CX artery supplies the lateral, posterior and inferiorsegments of the LV.
/square6The right coronary artery (RCA) runs in the rightatrioventricular groove and supplies right atrium,right ventricle and inferoposterior aspects of the leftDiseases of Cardiovascular System

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System149
3vascular smooth muscle and mediate vasodilata-
tion.
/square6The parasympathetic fibers start in the medulla andpass through the right and left vagus nerves. They
supply the AV and SA nodes via muscarinic (M2)
receptors and have an inhibitory effect.
/square6Afferent impulses from the heart pass via the spinalcord and the spinothalamic tract into the postero-
ventral nucleus of the thalamus.
Q.Describe briefly the conduction system of the
heart.the bundle of His and its branches. The delay in
the AV node is responsible for the PR interval onECG.
Q.Enumerate the symptoms of cardiac disease.
/square6The major symptoms associated with cardiac
disease are:
– Chest pain (discomfort)– Dyspnea
– Fatigue
– Edema– Palpitations
– Syncope
– Cough– Cyanosis
Q.What are the causes of chest pain? Discuss the
differential diagnosis of chest pain.
Causes of Chest Pain
Cardiac
/square6Angina
/square6Myocardial infarction
/square6Pericarditis
Non-cardiac
/square6Aortic dissection
/square6Pulmonary hypertension
/square6Pulmonary embolism
/square6Gastroesophageal reflux
/square6Esophageal spasm
/square6Peptic ulcer
/square6Gallbladder disease
/square6Musculoskeletal disease (costochondritis, rib
fracture, muscle pain)
/square6Pleuritis
/square6Herpes zoster
/square6Pneumothorax
Differential Diagnosis of Chest Pain
Angina
/square6Felt in the retrosternal region. Usually radiates toleft side of neck, jaw, epigastrium, shoulder, and
arms. Felt as pressure, burning, squeezing, or
heaviness. Usually lasts <20 min. Precipitated byexercise, cold weather, or emotional stress; relievedby rest or nitroglycerin. Prinzmetal’s angina maycome even at rest. Associated symptoms includesweating, palpitations, dizziness and dyspnea.
/square6Main investigations: ECG will show ST depression
and T wave inversion. Cardiac enzymes (CK-MB,troponins) and echocardiogram will be usuallynormal./square6The cardiac conduction system is made ofspecialized conduction tissue and consists of thesinoatrial (SA) node, internodal atrial pathway, AVnode, the bundle of His, bundle branches and
terminal Purkinje fibers.
/square6The SA node is oval in structure, about 1–2 cm long
and 0.5 cm thick. It is located at the junction of theright atrium and superior vena cava. SA node is
made of special cells and it generates the impulses
normally.
/square6The AV node is situated in the lower right atriumabove the insertion of the medial leaflet of the
tricuspid valve. It is also ovoid in shape and
measures 1 × 3 × 5 mm. It continues as the bundleof His which passes into the ventricular tissue.
/square6The bundle of His is about 2 cm in length. It divides
into right and left bundle branches. The left bundle
branch passes down the left side of the inter-ventricular septum. Left bundle branch gives riseto two fascicles known as anterosuperior andposteroinferior fascicles. Right bundle branch is acontinuation of bundle of His and runs on the right
side of the interventricular septum. Both left and
right bundle branches give rise to Purkinje fiberswhich ultimately supply the ventricles.
/square6The normal cardiac impulse is generated by SA
node. This impulse passes to the AV node through
atria. There is a delay in the AV node followed bytransmission of the impulse to ventricles throughFigure 3.2 Conducting system of heart


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3150 Myocardial Infarction
/square6Pain is same as angina but more severe and lasts
30 min or longer. It is not relieved by rest or nitro-glycerin. Associated symptoms include dyspnea,
sweating, weakness, nausea, and vomiting.
/square6Main investigations: ECG will show ST elevation and
pathological Q waves. Cardiac enzymes (CK-MB,troponins) will be elevated. Echocardiogram shows
regional wall motion abnormality.
Pericarditis
/square6Pain is sharp, stabbing and knife like and lasts for
many hours to days. Usually felt over theprecordium and may radiate to neck or leftshoulder. It is more localized than the pain ofmyocardial ischemia. It is aggravated by deepbreathing and supine position; relieved by sitting
up and leaning forward. Auscultation shows
pericardial friction rub.
/square6Main investigations: ECG will show ST elevation
(with concavity upwards). Echocardiogram may
show pericardial effusion or constriction.
Aortic Dissection
/square6Pain is felt in the anterior chest. It is sudden onset,
excruciating, tearing, knife like and may radiate to
back. It usually occurs in people with uncontrolled
hypertension or Marfan’s syndrome. There may bemurmur of aortic insufficiency and pulse or bloodpressure asymmetry between the limbs.
/square6Main investigations: Echocardiogram may show the
dissection. CT or MR angiography can confirm thediagnosis.
Pulmonary Embolism
/square6Chest pain is felt in the substernal or over the regionof pulmonary infarction. It is of sudden onset andpleuritic (with pulmonary infarction) or angina-like. It lasts minutes to <1 hour and aggravated bybreathing. Associated symptoms include dyspnea,tachypnea, tachycardia, hypotension, signs of acute
right-sided heart failure, pleural rub, and
hemoptysis.
/square6Main investigations: Chest X-ray may show wedge
shaped opacity. ECG may show S1Q3T3 pattern.
Echocardiogram may show signs of pulmonary
hypertension with dilated right atrium and rightventricle.
Pulmonary Hypertension
/square6Pain is felt like pressure in the substernal region.Pain is aggravated by exertion. Associated findingsinclude dyspnea and signs of pulmonary hyper-tension.
/square6Main investigations: Echocardiogram  may show signs
of pulmonary hypertension with dilated rightatrium and right ventricle.Gastroesophageal Reflux
/square6Pain is burning type, felt in epigastric and substernal
region and lasts 10 to 60 min. It is worsened bypostprandial recumbency and relieved by antacids.
/square6Main investigations: Upper GI scopy (gastrointestinal
scopy) may show reflux esophagitis, regurgitationof stomach contents into the esophagus.
Esophageal Spasm
/square6Pain is felt as pressure, tightness, or burning sensa-tion in the retrosternal area. It lasts for 2–30 minand closely mimics angina. Esophageal spasm canbe relieved by nitrates adding onto its confusionwith angina.
/square6Main investigations: Esophageal manometry can
record the increased pressure in the lower part ofesophagus due to spasm. Endoscopy is also usefulto visualize the inside of esophagus.
Peptic Ulcer
/square6Pain is burning type, felt in epigastric and sub-sternal region and lasts for a long time. It is relievedby food or antacids and aggravated by spices andalcohol. Associated nausea, vomiting and melenamay be present.
/square6Main investigations: Endoscopy will show the ulcer
in the stomach or duodenum.
Gallbladder Disease
/square6Cholecystitis and cholelithiasis can cause epigastric,right upper quadrant, or substernal pain. Pain is
felt as burning or pressure sensation and lasts for a
long time. It often increases after a meal.
/square6Main investigations: Ultrasound abdomen may show
gallstones or features of cholecystitis.
Musculoskeletal Disease
/square6Like costochondritis can cause chest pain. Pain isaching type and lasts for a variable duration. Painis aggravated by movement. Localized tendernessmay be present.
/square6Main investigations: ECG and other routine investiga-
tions will be normal.
Pleuritis
/square6Pain is felt superficially. It is usually unilateral, andwell localized. It is worsened by deep breath and
cough. Associated symptoms include cough, fever,
crepitations and occasional rub.
/square6Main investigations: Chest X-ray may show under-
lying pneumonia or pleural thickening or effusion.
Herpes Zoster
/square6Pain is sharp or burning with dermatomal distribu-
tion. Vesicular rash may appear in the dermatomal
area.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System151
3Pneumothorax
/square6Pain is sudden onset and lasts for many hours. Pain
is usually unilateral on the side of pneumothorax.Associated features include tracheal shift to
opposite side, dyspnea, absent or diminished breath
sounds on the side of pneumothorax.
/square6Main investigations: Chest X-ray will show the pneu-
mothorax (air in the pleural space).
Q.Define syncope. Enumerate the causes of syncope.
Discuss the approach to a case of syncope.
/square6Syncope is transient loss of consciousness and
postural tone due to cerebral hypoperfusion withspontaneous recovery. This definition excludesseizures, coma, shock, or other states of alteredconsciousness. Near-syncope is light-headedness
and a sense of an impending faint without loss of
consciousness.
/square6Loss of consciousness happens due to globalcerebral hypoperfusion. It happens within 10
seconds of cessation of cerebral blood flow. Patient
usually recovers consciousness as soon as he is flaton the ground.
/square6Though most cases of syncope are benign, there can
be serious underlying problems such as cardiac
disorders.
Causes of Syncope
/square6Syncope is classified as neurally mediated, cardiac,and orthostatic hypotension.Approach to a Case of Syncope
History
/square6Elicit a detailed history of the event from the patientor bystanders.
/square6Ask the following questions:
– Was loss of consciousness complete?– Was loss of consciousness with rapid onset and
short duration?
– Was recovery spontaneous, complete, and
without sequelae?
– Was postural tone lost?
/square6If the answers are yes, syncope is likely; if one, or
more answers are negative, other causes of loss of
consciousness should be considered.
/square6Precipitating factors:  They include fatigue, sleep or
food deprivation, hot weather, alcohol consump-tion, pain, and strong emotions such as fear orapprehension.
/square6Details of patient activity before the event:  Activity
prior to syncope may give a clue to the etiology of
symptoms. Syncope may occur at rest; with change
of posture; on exertion; after exertion; or withspecific situations such as shaving, coughing,voiding, or prolonged standing. Syncope occurringwithin 2 minutes of standing suggests orthostatichypotension.
/square6Position of the patient immediately before the syncope
occurred:  Syncope while standing indicates ortho-
static hypotension. Syncope while seated or lyingis more likely to be cardiac.
/square6Symptoms prior to the onset of syncope:  Faintness,
dizziness, or light-headedness occurs prior to truesyncope. Other symptoms, such as vertigo, weak-ness, diaphoresis, epigastric discomfort, nausea,
blurred or faded vision, pallor, or paresthesias, may
also occur prior to true syncope. An aura prior toloss of consciousness may suggest seizure. Syncopeon exertion, presence of chest pain, dyspnea, andpalptations may suggest cardiac cause. Severeheadache, focal neurologic deficits, diplopia, ataxia,
or dysarthria prior to the syncopal event suggest
neurological cause such as intracranial bleed orvertebrobasilar insufficiency.
/square6Duration of loss of consciousness  (LOC) can indicate
the cause. True syncope is associated with LOClasting for few seconds to few minutes. In neuro-logical problems, LOC usually lasts longer, few
minutes to hours.
/square6Confusion after syncope, tongue bite, urinary and
fecal incontinence, convulsive activity, andmyalgias indicate siezure as the cause of LOC.
/square6Obtain drug history, because many drugs causepostural hypotension and syncope. These arecalcium channel blockers, alpha-blockers, diuretics,etc.TABLE 3.1: Causes of syncope
Neurally mediated (most common type)
• Vasovagal syncope• Situational syncope (cough, sneeze, swallow, micturition,
defecation)
• Carotid sinus syncope
Cardiac
• Valvular  heart diseases (AS, MS)• Aortic dissection• Atrial myxoma• Cardiac tamponade• Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy• Myocardial ischemia, infarction• Pulmonary embolism• Pulmonary hypertension• Arrhythmias
Orthostatic hypotension
• Autonomic neuropathy• Volume depletion• Drugs (alpha blockers, beta-blockers, nitrates)
Miscellaneous
• Psychogenic syncope• Hyperventilation• Transient ischemic attack• Vascular steal syndromes (subclavian steal syndrome)

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3152 /square6Past history of cardiac disease, sizure disorder,
diabetes (hypoglycemia), etc. should be asked.History of pregnancy should be asked becauseectopic rupture can cause syncope.
Physical Examination
/square6Vital signs:  Fever may point to a precipitant of
syncope, such as a urinary tract infection (UTI)
or pneumonia. Tachycardia may be an indicator
of pulmonary embolism, hypovolemia, tachy-arrhythmia, or acute coronary syndrome. Brady-cardia may point toward a cardiac conductiondefect, or acute coronary syndrome. Posturalchanges in blood pressure (BP), hypotension, and
increased heart rate may point toward an
orthostatic cause of syncope. A decrease in systolicBP by 20 mm Hg, a decrease in diastolic BP by10 mm Hg, or an increase in heart rate by 20 beatsper minute (bpm) on standing indicates posturalhypotension as the cause of syncope.
/square6CVS:  Look for murmurs, signs of cardiac failure
such as basal crepitations of lung, presence of S3
and presence of arrhythmias.
/square6CNS:  Look for any signs of head injury, pupillary
abnormalities, cranial nerve deficits, motor deficits,
abnormal deep tendon reflexes, and sensorydeficits. Severe neuropathies may correlate withvasodepressor syncope.
/square6RS/ABDOMEN:  Look for any abnormalities.
Investigations
/square6Check blood glucose immediately using glucometer
to rule out hypoglycemia. Other tests includecomplete blood count, serum electrolytes, cardiac
enzymes, LFT and renal function tests.
/square6ECG: To rule out acute myocardial infarction or
myocardial ischemia, arrhythmias, conduction
defects.
/square6Stool for occult blood to rule out any GI bleed.
/square6Urine pregnancy test in women to rule out ectopic
rupture.
/square6Chest radiography:  May show evidence of diseases
such as pneumonia, heart failure, pulmonary
embolism, etc.
/square6Computed tomography (CT) of the head:  To rule out
any intracranial pathology such as hemorrhageor infarction in patients with neurologic deficitsor in patients with head trauma secondary tosyncope.
/square6CT of the chest and abdomen:  Indicated only in select
cases (e.g. suspected aortic dissection, rupturedabdominal aortic aneurysm, or pulmonary
embolism [PE]).
/square6Echocardiography:  Test of choice for evaluating
cardiac causes of syncope such as heart failure,
valvular heart diseases etc./square6Tilt-table test:  Useful for confirming autonomic
dysfunction and postural hypotension causingsyncope. Here patient is put on a table which is thentilted to an angle of 70° for up to 45 minutes whilethe ECG and blood pressure are monitored.
/square6Electroencephalography (EEG):  Indicated if seizure is
a likely diagnosis.
/square6Stress test:  A cardiac stress test is appropriate for
patients in whom cardiac syncope is suspected and
who have risk factors for coronary atherosclerosis.
Management
/square6Treatment depends on the cause or precipitant ofthe syncope.
/square6Situational syncope:  Patient education regarding the
condition.
/square6Orthostatic syncope:  Patient education; wearing elastic
compression stocking to lower limbs, mineralo-corticoids, and other drugs (e.g. midodrine);
elimination of drugs associated with hypotension;
increasing oral fluid intake.
/square6Cardiac syncope:  Antiarrhythmic for arrhythmia
induced syncope or pacemaker insertion. Surgical
correction if any valvular heart disease is present.
Q.Write briefly about vasovagal syncope.
/square6Vasovagal syncope (earlier called neurocardiogenic
syncope) is the most common cause of syncope.
Majority of patients are young women between 15
and 45 years old. Vasovagal syncope is likely if thereis history of specific triggers, such as emotionalstress, pain, prolonged standing, hot weather, etc.
Pathophysiology
/square6Regardless of the trigger, the mechanism of syncopeis similar in the various vasovagal syncopesyndromes. The nucleus tractus solitarii of the
brainstem is activated directly or indirectly by the
triggering stimulus, resulting in simultaneousenhancement of parasympathetic nervous systemtone (vagal) and withdrawal of sympatheticnervous system tone.
/square6Increased parasympathetic tone results in cardio-inhibitory response, characterized by decreasedheart rate (negative chronotropic effect) anddecreased contractility (negative inotropic effect)leading to a decrease in cardiac output resulting in
a loss of consciousness.
/square6Decreased sympathetic tone results in drop in blood
pressure (to as low as 80/20) without much changein heart rate. This occurs due to dilation of the blood
vessels, due to withdrawal of sympathetic tone.
/square6Though any of the above mechanisms can lead to
syncope, majority of people with vasovagalsyncope have both of the above mechanisms
playing a role.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System153
3Clinical Features
/square6Lightheadedness or dizziness.
/square6Feeling sweaty or clammy.
/square6Nausea.
/square6Blurry vision.
/square6Looking pale or gray.
/square6Weakness.
/square6Feeble pulse, hypotension.
Treatment
/square6Try to avoid situations that trigger fainting and take
measures to prevent injury due to falling.
/square6If there are frequent attacks affecting the quality of
life, following medications can be used:
/square6Alpha-1-adrenergic agonists (such as midodrine),which raise blood pressure.
/square6Corticosteroids (fludrocortisone) help raise sodium
and fluid levels.
/square6Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs such
as paroxetine) help to regulate the nervous systemresponse.
Q.Define cyanosis. Describe the mechanism and
causes of cyanosis.
Q.Describe the mechanism of central and peripheral
cyanosis. How do you differentiate central fromperipheral cyanosis?
Q.Differential cyanosis.
/square6Cyanosis  refers to a bluish discoloration of the skin
and mucous membranes due to an increased quantityof reduced hemoglobin or hemoglobin derivatives.
/square6Cyanosis is seen when reduced hemoglobin concen-tration in capillary blood is more than 5 g/dL.Cyanosis is also seen when methemoglobin (>1.5%)or sulfhemoglobin (>0.5%) is present in blood.
/square6It is easily detected on the lips, nail beds, ears, andmalar eminences. The degree of cyanosis ismodified by the color and thickness of the skin.
/square6Cyanosis can be divided into two types, central andperipheral.
Mechanism of Cyanosis
/square6It is the absolute quantity rather than the relative
quantity  of reduced hemoglobin which is important
in producing cyanosis. Thus in severe anemia even
if the reduced hemoglobin percentage is more; stillthe absolute quantity is less and hence, may notproduce cyanosis. The opposite is true in poly-cythemia where hemoglobin is increased and canproduce cyanosis even with lesser percentages of
reduced hemoglobin.
/square6In central cyanosis SaO2 is reduced or an abnormal
hemoglobin is present, and it affects both skin andmucous membranes. Peripheral cyanosis is due to
slowing of peripheral circulation which leads togreater extraction of O
2 from the blood and causes
cyanosis. It results from vasoconstriction anddiminished peripheral blood flow which occur incold exposure, shock, congestive failure, andperipheral vascular disease. Peripheral cyanosisusually spares mucous membranes of oral cavity
and tongue. In congestive heart failure both
peripheral and central cyanosis may coexist.
Causes of Cyanosis
TABLE 3.2: Causes of cyanosis
Central cyanosis
Decreased FIO2
• High altitude
Lung diseases
• Pneumonia• COPD• Interstitial lung disease• Respiratory failure due to any cause• Hypoventilation• Ventilation perfusion mismatching (pulmonary arteriovenous
fistulas)
Heart diseases
• Cyanotic congenital heart diseases• Congestive heart failure with pulmonary edema
Hemoglobin abnormalities
• Methemoglobin• Sulfhemoglobin• Carboxyhemoglobin
Peripheral cyanosis
• Cardiac failure• Cold exposure• Peripheral vascular disease• Venous obstruction• Raynauad’s phenomenon
Differentiation between central and peripheral
cyanosis (see Table 3.3)
/square6Cyanosis affecting only lower limbs but not upper
limbs is called differential cyanosis. It is seen inpatients with patent ductus arteriosus with reversalof shunt.
/square6Cyanosis of only upper limbs can occur in patentductus arteriosus with reversal of shunt withtransposition of great vessels.
Clinical Features
/square6Onset of cyanosis in the early perinatal period ishighly suggestive of a congenital cause whereas amore recent onset suggests an acquired cause.
/square6General examination shows bluish hue in the skinand mucus membranes.
/square6History of exposure or physical contact with sub-
stances like dapsone and sulfur-containing drugs
suggests hemoglobinopathies like methemoglobi-nemia.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3154
/square6Current or frequent exposure to cold suggests
peripheral cyanosis.
/square6Detailed physical examination should be done tolook for any cardiac or lung abnormality.
Investigations
/square6Arterial blood gas (ABG):  Decreased arterial oxygen
saturation is seen in central cyanosis whereas ABGis normal in peripheral cyanosis.
/square6Complete hemogram : To know the presence of
anemia, polycythemia, etc. which can influence thedegree of cyanosis.
/square6Chest X-ray : To rule out lung diseases such as
pneumonia, ILD.
/square6Hyperoxia test : High flow oxygen is given and
patient is observed for the disappearance of cyanosis.
In some cases of central cyanosis disappears. Therewill not be any change in peripheral cyanosis.
/square6Echocardiography:  This can identify cyanotic heart
diseases, heart failure, etc.
Treatment
/square6Depends on the underlying cause.
/square6Surgical intervention is required for the correction
of congenital heart disease causing cyanosis.
/square6Oxygen support can be provided to resolve thehypoxia. Oxygen can be provided through nasalcannula, oxygen mask, and assisted ventilation.
/square6For methemoglobinemia-induced cyanosis, thestandard treatment is with methylene blue.
Q.Define palpitation. Enumerate the causes of palpita-
tion. How do you approach a case of palpitation?
/square6Palpitation is defined as an unpleasant awareness
of the forceful, rapid, or irregular beating of the
heart.
/square6Palpitation is a very common and sometimes
frightening symptom. It may be due to cardiac ornon-cardiac problems. Differentiating cardiac from
non-cardiac cause is important because there is arisk of sudden death in those with an underlying
cardiac etiology.
Causes of PalpitationTABLE 3.3: Differentiation between central and peripheral cyanosis
Feature Central cyanosis Peripheral cyanosis
Site Seen on the entire body surface as well Seen only in peripheries
as peripheries
Evidence of respiratory or Present Absent
cardiovascular disease
Temperature of peripheries Warm Cold
Clubbing of fingers Usually present and may suggest Absent
congenital cyanotic heart disease
or pulmonary disease
Massage or warming of a Cyanosis persists Cyanosis disappears or decreases
cyanotic extremity
Breathing 100% oxygen Cyanosis may disappear Persists
SaO2Decreased Normal
TABLE 3.4: Causes of palpitation
Cardiac problems Metabolic disorders
(most common cause) • Hypoglycemia
• Any arrhythmia • Pheochromocytoma
• Valvular heart disease Physiological
• Ischemic heart disease • Stress
• Cardiomyopathy • Exercise
Psychiatric disease High output states
• Panic attack • Anemia
• Anxiety • ThyrotoxicosisDrugs • Pregnancy
• Sympathomimetic agents • Paget’s disease• Anticholinergic drugs • Fever• Beta blocker withdrawal• Cocaine• Amphetamines• Caffeine• Nicotine• Alcohol
Approach to a Patient with Palpitations
/square6Evaluation of the patient presenting with palpita-
tions begins with a history, physical examination,and 12-lead ECG. Additional testing should be
guided by clinical clues.
History
/square6Figure out what exactly the patient means. A
detailed description of the sensation is essential andask the patient to tap out the palpitation on a table.
/square6Recurrent but short-lived palpitation or the feeling
of missed beat suggests ectopic beats.
/square6Is the palpitation continuous or intermittent?
(Paroxysmal palpitation is suggestive of anarrhythmia. Persistent palpitation is suggestive of
a volume overload or a persistent arrhythmia like
atrial fibrillation).

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System155
3/square6Is the heart beat regular or irregular? (Irregular
palpitation is seen in atrial fibrillation. Regularpalpitation is seen in paroxysmal supraventriculartachycardia).
/square6Is the onset abrupt? (Abrupt onset seen inarrhythmias, slow onset seen in physiologicalcauses such as exercise).
/square6How do attacks terminate? (Sudden terminationsuggests arrhythmia such as PSVT, slow termina-tion suggestive of physiological causes such asexercise).
/square6Are there any associated symptoms? For example,Chest pain suggests myocardial ischemia. Light-headedness can be associated with brady ortachyarrhythmias. Polyuria is seen after an attack
of supraventricular tachycardia.
/square6Is there any history suggestive of underlying heart
disease such as IHD, valvular heart diseases, etc?
/square6Is there any extracardiac cause for palpitation(anemia, thyrotoxicosis)?
/square6A history of panic attacks or anxiety disorder pointsto a psychiatric cause.
/square6Is the patient taking any drugs which producepalpitations or arrhythmias?
Examination
/square6Note the general status of the patient: Whetheranxious or agitated because these can producepalpitation.
/square6Look for any abnormality in vital signs such asfever, hypertension, hypotension, tachycardia,bradycardia, tachypnea, and low oxygen saturation.Note the pulse volume and rhythm. Irregular
rhythm is seen in atrial fibrillation.
/square6Look for pallor (anemia can cause palpitation) any
thyroid abnormality (thyromegaly) or exophthalmos
(thyrotoxicosis can cause palpitation).
/square6CVS:  Look for murmurs (suggests valvular heart
disease), cardiomegaly and presence of S3 (suggests
cardiac failure). Also note the rate and regularity
of the heart beats.
Investigations
/square6ECG to rule out any arrhythmias. Normal restingECG does not exclude cardiac arrhythmia. Henceambulatory ECG monitoring should be consideredif arrhythmia is strongly suspected inspite ofnormal ECG.
/square6Echocardiogram to rule out any structural heartdisease.
/square6Exercise stress testing (treadmill testing) isindicated in patients who experience palpitations
with exertion.
/square6Other tests such as hemoglobin, thyroid functiontests, 24 hours urinary catecholamine levels
(pheochromocytoma), etc. depending on suspicion.Management
/square6Treatment depends on the underlying cause.
/square6Most cases of palpitations are due to an awarenessof the normal heart beat, a sinus tachycardia orbenign extrasystoles that have been triggered bystress, an intercurrent illness, or the effects ofcaffeine, alcohol and nicotine. In these situationspatient should be reassured.
/square6Beta-blockers may be tried for persistent benignpalpitations.
Q.Describe the different types of radial pulse and
their clinical importance.
Q.Clinical importance of radial pulse examination.
/square6Examination of the pulse involves assessment of
the following: Rate, rhythm, volume, character,condition of the vessel wall, radioradial and radio-femoral delay.
/square6Other peripheral pulses such as femorals, dorsalispedis, posterior tibials, subclavians and temporalsshould be palpated and assessed for any delay ordifference in volume. In coarctation of the aorta,the volume of the femoral pulse is lower than radialpulse and also delayed.
/square6Pulse volume and character are better assessed inthe carotid artery. All other parameters can beassessed in the radial pulse.
/square6The normal carotid and aortic pulse consists of anearly percussion wave due to left ventricularejection, and a second smaller peak tidal waverepresenting the reflected wave from periphery.However, normally, peripheral pulses such asradial and femoral are felt as single waveform.
Rate
/square6The normal rate in an adult varies from 60 to 100 per
minute. A resting pulse rate below 60 per minute is
called bradycardia and above 100 is tachycardia.
TABLE 3.5: Causes of bradycardia and tachycardia
Bradycardia Tachycardia
• Athletes • Anxiety
• During sleep • Fever• Hypothyroidism • Pregnancy• Vasovagal attack • Hyperthyroidism
• Heart block • Cardiac failure• Hyperkalemia • Tachyarrhythmias• Sick sinus syndrome • Drugs: Salbutamol, amino-
• Hypothermia phylline, vasodilators
• Raised intracranial tension• Drugs: Beta blockers, clonidine
Rhythm
/square6Normally the pulse is regular except for a slight
increase in rate on inspiration and slowing on
expiration (sinus arrhythmia).

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3156 Irregularly irregular
/square6Atrial fibrillation
/square6Atrial flutter with a varying AV block
/square6Multifocal atrial tachycardia (MAT)
/square6Frequent extrasystoles
Completely regular (loss of normal sinus arrhythmia)
Autonomic neuropathy
Regularly irregular
/square6Sinus arrhythmia
/square6Pulsus bigeminus, trigeminus
/square6Partial AV blocks
Volume
/square6This  is the amplitude of pulse wave as judged by
the palpating finger. It depends on pulse pressure
and is graded as high volume, normal volume, andlow volume.
High-volume pulse (water hammer, collapsingor Corrigan’s pulse)
/square6Aortic regurgitation
/square6Patent ductus arteriosus
/square6Mitral regurgitation
/square6Ventricular septal defect
/square6High output states (anemia, hyperthyroidism,beriberi, Paget’s disease, arteriovenous fistula)
/square6Increased stroke volume (complete heart block).
Low-volume pulse
/square6Hypovolemia
/square6Cardiogenic shock
/square6Tachycardias
/square6Dilated cardiomyopathy
/square6Heart failure
/square6Mitral stenosis
/square6Aortic stenosis
Varying volume pulse (alternate high and low volume
pulses)
Left ventricular failure.
Character of the Pulse
Pulsus Paradoxus
/square6This is an exaggeration of the normal phenomenon
of low-volume pulse during inspiration and bettervolume during expiration (normal fall by <10 mmHgon inspiration). Hence, the name “paradoxus” is amisnomer.
/square6Mechanism of pulsus paradoxus:  In normal people,
there is reduction of itrathoracic pressure duringinspiration, which causes pooling of blood in theright ventricle and pulmonary vasculature, whichin turn results in decreased venous return to left
ventricle and low stroke volume. Exaggeration of
this normal response can be caused by:– Restriction of diastolic filling of ventricles
(constrictive pericarditis, massive pericardialeffusion). Limitation in the diastolic filling of theright atrium and right ventricle duringinspiration results in lowering of left ventricularstroke volume.
– Right ventricular failure. This leads to decreased
venous return to left ventricle and low left ventri-cular stroke volume.
– Increased respiratory effort (severe asthma).
During inspiration, owing to enhancedintrathoracic negative pressure, there is poolingof blood in pulmonary veins resulting in loweredleft ventricular stroke volume.
Causes of pulsus paradoxus
/square6Constrictive pericarditis.
/square6Cardiac tamponade.
/square6Restrictive cardiomyopathy.
/square6COPD.
/square6Severe asthma.
/square6Tension pneumothorax.
How to look for pulsus paradoxus
/square6Pulsus paradoxus is better appreciated in theperipheral pulses (radial). During inspiration thereis decrease in the volume of radial pulse.
/square6An even better way of measuring pulsus paradoxusis by using sphygmomanometer and stethoscope.BP cuff is tied around the arm and inflated until allKorotkoff sounds are absent, then pressure isreleased very slowly from the cuff. The first sounds
auscultated will be heard only during expiration,
and this pressure should be noted. Next, as cuffpressure is dropped further, the pressure shouldbe noted when Korotkoff sounds are heard duringboth inspiration and expiration. The differencebetween these two systolic pressures quantifies
pulsus paradoxus.
Reverse Pulsus Paradoxus
/square6This refers to inspiratory rise in arterial pressure.
/square6It is seen in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, positive
pressure ventilation and AV dissociation.
Water Hammer or Collapsing Pulse or Corrigan’s Pulse
/square6This is characterized by a rapid upstroke, a rapid
down stroke and a high volume.
/square6The rapid upstroke is due to increased stroke
volume. Rapid downstroke is due to either diastolicleak back into left ventricle (e.g. aortic regurgita-
tion) or rapid run off to the periphery due to low
systemic vascular resistance (e.g. AV fistula).
Causes of water hammer pulse
/square6Aortic regurgitation.
/square6Ruptured sinus of Valsalva.
/square6Patent ductus arteriosus.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System157
3/square6Mitral regurgitation.
/square6Hyperkinetic circulatory states (anemia, hyper-
thyroidism, beriberi, Paget’s disease, arteriovenousfistula).
How to check for collapsing pulse
/square6The fundamental principle of eliciting the water
hammer pulse is to elevate the patient’s arm above
the heart and to palpate the patient’s wrist (radialpulse) with the examiner’s palm. Place the patientin supine position at a slight recline. Wrap aroundthe patient’s wrist with your palm and feel for theradial pulse with your palm. Now increase the
grasp so that radial pulse is slightly occluded. The
patient’s arm is then raised above the patient’s head.The water hammer pulse will feel like a tappingimpulse with the palm of examiner’s hand.
Pulsus Alternans
/square6This is alternate large volume and low volumepulse. There is a difference of 10–40 mmHg insystolic pressure between beats.
/square6It is due to the alternate strong and weak contractionof the left ventricle. When the ventricle contractspoorly there is less stroke stroke volume producing
weak pulse. Less stroke volume also leads to
increased end diastolic volume in left ventriclewhich leads to strong contraction and high volumepulse in the next beat according to Starling’s law.
/square6The pulse must be absolutely regular to diagnosepulsus alternans and distinguish it from pulsus
bigemini which also has beats of alternating
strength, although the rhythm is irregular.
/square6It is seen in cardiac failure.
Pulsus Parvus et tardus
/square6This is a slow rising, low volume, well sustainedpulse, seen in aortic stenosis./square6Anacrotic pulse  is a variant of pulsus parvus in
which a notch is palpable between the slowly rising
percussion and tidal waves.
Pulsus Bisferiens
/square6This is a pulse with double-peak during systole.Both peaks are felt during systole. It is seen in
combined aortic stenosis and aortic regurgitation.The first peak is due to a quick rising percussion
wave and the second peak is due to a delayed tidal
wave. The notch is due to aortic regurgitation.
Dicrotic Pulse
/square6Dicrotic pulse has two palpable peaks, one in systoleand other in diastole (note that pulsus bisferiensalso has two palpable peaks but both are felt during
systole). First peak during systole is due to the
percussion wave, while a second lower peak duringdiastole is due to accentuated dicrotic wave.
/square6It is seen in the following conditions:
– High-grade fever
– Dilated cardiomyopathy
– Advanced cardiac failure– Cardiac tamponade
Pulsus Bigemini or Trigemini or Quadrigemini
/square6Here the pulse is regularly irregular and is due to
fixed unifocal extrasystoles coming after every
normal beat (bigemini) or after every two (trigemini)
or three normal beats (quadrigemini), with a pauseafter the extrasystole.
Condition of arterial wall
/square6This can be assessed by rolling the radial artery with
fingers against the underlying bone. Normally it
feels soft and elastic. If the wall is thickened, it feels
hard and tortuous.
Radiofemoral and radioradial delay
/square6Delayed femoral pulse compared to the radial pulse
is seen in coarctation of aorta (post-subclavian),
Figure 3.3 Different types of pulses

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3158 aorto-arteritis, or saddle embolus. Radiofemoral
delay can be assessed by simultaneous palpationof these two arteries.
/square6Unequal radial pulses and radioradial delay may
be seen in coarctation of aorta (pre-subclavian).
/square6Unequal carotid pulses could be due to athero-
sclerotic stenosis in one of the arteries.
Q.Discuss the mechanism of jugular venous pulse.
Q.Describe the importance of examination of JVP.
What are the normal wave patterns of JVP and theirvariations? How do you differentiate JVP from
carotid pulse?
/square6Examination of jugular veins can give valuable cluesregarding volume status, central venous pressure,and right heart events. Since there are no valves
between the right atrium and internal jugular veins,
right atrial pressure is reflected in these veins.
How to measure JVP
/square6The patient should be in supine position, torsoelevated to 45 degrees, and the head extendedbackward and turned to the left (normally the neck
veins should not be visible and collapse in this
position). The height of JVP is measured as thevertical distance between the top of the venouspulsation and the angle of Louis (sternal angle,where the manubrium meets the sternum). Thismeasurement is normally ≤3 cm. Anything above
3 cm is considered abnormal.
/square6The centre point of right atrium is about 5 cm belowthe sternal angle. Hence, if 5 cm is added to the heightof JVP measured, we get a rough estimate of centralvenous pressure (CVP) which is normally ≤8 cm H
2O.
/square6Some clinicians choose to use the clavicle as a
reference point with the patient in seated position.Clavicle is easily located and venous pulsationsabove that level are clearly abnormal.
Causes of Elevated JVPWave Forms of JVP and their Mechanism
TABLE 3.6: Causes of elevated JVP
• Right heart failure (cor pulmonale)
• Volume overload• Tricuspid regurgitation• Tricuspid stenosis• Pulmonary HTN• Pulmonary embolism• Constrictive pericarditis• Cardiac tamponade• Sup vena cava obstruction (non-pulsatile elevation)• Massive ascites or right sided pleural effusion
Distinguishing JVP from Carotid Pulse
/square6Jugular venous pulse should be differentiated from
carotid pulse as the later can sometimes be mistakenfor the jugular venous pulsation.TABLE 3.7: Differences between JVP and carotid pulse
JVP Carotid pulse
Visible but not palpable Visible and palpable
Obliterated by pressure at root of Not obliterated
neck
Multiple wave forms Single wave form
Hepatojugular reflux present Absent
Definite upper level No definite upper level
On sitting up upper level of No change
column decreases
Upper level falls on inspiration No change
Figure 3.4 Waveforms of JVP
/square6JVP has 3 positive ( a, c, v) and 2 negative waves
(x and y).
/square6The ‘a’ wave occurs due to right atrial contraction.  A
prominent ‘ a’ wave is seen in patients with reduced
right ventricular (RV) compliance from any cause.
A cannon ‘ a’ wave occurs with A-V dissociation
(complete heart block) and RA contraction againsta closed tricuspid valve. ‘ a’ wave is absent in atrial
fibrillation because there is no coordinated atrialcontraction. Cannon A waves need to be distin-guished from giant A waves that occur in right heart
structural changes such as tricuspid valvulopathies,
right ventricular hypertrophy, and pulmonaryhypertension. To the observer of the jugular,venous-pressure giant A waves and Cannon Awaves may appear similar. From physical examalone it might be difficult to differentiate between
the two
/square6Next ‘x’ descent follows and is due to the fall in pressure
in the atrium during atrial diastole.  In normal indivi-
duals, the x′ descent is the predominant waveform
in the jugular venous pulse.
/square6The ‘ x’ descent is interrupted by a positive ‘c’ wave
which is due to the ventricular systole  pushing the
closed tricuspid valve into the right atrium,
elevating its pressure.
/square6The ‘v’ wave is due to atrial filling,  and occurs at the
end of ventricular systole. Its height depends onRA compliance and the amount of blood in the RA.
Normally v wave is smaller than the ‘ a’ wave. In
patients with atrial septal defect (ASD), the ‘ a’ and
‘v’ waves may be of equal height.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System159
3/square6The ‘y’ descent follows the ‘v’ wave peak and reflects the
fall in RA pressure after tricuspid valve opening.  If there
is resistance to ventricular filling in early diastole,the ‘ y’ descent will be blunted (e.g. pericardial
tamponade, tricuspid stenosis). A steep ‘ y’ descent
occurs when the ventricular diastolic filling occurs
early and rapidly, as with pericardial constriction.
The corresponding auscultatory phenomenon is thepericardial knock.
Q.Kussmauls sign.
/square6The normal JVP falls with inspiration. This is due
to negative intrathoracic pressure which increases
pulmonary vascular compliance.
/square6Failure to decrease or a rise in JVP pressure withinspiration is known as the Kussmaul sign.
/square6Kussmaul sign is seen in the following conditions:
– Constrictive pericarditis
– Restrictive cardiomyopathy
– Acute severe asthma or COPD
– Pulmonary embolism
– RV infarction
– Right-sided volume overload
– Advanced systolic failure.
Q.Hepatojugular reflux (abdominojugular reflux).
/square6Abdominojugular reflux is performed using firm
and consistent pressure over the upper abdomen, pre-ferably the right upper quadrant, for 10–30 seconds.
/square6Normally there is either no rise or only a transient(2 to 3 seconds) rise in JVP which falls down evenif the pressure on the abdomen is continued.
/square6A sustained rise in JVP until abdominal pressure is
released indicates impaired right heart function.
This abnormal response is called hepatojugularreflux.
/square6Patient should not hold his or her breath or perform
a Valsalva-like maneuver during the procedure
because these can falsely elevate the venous pressure.
Significance
/square6This can help to confirm that the pulsation is caused
by the JVP.
/square6Abdominojugular reflux indicates a volume-
overloaded state and limited compliance of an
overdistended or constricted venous system. It ispositive in right heart failure. But the normalresponse is lost in SVC obstruction and Budd-Chiarisyndrome.
Q.Discuss the mechanism and variations of first heart
sound.
/square6The first heart sound is mainly due to closure of
the mitral and tricuspid valves. It coincides withthe R wave on the ECG./square6Normally S1 is louder than S2 at the apex (mitralarea). The loudness of the mitral valve closuredepends upon 3 things: The degree of valveopening, the force of ventricular contractionshutting the valve, and the integrity of the valve.Think of a slamming door. The amount of its noise
will depend on how far open the door is, how hard
you slam it, and the integrity of the door.
/square6S1 has two components: mitral component (M1) dueto mitral valve closure and tricuspid component (T1)
due to tricuspid valve closure. Normally these two
components are not heard separately as the tricuspidvalve closure sound is too faint to hear. However,splitting of first heart sound can be heard sometimes.
Variations of First Heart Sound
TABLE 3.8: Variations of first heart sound
Loud first heart sound
• Tachycardia
• Short PR interval• Mitral stenosis• Tricuspid stenosis• Left atrial myxoma
Soft first heart sound
• Bradycardia
• Long PR intervalVariations of first heart sound• Mitral regurgitation• Calcified mitral valve• Aortic regurgitation (due to premature closure of mitral valve)• Poor LV function (cardiac failure, cardiomyopathy, myocarditis)
• Decreased conduction of the sound to chest wall (obesity,
emphysema, pneumothorax, pericardial effusion)
Varying intensity of first heart sound
• Atrial fibrillation• Complete atrioventricular block
Splitting of first heart sound
• Right bundle branch bock
• Severe mitral stenosis
Q.Discuss the mechanism and variations of second
heart sound.
/square6The second heart sound (S2) is produced by closure
of the aortic and pulmonary valves. It has twocomponents; aortic component (A2) due to closureof aortic valve and pulmonary component (P2) due
to closure of pulmonary valve.
/square6Normally A2 comes first and then P2. Both A2 and
P2 occur at the end of the T wave on ECG.
/square6Normally, during inspiration, there is increasedvenous return to right ventricle and hencepulmonary valve closes late. At the same time dueto decreased venous return to left ventricle, aorticvalve closes early. This causes physiological
splitting of second heart sound during inspiration.
During expiration the sound is heard as single. Asplit S2 is best heard at the pulmonary area sinceP2 is much softer than A2.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3160 Variations of Second Heart Sound a ventricle with decreased compliance, as in patients
with HCM. Likewise, decreased rates of filling intooverfilled ventricles with large end-systolicvolumes, as seen in patients with LV systolic dys-function, will also produce this sound.
Causes of S3TABLE 3.9: Variations of second heart sound
Loud A2
• Hypertension• Hyperdynamic circulatory states• Syphilitic aortic regurgitation
Soft A2
• Aortic stenosis
Loud P2
• Pulmonary hypertension• Pulmonary artery dilatation
Soft P2
• Pulmonary stenosis• Tetralogy of Fallot• Pulmonary atresia
Wide fixed split
• Atrial septal defect• Severe pulmonary stenosis• Severe right ventricular failure
Wide mobile split
Delayed activation of right ventricle• Right bundle branch block• Ectopic from left ventricle
Prolonged right ventricular systole
• Pulmonary stenosis• Pulmonary hypertension• Acute pulmonary embolism
Early aortic closure
• Mitral regurgitation
Reversed splitting
Delayed activation of left ventricle• Left bundle branch block• Ectopic from right ventricle
Prolonged left ventricular systole
• Severe hypertension• Severe aortic stenosis• Cardiomyopathy• Acute MI• Patent ductus arteriosus• Left ventricular failure
Early pulmonary valve closure
• Tricuspid regurgitation• WPW syndrome
Q.Discuss the mechanism and significance of third
heart sound.
Q.S3 (ventricular gallop).
/square6Third heart sound (S3 also known as ventricular
gallop) occurs during the rapid filling phase ofventricular diastole (early part of diastole). It is abenign finding in children and young adults. Whenheard in elderly it usually indicates underlyingcardiac disease.
/square6S3 occurs when the ventricle suddenly reaches its
elastic limits and abruptly decelerates the onrushingcolumn of blood. Thus, an S
3 can be produced by
excessive rapid filling into a ventricle with normal
compliance, as with high-output states and MR, or
by a normal or less than normal rate of filling intoTABLE 3.10: Causes of S3
Physiological
• Children and young adults• Pregnancy
Pathological
• Cardiac failure• Hyperkinetic circulatory states (anemia, thyrotoxicosis, beri-
beri)
• Mitral or tricuspid regurgitation• Aortic or pulmonary regurgitation
/square6S3 can be left or right sided. A left-sided S3 is a low-
pitched sound best heard over the LV apex in the
left lateral decubitus position with the bell of
stethoscope and with the breath held in expiration.Right-sided S
3 (seen in right heart failure) is best
heard at the left lower sternal border with thepatient supine and on inspiration.
/square6S3 has to be differentiated from split S2, opening
snap of mitral stenosis, and a diastolic click relatedto mitral valve prolapse.
Q.Discuss the mechanism and significance of fourth
heart sound.
/square6A fourth heart sound (S4) occurs due to a forcible
atrial contraction against a noncompliant ventricle.
/square6It can occur in either of the ventricles (right sidedS
4 from right ventricle and left sided S4 from left
ventricle). It occurs in the last filling phase ofventricular diastole and is heard just before systole
and precedes S
1.
/square6Left sided S4 is best heard over the apex on
expiration with the patient in left lateral position.Right sided S
4 is best heard on inspiration.
/square6Presence of S4 is always abnormal.
Causes of S4
TABLE 3.11: Causes of S4
Decreased compliance of ventricles due to hypertrophy
• Systemic hypertension
• Pulmonary hypertension• Aortic and pulmonary stenosis• Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy• Restrictive cardiomyopathies• Ischemic heart disease
Excessively rapid late diastolic filling
• Acute mitral regurgitation• Acute tricuspid regurgitation• Hyperkinetic states (anemia, thyrotoxicosis)

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System161
3Q.List the investigations used in the evaluation of
cardiac disorders.
Investigations usually done in cardiac disorders are
as follows:
/square6Electrocardiography (ECG)
–Resting ECG
–Exercise (stress) ECG
–Ambulatory ECG (holter monitoring)
/square6Echocardiography (ECHO)
–Two-dimensional echocardiography
–Doppler echocardiography
–Transesophageal echocardiography
/square6Chest X-ray
/square6Cardiac catheterisation
/square6Computed tomographic (CT) imaging
/square6Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
/square6Radionuclide imaging
–Blood pool imaging to assess ventricular function
–Myocardial perfusion imaging
/square6Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS)
/square6Endomyocardial biopsy.
Q.Electrocardiography (ECG).
/square6ECG is a recording of electrical impulses arising
from the heart.
/square6Normally, cardiac activation starts in the sinoatrialnode, goes to atrium, AV node, and then toventricles through bundle of His and its branches.Each of this stage gives rise to electrical current,which is recorded by the electrodes placed on the
chest wall creating the ECG. Though SA node
generates impulses, this is not recorded on ECG.Similarly, atrial repolarization produces littleelectrical activity and cannot be recorded on ECG.Except these two events, all other events arerecorded on the ECG.
/square6ECG consists of the following waves and seg-ments
P wave Due to atrial depolarization
PR interval Due to the delay in conducting the sinus
impulse to ventricles in AV node
QRS complex Due to ventricular depolarization
T wave Ventricular repolarization
QT interval Represents the total duration of ventricular
depolarisation and repolarisation
Uses of ECG
/square6To determine the cardiac rhythm and the condition
of the conducting tissues
/square6To diagnose myocardial ischemia and infarction
/square6To know the effects of some drugs on the heart
/square6To know the chamber size
/square6Electrolyte imbalance.Q.Exercise test or stress test (treadmill test) or stress
ECG.
/square6Many patients complain of symptoms suggestive
of angina on exertion but their resting ECG is
normal. Such patients can be made to exercise (walkon a treadmill) and the ECG is recorded conti-nuously during exertion. Such ECG may show ST,T changes proving ischemia or other changes.
Indications for Exercise (Stress) ECG
/square6Evaluation of patients with suspected angina.
/square6Evaluation of stable angina.
/square6Evaluation of functional capacity.
/square6Assessment of prognosis and functional capacityafter myocardial infarction.
/square6Assessment of outcome after coronary revasculari-
sation, e.g. coronary angioplasty.
/square6To diagnose and evaluate the treatment of exercise-
induced arrhythmias.
Procedure
/square6The commonly used exercise protocol is BruceProtocol. Patient is made to walk on treadmill or
bicycle ergometer and 12-lead ECG is continuously
recorded during exercise. Blood pressure, heart rateand symptoms are monitored regularly throughoutthe test.
/square6Both false positive and false negative tests can occur
with stress test. However, in patients with symp-
toms suggestive of angina, exercise testing hasmuch better sensitivity and specificity, and isclinically very useful.
Positive Stress Test
/square6Anginal pain occurs.
/square6ST, T changes sign of ischemia (ST segment shiftsof >1 mm).
/square6Fall in BP.
/square6Exercise-induced arrhythmia.
Contraindications for Stress Test
/square6Un-stable angina.
/square6Decompensated heart failure.
/square6Severe hypertension.
/square6Uncontrolled cardiac arrhythmias..
/square6Advanced atrioventricular block.
/square6Acute myocarditis or pericarditis.
/square6Severe aortic stenosis.
/square6Severe hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy.
/square6Acute systemic illness (pulmonary embolism, aorticdissection).
Q.Ambulatory ECG (Holter monitoring)
/square6A standard electrocardiograph (ECG) records the
heart’s electrical activity for only a few seconds.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3162 This can detect abnormalities that are constant;
however, sometimes abnormal heart rhythms andischemic events may occur only briefly orunpredictably. To detect such problems, continuousambulatory ECG, in which the ECG is recorded conti-nuously for 24 to 48 hours while the person engages
in normal daily activities is used. These records are
then analyzed for rhythm and ST-T alterations.
Technique
/square6There are many portable devices for ambulatoryECG recording. These devices are compact, battery-operable, can be worn by the patient and permitcontinuous data recording during daily activitiesof the patient. Holter monitor is one such small
instrument which can be worn by the patient for
24 to 48 hours. Event recorders record only theabnormal rhythm whenever they occur. Many ofthese devices have the facility to transmit ECGrecordings to a cardiac centre through thetelephone.
Indications
/square6To evaluate unexplained palpitations (these can be
due to transient arrhythmias).
/square6To diagnose the cause of recurrent syncope or near
syncope (could be due to transient arrhythmias orcardiac ischemic events).
/square6To evaluate transient episodes of cardiac arrhyth-mias or myocardial ischemia
Q.Echocardiography (ECHO).
/square6Echocardiography is nothing but ultrasound of the
heart. Images of the heart are obtained by placingthe ultrasound transducer on the chest wall.
/square6It is commonly used because it is noninvasive.
Common Indications for Echocardiography
/square6Assessment of ventricular function.
/square6Evaluation of valvular heart diseases.
/square6Identification of vegetations in endocarditis.
/square6Identification of structural heart disease.
/square6Detection of pericardial effusion.
/square6Identification of cardiac masses such as myxoma,
clots, mural thrombus, etc.
M-mode 2-D Echocardiography
/square6This is a transthoracic ultrasound which records
structures in a one-dimensional fashion. By rapidelectronic and mechanical scanning of the ultrasonicbeam across various cardiac structures, 2-dimensional
(2D) images  can be formed.
/square6This modality permits evaluation of the size,
structure and motion of various cardiac valves andchambers. However, 2D echo does not provide any
hemodynamic information (direction of blood flow,etc.). Combined conventional and color Doppler
echocardiography can assess flow and hemo-dynamic information also.
Doppler Echocardiography
/square6Doppler echocardiography is based on the Doppler
effect  described by Christian Doppler. When an
ultrasound beam with known frequency is trans-mitted to the heart, it is reflected by red blood cells.
The frequency of the reflected ultrasound waves
increases when the red blood cells are movingtoward the source of ultrasound and decreaseswhen the red blood cells are moving away.
/square6The speed and direction of movement of bloodacross the valves and arteries can be detected bythis technique.
/square6Advanced techniques include three-dimensional
echocardiography and intravascular ultrasound.
Uses of Doppler Echocardiography
/square6It is very useful to evaluate valvular heart diseases.
It can detect the severity and direction of blood flowin valvular heart disease such as aortic regurgitationor mitral regurgitation, etc.
/square6To estimate pressure gradients, e.g. across stenosedaortic valve.
Transesophageal Echocardiography
/square6Here an ultrasound probe is passed into theesophagus and placed behind the left atrium. It canobtain clear images of cardiac structures especiallyvalves and left atrium.
Uses
/square6It is useful to pick up vegetations in infectiveendocarditis which may not be detected by surface
echocardiography.
/square6It is also useful for investigating patients with
prosthetic (especially mitral) valve dysfunction,congenital abnormalities (e.g. atrial septal defect),
aortic dissection, and systemic embolism.
Q.Uses of computed tomographic (CT) and MRI imaging
in the evaluation of cardiovascular disease.
CT Imaging
/square6CT imaging is most useful for imaging the aorta
in suspected aortic dissection. It is also useful to
image the chambers of the heart, great vessels,
pericardium and surrounding structures.
/square6Non-invasive imaging of the coronary arteries ispossible by using CT angiogram. CT images of theproximal coronary arteries are comparable toconventional coronary angiography. The patencyof coronary artery bypass grafts can also be assessed
by using CT angiogram.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System163
3Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
/square6MRI is now considered the gold standard for the
assessment of regional and global systolic function,myocardial infarction (MI) and viability, and the
assessment of congenital heart disease. It is particu-
larly useful in detecting infiltrative conditions (suchas amyloidosis, sarcoidosis) affecting the heart. Theright ventricular wall which is difficult to see onechocardiogram is readily visualised on MRI.
Q.Cardiac catheterization.
Q.Coronary angiography (CAG).
Cardiac Catheterization
/square6Cardiac catheterization is a procedure where a
specially designed small catheter is introduced intothe heart through an artery or vein under X-ray
guidance. Introducing the catheter into the left side
of the heart is called left heart catheterization andinto the right side is called right heart catheterization.
Technique
/square6Cardiac catheterisation is performed under lightsedation and local anesthesia.
/square6Left heart catheterization is performed throughradial, brachial and femoral artery routes. Rightheart catheterization is performed through basilicor femoral vein route.
Indications
/square6To assess coronary artery disease by coronaryangiogram (CAG).
/square6Revascularisation procedures such as balloonangioplasty and stenting.
/square6To assess the size and function of the ventricles by
ventriculography.
/square6To assess pulmonary artery pressure.
/square6To detect intracardiac shunts by measuring oxygen
saturation in different chambers.
/square6To measure intracardiac/intravascular pressuresand flow.
/square6Measurement of hemodynamic data in criticallysick patients.
/square6For nonsurgical closure of atrial septal defect,ventricular septal defect or patent ductus arteriosusin carefully selected cases.
/square6For temporary/permanent cardiac pacing.
/square6To perform endomyocardial biopsy.
Contraindications
/square6Marked untreated ventricular irritability (risk ofventricular tachycardia/ventricular fibrillation).
/square6Electrolyte abnormalities and digitalis toxicity.
/square6Marked untreated congestive heart failure .
/square6Uncontrolled hypertension./square6Concurrent febrile illness.
/square6Severe renal and/or hepatic impairment.
/square6Severe anemia.
Coronary Angiography (CAG)
Definition
/square6Coronary angiography is obtaining anatomicaldetails of coronary arteries by injection of radio-opaque contrast material into the coronary arteries
and their radiological filming.
Technique
/square6Technique is described under cardiac catheteriza-
tion. It involves passing a small specially designed
catheter into the aorta and then into the coronary
arteries to inject the contrast material. Radial, brachialor femoral routes can be used to enter the aorta.
Indications
/square6For evaluation of unexplained chest pain with highsuspicion of angina.
/square6To establish the site and severity of coronary arterydisease in patients with definite angina.
/square6Prior to coronary artery bypass surgery.
/square6To perform balloon angioplasty and stenting.
/square6To perform intracoronary thrombolytic therapy.
/square6To assess the patency of coronary bypass grafts after
surgery.
Contraindications
/square6See above under cardiac catheterization.
Complications
/square6Death may occur in cases with advanced coronary
disease. However, its incidence is very low (0.1%or less).
Q.Role of radionuclide imaging in the evaluation of
cardiac disorders.
/square6Injecting gamma-emitting radionuclides and
picking up the gamma rays emitted by the heart by
gamma camera can be used to assess the ventricular
function and myocardial perfusion.
/square6Left ventricular function can be assessed byinjecting the isotope intravenously. Isotope mixes
with blood and enters ventricles. Using the gamma
camera, the amount of isotope-emitting blood inthe heart can be measured in systole and diastolewhich gives information about ventricular function.
/square6Myocardial perfusion imaging involves obtainingscintiscans of the myocardium at rest and duringstress after the administration of an intravenousradioactive isotope such as technetium Te-99mtetrofosmin. It can give information about myo-cardial perfusion and identify areas of ischemia or
infarction. Positron emission tomography (PET) scan

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3164 can give more accurate quantitative information
regarding myocardial perfusion, but is availableonly in a few centres .
Q.Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS).
/square6IVUS is an invasive procedure, performed along with
cardiac catheterization. Here, a miniature ultrasoundprobe (transducer) on the tip of a coronary catheter
is passed into the coronary arteries and detailed
images of the interior walls of the arteries areobtained. IVUS shows a cross-section of both theinterior, and the arterial wall. Visualization of arterialwall is not possible by conventional angiogram,which shows only the luminal narrowing.
Uses of IVUS
/square6View the artery—from the inside out, making it
possible to evaluate the amount of disease present,
how it is distributed, and in some cases, what it ismade of.
/square6Helps in the selection of correct size stents and
balloons for angioplasty.
/square6To confirm accurate stent placement and optimal
stent deployment.
/square6IVUS is useful to assess plaque morphology.
/square6IVUS can also be used to view the aorta and struc-ture of the artery walls (which can show plaquebuild up), find which blood vessel is involved in
aortic dissection.
Q.Define heart failure. Describe the etiology,
classification, clinical features, investigations andmanagement of heart failure (congestive cardiac
failure).
Q.Precipitating causes of heart failure.
Q.Role of ACE inhibitors in the management of heart
failure.
Q.Role of beta-blockers in the management of heart
failure.
Definition
/square6Heart failure (HF) is defined as a complex clinical
syndrome that can result from any structural orfunctional cardiac disorder that impairs the abilityof the ventricle to fill with or eject blood.
/square6It is a common health problem especially in indus-trialized countries.
Etiology of Heart Failure
/square6Heart failure may be caused by one of the followingfactors, either singly or in combination:
– Intrinsic pump failure.
– Increased workload on heart.
– Impaired filling of cardiac chambers.Intrinsic Pump Failure
Here there is weakening of myocardium due to
various causes so that the heart fails to act as anefficient pump. Various causes of pump failure are:
/square6Ischemic heart disease (myocardial infarction)
/square6Myocarditis
/square6Cardiomyopathies
/square6Disorders of the rhythm (e.g. atrial fibrillation and
flutter).
Increased Workload on the Heart
Pressure overload
/square6Systemic and pulmonary arterial hypertension.
/square6Stenotic valvular disease (mitral stenosis, aortic
stenosis, pulmonary stenosis, tricuspid stenosis).
/square6Chronic lung diseases (ILD, COPD).
Volume overload
/square6Valvular insufficiency (mitral and aortic regurgitation)
/square6ASD, VSD
/square6High output states (thyrotoxicosis, anemia,
arteriovenous shunts, beriberi)
Impaired Filling of Cardiac Chambers
/square6Cardiac tamponade
/square6Constrictive pericarditis.
Precipitating Causes of Heart Failure
/square6Precipitating causes make the previously compro-mised heart fail. These include,
/square6Infection:  Any infection may precipitate HF. Fever,
tachycardia, hypoxemia, and the increasedmetabolic demands due to infection may placeadditional burden on a compromised heart and lead
to heart failure.
/square6Arrhythmias:  Tachyarrhythmias reduce the time
available for ventricular filling, and cause ischemicmyocardial dysfunction in patients with ischemic
heart disease. Atrioventricular dissociation as
happens in many brady- and tachyarrhythmiasresults in the loss of the atrial booster pump mecha-nism, thereby raising atrial pressure and reducecardiac output.
/square6Physical, dietary, fluid, environmental, and emotionalexcesses:  Sudden increase in sodium intake, physical
overexertion, excessive environmental heat orhumidity, and emotional crises all may precipitateHF.
/square6Discontinuation of drugs:  Such as antihypertensives,
diuretics, etc. given for heart failure may precipitateheart failure.
/square6Ingestion of drugs: Such as NSAIDs can precipitate
heart failure.
/square6Myocardial infarction:  A new infarction on a pre-
viously compromised heart may precipitate heart
failure.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System165
3/square6Pulmonary embolism:  May result in right heart
failure.
/square6Anemia:  In the presence of anemia, the oxygen needs
of the metabolizing tissues can be met only by anincrease in the cardiac output. An already compro-mised heart may not be able to tolerate such anincreased demand and may fail.
/square6Thyrotoxicosis and pregnancy:  Thyrotoxicosis and
pregnancy are high cardiac output states whichplace increased demand on heart.
/square6Uncontrolled hypertension:  Uncontrolled BP either
due to renal problems or discontinuation of anti-
hypertensives may result in cardiac decompensa-
tion.
/square6Myocarditis:  Rheumatic, viral, and other forms of
myocarditis may precipitate HF in patients with orwithout pre-existing heart disease.
/square6Infective endocarditis:  Valvular damage, anemia,
fever, and myocarditis which may occur in infectiveendocarditis may precipitate HF.
Types of Heart Failure
/square6HF can be classified in many ways. It can be acuteor chronic, left-sided or right-sided, high-output orlow-output, forward or backward, and systolic or
diastolic failure.
Acute versus Chronic Failure
/square6In acute failure, there is sudden reduction in cardiac
output which leads to hypotension without peripheraledema, whereas in chronic heart failure, bloodpressure is well maintained but there is peripheraledema. Causes of acute heart failure are massivemyocardial infarction and valve rupture. Causes of
chronic heart failure are valvular heart disease,
dilated cardiomyopathy, and systemic hypertension.
Left-sided versus Right-sided Failure
/square6In left ventricular failure, there is pulmonarycongestion resulting in dyspnea and orthopnea.
/square6In right-sided failure, systemic congestion leads toraised jugular venous pressure, congestive hepato-megaly, ascites, and lower limb edema.
/square6Failure of both left and right ventricles is calledcongestive cardiac failure (CCF) and is seen in long-standing valvular heart disease (aortic and mitralvalve), myocarditis, cardiomyopathies, and hyper-
tension.
High-output versus Low-output Failure
/square6Examples of high-output failure are severe anemia,
hyperthyroidism, beriberi, arteriovenous fistulae,pregnancy, and Paget’s disease. Here the cardiacoutput is more than normal.
/square6Examples of low-output failure are ischemic heartdisease, hypertension, dilated cardiomyopathy, andvalvular and pericardial disease. Here the cardiac
output is reduced.
Systolic versus Diastolic Failure
/square6In systolic heart failure, heart is not able to pumpthe blood into arterial system. It happens mainlydue to myocardial dysfunction. Examples aremyocardial infarction, cardiomyopathy, etc.
/square6Diastolic failure is due to inability of the ventricleto relax and receive blood, which leads to elevation
of ventricular diastolic pressure. Examples are left
ventricular hypertrophy, constrictive pericarditis,restrictive cardiomyopathy, etc.
/square6In most patients with cardiac hypertrophy anddilatation, systolic and diastolic heart failure co-exist.
Pathophysiology
/square6In the normal ventricle, stroke volume increases
over a wide range of end-diastolic volumes (theFrank-Starling effect). In the failing heart withdepressed contractility, there is relatively littleincrement in systolic function with further increasesin left ventricular volume, and the ventricularfunction curve is shifted downward and flattened.Systolic dysfunction causes pulmonary congestion(left heart failure) or systemic congestion (rightheart failure), or both pulmonary and systemiccongestion (CCF), effort intolerance, and organdysfunction.
/square6The reduction in cardiac output leads to activationof compensatory mechanisms viz. increased sympa-thetic activity, stimulation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) and secretion ofantidiuretic hormone (ADH). This neurohumoralactivation causes tachycardia, peripheral vaso-constriction, sodium and water retention. The resultof these compensatory mechanisms is increase inblood pressure (for tissue perfusion) and bloodvolume (enhancing preload, stroke volume, andcardiac output by the Frank-Starling mechanism).These compensatory mechanisms help to normalizethe hemodynamic disturbances to some extent, butincrease the myocardial oxygen and energyrequirements. In the long run, these compensatoryresponses perpetuate myocardial damage andworsen heart failure.
/square6Other compensatory mechanisms are activation ofvasodilatory molecules, such as atrial and brainnatriuretic peptides (ANP and BNP), prosta-glandins (PGE
2 and PGI2), and nitric oxide (NO),
that offset the excessive peripheral vascularvasoconstriction. ANP and BNP cause natriuresis,vasodilation and inhibition of angiotensin II,aldosterone and ADH secretion, thereby reversingsome of the harmful effects.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3166 Clinical Features
Symptoms
Dyspnea
/square6Exertional dyspnea  is seen in early heart failure. As
heart failure advances, dyspnea occurs with
progressively less strenuous activity and ultimately
it is present even at rest.
/square6Orthopnea  is dyspnea in lying down position and is
a later manifestation than exertional dyspnea.
Orthopnea is due to redistribution of fluid from the
abdomen and lower extremities into the chest in lying
position, which increases the pulmonary capillary
pressure, combined with elevation of the diaphragm.
/square6Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea (PND) is sudden onset
dyspnea and cough occurring usually 1 to 3 hours
after the patient retires. Symptoms usually resolve
over 10 to 30 minutes after the patient arises, often
gasping for fresh air from an open window. PND
happens due to accumulation of excessive blood in
the lungs during sleep causing pulmonary edema,
depression of the respiratory center and decreased
sympathetic activity during sleep. The patient gets
up suddenly feeling excessively breathless and
choked and longs for fresh air. He may bring out
pink frothy sputum.
/square6Acute pulmonary edema  results from transudation of
Fluid into the alveolar spaces because of acute rise
in capillary hydrostatic pressures due to sudden
decrease in cardiac function. Patient may present
with cough or progressive dyspnea. Wheezing is
common due to bronchospasm. If acute pulmonary
edema is not treated earlier, patient may begin
coughing up pink (or blood-tinged), frothy fluid
and become cyanotic and acidotic. Some patients
may present with Cheyne-Stokes respiration
(periodic respiration or cyclic respiration) which is
characterized by periods of apnea, hypoventilation
and hyperventilation.
Fatigue
/square6This is due to reduced perfusion of skeletal muscles.
Cerebral symptoms
/square6These are due to reduced cerebral perfusion and
include altered mental status, confusion, lack of
concentration, memory impairment, headache,
anxiety and insomnia.
Abdominal symptoms
/square6Like nausea, anorexia, and pain abdomen are due
to congested gastric mucosa, liver and portal
venous system.
Oliguria, nocturia
/square6Reduced renal perfusion during day causes sodium
and water retention and oliguria. Renal perfusion
increases at night due to shift of fluid from the extra-
vascular to the intravascular compartment, resulting
in increased excretion of sodium and water and
nocturia.NYHA classification of heart failure (staging of heart
failure)
/square6The New York Heart Association (NYHA) classifica-tion system is the simplest and most widely used
method to gauge symptom severity. The classifica-
tion system is a well-established predictor ofmortality and can be used at diagnosis and tomonitor treatment response.
TABLE 3.12: New York Heart Association (NYHA) functional
classification
Functional capacity Description
I No limitations of physical activity
No heart failure symptoms (fatigue,
palpitation, dyspnea)
II Mild limitation of physical activity
Heart failure symptoms with signi-
ficant exertion; comfortable at rest or
with mild activity
III Marked limitation of physical activity
Heart failure symptoms with mild
exertion; only comfortable at rest
IV Discomfort with any activity
Heart failure symptoms occur at rest
Physical Signs
Vital signs
/square6Pulse is fast and of low volume. Pulsus alternans
may be seen in LVF.
/square6BP is low in severe heart failure.
/square6Respiratory rate may be high due to pulmonaryedema.
General examination
/square6Patient is dyspneic and orthopnic. Peripheries are
cold and may be cyanosed. JVP is usually elevatedwith positive abdomino-jugular reflux. Pitting
pedal edema may be present. Sacral edema is seen
in bedridden patients. In chronic, severe heartfailure, weight loss may occur, leading to a
syndrome of cardiac cachexia. Cardiac cachexia is
due to elevated levels of cytokines.
CVS
/square6Cardiac enlargement (apex beat shifted down and
out) may be seen. S1 may be diminished in intensity.Third and fourth heart sounds are often audible.
Pansystolic murmur may be heard due to incompe-
tence of mitral and tricuspid valve due to dilatationof ventricles.
RS
/square6Tachypnea may be present due to pulmonary
edema. Bilateral fine basal crepitations and rhonchi
may be heard due to pulmonary edema. Sometimes
signs of pleural effusion may be present.
Abdomen
/square6Liver may be enlarged and tender due to conges-
tion. Ascites may be present.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System167
3NS
/square6Confusion, memory disturbances may be seen due
to reduced brain perfusion.
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray:  The presence of cardiomegaly (a cardio-
thoracic ratio >0.5 and especially >0.60) is a strong
indicator of heart failure. Pulmonary edema may
be seen as bilateral batwing hilar haziness, genera-
lized haze (due to interstitial edema), and Kerley’s
B lines (due to prominent interlobular lymphatics)
at the lung base. Bilateral pleural effusion may be seen
which is usually more on right side.
/square6Electrocardiogram (ECG):  It can show cardiac rhythm,
identify ischemia, prior or recent MI, and detect evi-
dence of left ventricular hypertrophy. It also shows
conduction defects and electrolyte disturbances.
/square6Echocardiography: Transthoracic echo can confirm
the presence of heart failure and also quantify it. It
also provides information on left and right ventri-
cular size, regional wall motion abnormality (as an
indicator ischemia or infarction), condition of the
heart valves, and ventricular hypertrophy. It can also
detect left atrial myxoma, and pericardial effusion.
/square6Natriuretic peptide measurements:  Elevated serum
levels ANP (atrial natriuretic peptide) and BNP
(brain natriuretic peptide)  are seen in heart failure.
/square6Radionuclide studies:  Provide non-invasive and accu-
rate measurement of wall motion abnormalities,
ventricular volume and ejection fraction.
/square6Cardiac catheterization : In heart failure, there is
increased end-diastolic ventricular pressure,
reduced cardiac output and reduced ventricular
ejection fraction. Coronary angiogram can identify
the extent of coronary artery disease.
Treatment of Heart Failure
/square6The ideal approach would be to treat both the
underlying and precipitating causes. Correction of
underlying cause (e.g. surgical correction of valvular
defects) may dramatically improve heart failure.
Correction of underlying cause may not always be
possible (e.g. old myocardial infarction). Precipitat-
ing causes like infections, severe anemia, hyper-
thyroidism, etc. should be looked for and corrected.
Control of Excessive Fluid
/square6Low salt diet and fluid restriction: Can help in
decreasing many of the clinical manifestations of
heart failure.
/square6Diuretics: These agents reduce ECF volume expansion
and reduce edema. Many agents are available and
almost all are effective in controlling fluid retention.
These agents include frusemide, torsemide, thiazides,
spironolactone and amiloride, etc. A combination of
potassium losing and potassium sparing diuretics
will prevent hypokalemia. Hyponatremia can occurdue to diuretics and should be watched for.Prevention of Deterioration of Myocardial Function
/square6Chronic activation of the renin-angiotensin-
aldosterone system (RAAS) and of the adrenergic
nervous systems in HF causes ventricular remodel-
ing, further deterioration of cardiac function and/
or potentially fatal arrhythmias. Drugs that block
these two systems are useful in the management of
HF and decrease long-term mortality.
/square6Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors: ACE
inhibitors slow the maladaptive remodeling of
ventricles, and reduce the afterload by causing
vasodilatation. ACE inhibitors have been shown to
prevent or retard the development of HF in patients
with left ventricular dysfunction, enhance exercise
tolerance, and reduce long-term mortality and rate
of readmission to hospitals. ACE inhibitors inhibit
local (tissue) renin-angiotensin systems. ACE
inhibitor should be given indefinitely to patients
with heart failure. However, ACE inhibition should
not be used in hypotensive patients. Examples of
ACE inhibitors are captopril, enalapril, lisinopril,
ramipril, perindopril, etc.
/square6Angiotensin receptor blockers (ARB): These agents
have similar effects as ACE inhibitors. They are
used when patients cannot tolerate ACE inhibitors
due to cough, angioneurotic edema, and leuco-
penia. Examples of ARBs are losartan, telmisartan,
olmesartan, valsartan, etc.
/square6Aldosterone antagonist: The activation of the RAAS
in HF increases the levels of angiotensin II and aldo-
sterone. Aldosterone causes Na+ retention (hence
fluid retention), sympathetic activation, myocardial,
vascular, and perivascular fibrosis, and vasocons-
triction. Spironolactone is an antagonist of aldosterone
and when given to heart failure patients on long
term basis reduces mortality and sudden death.
Eplerenone is a new, more selective aldosterone
inhibitor that can be used instead of spironolactone.
/square6Beta-adrenoceptor blockers: Beta-blockers have been
shown to improve the symptoms of HF, and to
reduce long-term mortality, sudden death, and
hospitalization for HF. They should be given only
for patients with moderately severe HF (classes II
and III). They should not be given for patients with
class IV heart failure, hypotension (systolic pressure
<90 mmHg), severe fluid overload, recent treatment
with an intravenous inotropic agent, sinus brady-
cardia, atrioventricular block, or a bronchospastic
condition. Beta-blocker should be started after starting
ACE inhibitors and continued indefinitely. Examples
are atenolol, metoprolol, bisoprolol, and carvedilol.
/square6Vasodilators: Direct vasodilators are helpful in
patients with severe heart failure who have systemic
vasoconstriction despite ACE inhibitor therapy.
Decrease in periphearal resistance enhances cardiac
output by decreasing afterload. Sodium nitro-
prusside, nitroglycerin, hydralazine and nesiritide
are vasodilators, which have to be given by conti-

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3168 nous IV infusion. Hydralazine and isosorbide
dinitrate are useful for chronic oral administration.
/square6Angiotensin receptor neprilysin inhibitor (ARNI):  A
new therapeutic class of agents acting on the RAAS
and the neutral endopeptidase system has beendeveloped. This is called angiotensin receptorneprilysin inhibitor (ARNI)]. This is a combinationof valsartan and sacubitril. Sacubitril is a neprilysininhibitor and valsartan is angiotensin-II receptor
inhibitor. By inhibiting neprilysin, sacubitril slows
the degradation of ANP, BNP, and other peptides.This results in high circulating levels of ANP andBNP which enhance diuresis, natriuresis, andmyocardial relaxation. ANP and BNP also inhibitrenin and aldosterone secretion. Because neprilysin
breaks down angiotensin II, inhibiting neprilysin
will result in accumulation of angiotensin II. Forthis reason, neprilysin inhibitor sacubitril cannotbe used alone; it must always be combined with anARB to block the effect of the excess angiotensin II.Sacubitril/valsartan combination should be used in
patients who are symptomatic even after using an
ACEI (or ARB). The ACEI or ARB should be stoppedand then sacubitril/valsartan should be added.
/square6Ivabradine:  Ivabradine slows the heart rate through
inhibition of the If channel in the sinus node. It
should be used only for patients in sinus rhythm.Ivabradine can be used to reduce the risk of hospita-
lization and cardiovascular death in symptomatic
patients with heart failure with a resting heart rate≥70 bpm despite using beta-blocker, ACEI and ARB.
Enhancement of Myocardial Contractility
/square6Cardiac glycosides (digitalis and digoxin): Cardiac
glycosides enhance myocardial contractility andhence improve symptoms of heart failure. Theyinhibit Na
+, K+-ATPase and increase intracellular
sodium. The latter, in turn, increases intracellular
calcium through a Na+-Ca2+ exchange mechanism.
The increased calcium augments myocardialcontraction. Although, dgoxin reduces symptomsof HF it does not improve long-term survival.Digoxin is not useful in heart failure due to hyper-
trophic cardiomyopathy, mitral stenosis, chronic
constrictive pericarditis, and diastolic HF.
/square6Sympathomimetic amines: These are dopamine and
dobutamine which act on beta-adrenergic receptorsand improve myocardial contractility. They haveto be given by constant intravenous infusion and
can be given for several days. They are especially
useful in patients with intractable, severe HF,patients with acute myocardial infarction and shockor pulmonary edema or in refractory HF as a“bridge” to cardiac transplantation. Dopamine isuseful in heart failure with hypotension since at
higher doses it also stimulates α-adrenergic receptors
and elevates arterial pressure. Dobutamine is usefulin the treatment of acute HF without hypotension
since it lowers arterial pressure.
/square6Phosphodiesterase inhibitors: Examples are amrinone
and milrinone. Both these drugs exert positiveinotropic and vasodilator actions by inhibitingphosphodiesterase III, which increases intra-
cytoplasmic cyclic AMP mediating adrenergic
stimulation. These agents are administered bycontinuous intravenous infusion. Indications aresame as dopamine and dobutamine.
/square6Cardiac resynchronization therapy: Intraventricular
conduction defects are seen in some patients withheart failure leading to dyssynchrony of cardiac
contraction. For example, when there is left bundle
branch block (LBBB), right and left ventricles donot contract simultaneously, which impairs cardiaccontraction and aggravates HF. “Resynchronization”with a device that has three pacing leads (rightatrium, right ventricle, and cardiac vein, which
provides left ventricular stimulation) has been
shown to improve heart failure symptoms.
Circulatory Assist Devices/Cardiac Transplantation
/square6When patients do not respond to all the abovemeasures, have class IV heart failure, and areunlikely to survive one year, they should beconsidered for assisted circulation and/or cardiactransplantation.
Antiarrhythmics
/square6Premature ventricular contractions and episodes of
asymptomatic ventricular tachycardia are common
in advanced HF. Sudden death can occur due toventricular fibrillation. Amiodarone, a class IIIantiarrhythmic, is the drug of choice for patientswith heart failure.
/square6Implantable automatic defibrillator (ICD) shouldbe considered for patients who have been resusci-tated from sudden death, and those with syncopeor presyncope due to ventricular arrhythmias.
Anticoagulants and Antiplatelets
/square6Routine use of anticoagulants (e.g. warfarin) is notrecommended in patients with heart failure in sinusrhythm who do not have demonstrated left ventri-
cular thrombus. Anticoagulation is recommended
if there is atrial fibrillation or a previous thrombo-embolic event.
/square6Antiplatelets such as aspirin should be used only if
there is coronary artery disease.
Treatment of Diastolic Heart Failure
/square6The underlying cause such as ventricular hyper-
trophy, fibrosis, or ischemia should be treated.
Dietary sodium restriction and diuretics are useful
to reduce pulmonary and/or systemic venouscongestion.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System169
3Non-pharmacological Measures
/square6Rest:  Rest reduces the demand on the heart. Ade-
quate rest reduces venous pressure and pulmonarycongestion. Absolute bedrest is not required even
for patients with severe HF.
/square6Diet:  The diet should provide adequate calories to
maintain ideal weight. Obese patients should have
a low-calorie diet. Oils and fats should be cut down.The sodium intake should not exceed 6 g of saltper day. Potassium-rich foods are advised for thosereceiving diuretics.
Q.Describe the genetic basis of some forms of heart
failure.
/square6Some forms of heart failure due to cardiomyo-
pathies have underlying genetic basis.
Recommendations for Genetic Testing in Heart Failure
/square6In most patients with heart failure, routine genetictesting is not recommended.
/square6It is recommended in patients with hypertrophiccardiomyopathy (HCM), idiopathic dilatedcardiomyopathy (DCM) and arrhythmogenic rightventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC). Restrictivecardiomyopathy can also have genetic basis and can
also be considered for genetic testing.
/square6HCM is mostly inherited as an autosomal dominant
disease. Currently, many genes and many muta-
tions in these genes have been identified, most of
which are located in the sarcomere genes encodingcardiac β-myosin heavy chain and cardiac myosin
binding protein C.
/square6Some cases of DCM are hereditary. Many genesrelated to DCM have been identified and these arerelated to the cytoskeleton. The most frequent onesare titin (TTN), lamin (LMNA) and desmin (DES).
/square6ARVC is hereditary in most cases and is caused bygene mutations that encode elements of the desmo-
some.Genetic Counseling
/square6Counselling should be performed by someone with
sufficient knowledge of the specific psychological,
social and medical implications of a diagnosis.
/square6Determination of the genotype is important, sincesome forms carry a poorer prognosis.
/square6Screening of first-degree relatives for early detection
is recommended from early adolescence onwards.
Q.Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP).
/square6BNP is a peptide hormone that is released primarily
by ventricles in response to volume expansion. BNP
is so called because it was initially identified in the
brain.
/square6The level BNP is increased in heart failure, asventricular cells secrete BNP in response to the high
ventricular filling pressures. Ventricles also secrete
atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP), but measurement
of BNP is more helpful than ANP in the diagnosis
of heart failure. Clinical experience with BNP is
much greater than ANP.
/square6BNP has diuretic, natriuretic, and hypotensiveeffects. It also inhibits the renin-angiotensin system,
endothelin secretion, and systemic and renal sym-
pathetic activity. Hence BNP counteracts the effects
of norepinephrine, endothelin, and angiotensin II,
limiting the degree of vasoconstriction and sodium
retention. BNP may also protect against collagen
accumulation and the pathologic remodeling that
contributes to progressive HF.
Uses of BNP
/square6To differentiate dyspnea due to heart failure from
other causes. Most dyspneic patients with HF have
values above 400 pg/mL, while values below
100 pg/mL have a very high negative predictive
value for HF as a cause of dyspnea.
/square6Monitoring treatment of heart failure:  The plasma
concentrations of BNP fall after effective treatment
of HF and can be used to titrate treatment.
/square6Prognosis of HF: Higher the BNP, poorer the prognosis.
TABLE 3.13: Differences between left and right heart failure
Left heart failure Right heart failure
Common causes • Myocardial infarction • Pulmonary stenosis
• Systemic hypertension • Cor pulmonale due to COPD, ILD, bronchiectasis• Aortic stenosis • Pulmonary hypertension
• Aortic regurgitation • Pulmonary embolism
• Mitral stenosis
Symptoms • Dyspnea, orthopnea, PND • Anorexia, nausea, vomiting (due to gastric mucosal
• Nocturia congestion)
• Palpitations • Right hypochondrial pain (due to liver congestion)
Signs • Pallor • Peripheral edema
• Sweating • Raised JVP
• Pulsus alternans • Ascites, pleural effusion• Narrow pulse pressure • Right ventricular S3 and S4 gallop
• Left ventricular S3 and S4 gallop
• Bilateral basal lung crepitations

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3170 Q.How do you differentiate between left and right
heart failure?
Q.Cardiac remodeling (after MI).
/square6Cardiac remodeling refers to a process of regional
and global structural and functional changes in theheart after myocardial infarction.
/square6Factors which influence remodeling are loss of viable
myocardium (after MI), inflammatory response,
increased wall stress in the border zone and remotemyocardium, and neurohormonal activation.
/square6The incidence and extent of adverse ventricular
remodeling have significantly declined in the
current reperfusion era with primary percutaneouscoronary intervention and many effective drugsavailable to prevent remodeling.
Factors Influencing Adverse Ventricular Remodeling
/square6Infarct size:  This is the single most important factor.
Bigger the infarct, greater the extent of remodeling.
/square6End-diastolic volume:  An increase in end-diastolic
volume occurs early in MI to accommodate a largerpreload and compensate for the acute decrease incontractility. However, wall stress increases with theincrease in chamber size, which increases the chances
of the progression to adverse ventricular remodeling
and HF (“dilatation begets more dilatation”).
/square6Neurohormonal activation: The acute decrease in
ventricular contractility and increase in intracavitarypressure cause activation of the renin-angiotensin-
aldosterone and the noradrenergic sympathetic
nervous systems which in turn leads to release ofneurohormones, such as angiotensin II, aldosterone,and norepinephrine. These hormones producetachycardia and vasoconstriction which helps in theacute stage to maintain cardiac output and perfusion
of vital organs. However, the same neurohormones
promote the adverse ventricular remodeling and heartfailure by (1) promoting further cardiomyocyte lossand increased cardiac stiffness, and (2) promotingsodium and water retention by the kidneys and increas-ing the afterload by peripheral vasoconstriction.
/square6The imbalance in perfusion/demand and theneurohormonal and pro-inflammatory milieupromote cardiomyocyte diastolic and systolicdysfunction and transition from pro-hypertrophy
to pro-apoptosis signaling. This process results in
further loss of viable myocardium and furtherstimulation of the compensatory mechanisms,resulting in a vicious cycle that leads to adverseventricular remodeling.
Prevention or Delaying ofAdverse Ventricular Remodeling
/square6Prompt reperfusion to reduce infarct size.
/square6Reduction of wall stress by using diuretics and
peripheral vasodilators (such as ACE inhibitors)./square6Inhibition of neurohormonal response by using
ACE inhibitors (blocks angiotensin), spironolactone(blocks aldosterone) and beta blockers (blockssympathetic activity).
Q.Digoxin.
Q.Manifestations and management of digoxin over-
dosage.
/square6Digoxin is a purified glycoside from Digitalis lanata
(foxglove plant). It has been used for more than 200
years in the treatment of heart failure.
Actions
/square6It inhibits Na, K-ATPase pump in myocardial cells.
Increased intracellular sodium promotes sodium-
calcium exchange, leading to a rise in the intra-
cellular calcium concentration. This results inimproved myocardial contractility.
/square6Digoxin also exerts antiadrenergic action in patientswith HF by inhibiting sympathetic outflow andaugmenting parasympathetic tone thereby causing
vasodilatation and reduction of afterload.
/square6It prolongs the refractory period of AV node by
increasing parasymphathetic outflow leading to
slowing of ventricular rate.
Pharmacokinetics
/square6Digoxin has oral bioavailability of about 80%.
/square6Higher concentration is seen in heart than plasma.It is highly protein bound and hence, it is not
effectively removed by hemodialysis in case oftoxicity.
/square6Its half life is 1.6 days and the effect lasts 24–36hours after the last dose.
/square6It is mainly excreted by the kidneys and small
amount in the stools.
Uses of Digoxin
/square6Severe heart failure in sinus rhythm:  It improves the
symptoms of heart failure but does not provide anymortality benefit
/square6Arrhythmias: Such as atrial fibrillation with fast
ventricular rate for ventricular rate control.
Dosage and Route of Administration
/square6Loading dose:  An initial dose of 0.5 mg of digoxin is
given IV or orally, followed by over several
minutes, followed by 0.25 mg every 6 hours until
digitalization is achieved.
/square6Maintenance dose: 0.125 to 0.25 mg daily orally.
Maintenance dose should be reduced in renal
failure.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System171
3Overdosage (Toxicity)
Clinical Features
/square6Symptoms of digoxin toxicity are mostly nonspecific,
and include fatigue, blurred vision, disturbed color
perception, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea,
abdominal pain, headache, dizziness, confusion,delirium, and occasionally hallucinations.
/square6Cardiovascular effects include bradycardia,
atrioventricular block with or without concomitant
supraventricular tachyarrhythmia, and ventriculartachyarrhythmias. Hyperkalemia also occurs in
acute poisoning.
Treatment
/square6Digoxin—specific antibodies are used for hemo-
dyamically significant arrhythmias.
/square6Other supportive measures include atropine, dopa-
mine, epinephrine, phenytoin, and external cardiac
pacing for bradyarhythmias and magnesium,lidocaine, phenytoin, and bretylium for ventricular
tachyarhythmias.Q.Cor pulmonale.
Q.Discuss the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features,
investigations, and management of chronic cor
pulmonale.
/square6Cor pulmonale is defined as an alteration in the
structure and function of the right ventricle due to
respiratory system disease.
/square6Pulmonary hypertension is the link between
respiratory system disease and cor pulmonale.
Respiratory diseases cause pulmonary hyper-tension, which in turn causes cor pulmonale. In cor
pulmonale, there is enlargement of the right
ventricle (RV) with or without failure.
/square6Secondary to abnormalities of the lungs, thorax,
pulmonary ventilation, or circulation.
/square6Cor pulmonale can be acute or chronic. Acute cor
pulmonale develops suddenly and is seen in
massive pulmonary embolism and ARDS. Chronic
cor pulmonale develops slowly.
Etiology of Cor pulmonale
TABLE 3.14: Etiology of cor pulmonale
Mechanism of pulmonary  HTN causing cor pulmonale Causes
Persistent vasoconstriction • High-altitude dwellers
• Hypoventilation syndromes (pickwikian syndrome, myasthenia
gravis)
• Chest deformities (kyphoscoliosis)
Loss of cross-sectional area of the vascular bed • COPD (emphysema)
• Lung resection• Interstitial lung disease• Bronchiectasis• Cystic fibrosis
Obstruction of large vessels • Extrinsic compression of pulmonary veins
• Fibrosing mediastinitis• Adenopathy/tumors• Pulmonary embolism
Chronically increased blood flow • Eisenmenger syndromeVascular remodelling • Primary pulmonary hypertension
• Secondary pulmonary hypertension• Collagen vascular diseases• Cystic fibrosis
Pathogenesis
/square6All the causes of cor pulmonale affect the right heart
by producing pulmonary hypertension. Pulmonaryhypertension places extra load on right heart andmakes it dilate and fail.
/square6Hypoxia is a strong vasoconstrictor of the pulmo-nary artery and its branches. Other factors leadingto pulmonary hypertension are reduction of thepulmonary vascular bed by fibrotic and thromboticobliteration of the capillaries and compression of
pulmonary capillaries by high intra-alveolar
pressures, when there is air trapping.Clinical Features
/square6Patients usually have symptoms related to theunderlying pulmonary disorder like cough, exer-tional dyspnea, wheezing, easy fatigability, andweakness. In acute cor pulmonale due to pulmo-nary embolism, there may be signs of DVT.
/square6With the onset of RV failure, peripheral edema and rightupper quadrant pain (due to congested liver) appear.
/square6Examination may reveal cyanosis, clubbing, raisedJVP, signs of right ventricular hypertrophy (RV
heave, epigastric pulsations, loud P2) an enlarged,
and tender liver and dependent edema.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3172 Investigations
Chest X-ray
/square6Chest X-ray may show the underlying lung disease,
enlarged RV and dilated pulmonary artery.
ECG
/square6May show signs of right ventricular hypertrophysuch as right axis deviation, peaked P waves, anddeep S waves in lead V1.
Echocardiogram
/square6Echo shows normal LV size and function but RVand RA dilation. There may be tricuspid regurgita-tion due to right ventricular dilatation.
Other Tests
/square6Tests to diagnose the underlying cause of cor pulmo-
nale are pulmonary function tests (for COPD),
perfusion lung scans and multi-slice CT (to excludepulmonary emboli) and lung biopsy to rule outinterstitial lung disease. Catheterization of the rightheart can confirm the diagnosis of cor pulmonaleby demonstrating increased RV and RA pressures.
Treatment
/square6Underlying pulmonary disease responsible for cor
pulmonale should be treated. Oxygen supplemen-
tation, salt and fluid restriction, and diuretics arehelpful in managing right heart failure.
Q.Acute pulmonary edema due to LVF.
/square6Acute pulmonary edema refers to the rapid build-
up of fluid in the alveoli and lung interstitium thathas extravasated out of the pulmonary circulation.
/square6As the fluid accumulates, it impairs gas exchange
and decreases lung compliance, producing
dyspnoea and hypoxia. Pulmonary edema can bebroadly divided into two types: Cardiogenic andnon-cardiogenic pulmonary edema.
/square6Cardiogenic pulmonary edema (synonyms: acute leftheart failure, cardiac asthma):  This form of pulmonary
edema occurs when left ventricular failure occurs,so that blood returning to the left atrium exceedsthat leaving the left ventricle (LV). As a result,pulmonary venous pressure increases, causing the
capillary hydrostatic pressure in the lungs to exceed
the oncotic pressure of the blood, leading tofiltration of fluid out of the capillaries.
Causes of Cardiogenic Pulmonary Edema
/square6Acute myocardial infarction or severe ischemia
/square6Exacerbation of chronic heart failure
/square6Acute volume overload of the LV (e.g. valvularregurgitation)
/square6Mitral stenosis/square6Atrial fibrillation
/square6Accelerated hypertension
/square6Infective endocarditis.
Clinical Features
/square6Patients present with severe dyspnea, orthopnea,PND, pink frothy sputum, and excessive sweating.
/square6Examination shows cyanosis, bilateral basal crepi-tations, and diffuse rhonchi.
/square6There may be tachycardia and S3 gallop in LVF.
/square6In addition, there may be findings of underlying
disease.
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray  shows increased interstitial markings,
and butterfly pattern of distribution of alveolaredema. Kerley’s B lines may be seen due to thickand tense lymphatics. Cardiomegaly may bepresent.
/square6ECG  may show evidence of ischemia, infarction,
and arrhythmias.
/square6Echocardiography  shows low ejection fraction and
elevated atrial pressures in cardiogenic pulmonary
edema.
/square6Pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP)  is elevated
in cardiogenic pulmonary edema usually above
25 mm Hg. In noncardiogenic pulmonary edema,
the wedge pressure may be normal or even low.
Treatment
Cardiogenic Pulmonary Edema
General measures
/square6Patient should be put in sitting position with legs
hanging down the side of the bed. This position
decreases venous return to heart and improvespulmonary edema. High flow oxygen is giventhrough face mask. Noninvasive or invasive ventila-tory support may be required in severe respiratorydistress.
Morphine
/square6Morphine is very effective in cardiogenic pulmonary
edema. It acts by increasing venous capacitance,lowering left atrial pressure. It also relieves anxietythus increasing the efficiency of ventilation. The
initial dosage is 2–8 mg intravenously which can
be repeated after 2–4 hours.
Diuretics
/square6Intravenous diuretics (furosemide, 40 mg, or
torsemide 20 mg or higher doses) decrease fluid
overload and preload. Benefit is seen even beforethe onset of diuresis due to venodilation.
Nitroprusside, nitroglycerin, and nesiritide
/square6All these drugs decrease arterial resistance and
increase venous capacitance thus decreasingpulmonary blood flow and pulmonary venous

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System173
3pressures. Sublingual nitroglycerin or isosorbide
dinitrate, topical nitroglycerin, or intravenousnitrates will decrease dyspnea rapidly prior to theonset of diuresis.
Inotropic drugs
/square6Like dopamine, dobutamine, amrinone and milri-
none may improve cardiac output and decreasepulmonary edema.
Q.Non-cardiogenic pulmonary edema.
/square6Pathological processes acting either directly or
indirectly on the pulmonary vascular permeabilitycause this form of pulmonary edema.
Causes of Non-cardiogenic Pulmonary Edema
/square6ARDS (sepsis, pancreatitis, burns, polytrauma)
/square6Eclampsia
/square6Immersion/submersion
/square6Toxic inhalation
/square6High altitudes (HAPE) and decompression illness
/square6Head injury/intracranial hemorrhage.
Treatment
/square6Treat the underlying cause.
Q.What is infective endocarditis? Discuss the etiology,
types, pathogenesis, clinical features, and manage-ment of infective endocarditis. Add a note oninfective endocarditis prophylaxis.
Q.Duke criteria.
/square6Infective endocarditis (IE) is defined as an infection
of the endocardial surface of the heart.
/square6It may involve heart valve (native or prosthetic),the lining of a cardiac chamber or blood vessel, acongenital anomaly (e.g. septal defect) or anintracardiac device.
/square6It is characterized pathologically by the presenceof vegetation, which is a mass of platelets, fibrin,microorganisms, and inflammatory cells.
Types
/square6Endocarditis may be classified as acute, subacute,and prosthetic valve endocarditis.
/square6Acute endocarditis  develops abruptly and progresses
rapidly (i.e. over days). It rapidly damages cardiacstructures, hematogenously seeds extracardiac sites,
and, if untreated, may result in death within weeks.
/square6Subacute endocarditis  usually develops insidiously
and progresses slowly (i.e. over weeks to months),
causes structural cardiac damage only slowly, if at
all, and rarely causes metastatic infection.
/square6Prosthetic valvular endocarditis (PVE) usually occurs
in patients after heart valve surgery. Any unexplainedfever in such patients should be investigated forpossible endocarditis. The infection usually affectsthe valve ring and may resemble subacute or acute
endocarditis, depending on the virulence of theorganism. Repeat surgery may be required andmorbidity and mortality are high.
Etiology
TABLE 3.15: Etiology of endocarditis
Acute endocarditis Subacute endocarditis
•Staph. aureus •Streptococcus viridans
• Group A hemolytic streptococci • Streptococcus milleri
• Pneumococci • Streptococcus bovis
• Gonococci • Enterococcus fecalis
• HACEK group
•Staph. aureus  (rarely)
/square6The causative organism can be bacteria, rickettsia,
chlamydia or fungus.
/square6However, most cases of infective endocarditis arecaused by a small number of bacterial species. These
include streptococcus viridans , staphylococci, and
HACEK organisms (Haemophilus, Actinobacillus,Cardiobacterium, Eikenella, and Kingella) originat-ing respectively from oral cavity, skin, and upperrespiratory tract. Streptococcus bovis originates from
GIT, and enterococci from the genitourinary tract.
/square6Nosocomial endocarditis is due to bacteremia arisingfrom IV cannulas and urinary tract infections. Candida
species is the commonest fungal endocarditis.
/square6Prosthetic valve endocarditis occurring within2 months of valve replacement is usually due tointraoperative contamination of the prosthesis or abacteremic postoperative complication. It can bedelayed up to 12 months. Common organisms are
coagulase-negative staphylococci, S. aureus,  faculta-
tive gram-negative bacilli, diphtheroids, and fungi.Prosthetic valve endocarditis occurring >12 monthsafter surgery are due to the same organisms causingnative valve endocarditis.
/square6Endocarditis occurring in IV drug abusers is dueto Staph. aureus strains, and involves tricuspidvalve. Polymicrobial endocarditis is common in IVdrug addicts.
/square6About 5 to 15% of patients with endocarditis havenegative blood cultures. Some of these culturenegative cases are due to prior antibiotic exposure.Remaining culture negative cases are due tofastidious organisms, such as pyridoxal-requiring
streptococci (now designated Abiotrophia species),
HACEK organisms, Bartonella henselae,  or Bartonella
quintana .
Pathogenesis
/square6Organisms that cause endocarditis usually enter the
bloodstream from mucosal surfaces, skin, or sitesof focal infection.
/square6Normal endocardium is resistant to infection andto thrombus formation. Endocardial injury (e.g. at

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3174 the site of impact of high-velocity jets or on the low-
pressure side of a cardiac structural lesion, mitralregurgitation, aortic stenosis, aortic regurgitation,ventricular septal defects, and complex congenitalheart disease) predisposes to infection or to develop-ment of platelet-fibrin thrombus. This platelet-fibrin
thrombus without microorganisms is called non-
bacterial thrombotic endocarditis (NBTE) whichcan subsequently get infected by bacteria duringtransient bacteremia.
/square6NBTE can also occur in hypercoagulable states likemalignancy and chronic diseases (marantic endo-carditis), systemic lupus erythematosus andantiphospholipid antibody syndrome.
/square6Microorganisms adhere to thrombi but morevirulent bacteria (e.g. S. aureus ) can adhere directly
to intact endothelium or exposed subendothelialtissue. If the organisms cannot be removed bydefence mechanism, the organisms proliferate andinduce a procoagulant state at the site by eliciting
tissue factor from adherent monocytes.
/square6Tissue factor leads to fibrin deposition, and along
with platelet aggregation and microorganisms,forms an infected mass called vegetation. Vegeta-
tions have three layers; an inner layer of RBC, WBC
and platelets, a middle layer of bacteria and an outerlayer of fibrin. In the absence of host defenses, orga-nisms enmeshed in vegetation proliferate to formdense microcolonies. Organisms deep in vegetationsare relatively resistant to killing by antimicrobial
agents. Proliferating surface organisms are shed
into the blood-stream continuously some of whichare cleared by the reticuloendothelial system andothers are distributed to all parts of the body.
/square6Release of cytokines by inflammatory cells causesconstitutional symptoms like fever, malaise.
/square6Damage to intracardiac structures leads to valvularincompetence and other manifestations.
/square6Embolization of vegetation fragments leads toinfection or infarction of remote tissues.
Clinical Manifestations
/square6The clinical presentation can vary from acute to sub-acute presentations. Usually the causative micro-organism is responsible for the temporal course ofendocarditis.
Systemic Manifestations
/square6In patients with acute endocarditis fever is highgrade and is usually between 103 and 104°F. insubacute endocarditis, fever is typically low-grade
and rarely exceeds 103°F. Fever may be blunted or
absent in elderly, debilitated and those with cardiacor renal failure.
/square6Drenching night sweats, arthralgias, myalgias
(especially in the lower part of the back and thighs),
and weight loss may accompany fever.Cardiac Manifestations
/square6Regurgitant murmurs may occur because of damageto valve and its supporting structures. Stenoticmurmurs can occur due to large vegetations.
/square6Valve ring abscess may occur due to local extensionof the infection from the valve ring. Valve ring
abscesses can cause persistent fever and heart block
due to destroyed conduction pathways in the areaof the atrioventricular node and bundle of His.Valve ring abscess may burrow into pericardiumcausing pericarditis or hemopericardium. It can alsolead to shunts between cardiac chambers or
between the heart and aorta.
/square6Myocardial infarction may result from coronaryartery embolization.
/square6Myocardial abscess may occur as a consequence ofbacteremia.
/square6Diffuse myocarditis can occur and is probably dueto immune complex vasculitis.
/square6Congestive cardiac failure develops in 30 to 40% ofpatients due to valvular dysfunction and occasio-
nally due to endocarditis-associated myocarditis oran intracardiac fistula. CHF occurs more frequentlywith left-sided than right-sided endocarditis andwith aortic more than mitral involvement.
Embolic Manifestations
/square6Embolic events  result in infarction of numerous
organs, such as the lung in right-sided endocarditis
or the brain, spleen, or kidneys in left-sided
endocarditis. Following are the manifestations ofembolic events. Most emboli occur before or withinthe first few days after initiation of antibiotictherapy.
/square6Cutaneous embolism:  Produces Janeway’s lesions.
These are hemorrhagic, nonpainful macules mostcommonly found on the palms and soles.
/square6Nails:  Splinter hemorrhages. These are non-
blanching, linear, brownish-red lesions in the nailbeds perpendicular to the direction of growth of thenail; they may also be seen as a result of local trauma.
/square6Peripheral arteries:  Claudication, absent pulses and
gangrene.
/square6CNS:  Seizures, stroke, loss of vision.
/square6Kidneys:  Loin pain, hematuria and renal failure
/square6Lungs:  Pulmonary infarction, hemoptyisis, pleurisy
and pleural effusion.
/square6Septic emboli:  Suppurative complications such as
abscesses, septic infarcts, and infected mycotic
aneurysms. Mycotic aneurysms are focal dilationsof arteries occurring at points in the artery wall thathave been weakened by infection in the vasa vaso-rum or where septic emboli have lodged. Mycoticaneurysms usually develop at arterial bifurcations,
e.g. in the middle cerebral, splenic, superior mesen-
teric, pulmonary, coronary, and extremity arteries.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System175
3Immunologic Phenomena
/square6Glomerulonephritis, sterile meningitis, and poly-
arthritis.
/square6Mucocutaneous petechiae.
/square6Roth’s spots—circular retinal hemorrhages withwhite central spot.
/square6Osler’s nodes—painful tender nodules in the pulpsof fingers.
/square6Hepatosplenomegaly may develop with prolongedillness.
/square6Culture negative endocarditis occurs in some cases.This may be due to fastidious organisms and priorantibiotic therapy.
ECG
/square6Should be done for all to serve as a baseline and todetect any complications like conduction abnorma-
lities, MI, and pericarditis.
Echocardiography
/square6Echocardiography can identify the presence and
size of vegetations, detect intracardiac complica-tions, and assess cardiac function. Echocardiograpyshould be done for all patients with a clinicaldiagnosis of endocarditis.
/square6Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) is non-invasive but cannot detect vegetations <2 mm indiameter. It is also not very useful in obese andemphysema patients. TTE is not adequate forevaluating prosthetic valves or detecting intra-
cardiac complications.
/square6Transesophageal echocardiograpy (TEE) is more
sensitive than TTE. It can detect small vegetations;detect prosthetic endocarditis and intracardiac
complications like myocardial abscess, valve perfora-
tion, or intracardiac fistulae.Figure 3.5 Splinter hemorrhages
Diagnosis
The Duke Criteria
/square6Duke criteria are based on clinical, laboratory, andechocardiographic findings. Now modified Duke
Criteria is used to diagnose infective endocarditis.
/square6Presence of two major criteria, or one major and
three minor criteria, or five minor criteria is requiredto make a clinical diagnosis of definite endocarditis.
If one major and one minor criteria or three minor
criteria are present then it is called possible infectiveendocarditis (Table 3.16).
Blood Cultures
/square6Isolation of the causative microorganism fromblood cultures is important not only for diagnosisbut also for treatment. Three to 5 sets of bloodcultures are obtained within 60–90 minutes. In the
absence of prior antibiotic therapy, atleast two
blood cultures should be positive.
/square6If the cultures remain negative after 48 to 72 h, twoor three additional blood cultures, including a lysis-
centrifugation culture, should be sent.
/square6Empirical antimicrobial therapy should be withheld
in hemodynamically stable patients with subacuteendocarditis, especially those who have received
antibiotics within the preceding 2 weeks. This will
allow additional blood cultures to be sent withoutthe confounding effect of antibiotic therapy.
/square6Antibiotics should be started immediately in acute
endocarditis and in those with hemodynamic insta-
bility after the initial sets of blood culture are obtained.TABLE 3.16: Modified Duke criteria
Major criteria
1. Blood culture positive for typical infective endocarditis
organisms ( S. viridans  or S. bovis , HACEK organisms, S. aureus
without other primary site, Enterococcus), from 2 separate
blood cultures or 2 positive cultures from samples drawn
>12 hours apart, or 3 or a majority of 4 separate cultures ofblood (first and last sample drawn 1 hour apart).
2. Echocardiogram with oscillating intracardiac mass on valve
or supporting structures, in the path of regurgitant jets, or on
implanted material in the absence of an alternative anatomicexplanation, or abscess, or new partial dehiscence of
prosthetic valve or new valvular regurgitation.
3. Single positive blood culture for Coxiella burnetii  or anti-
phase 1 IgG antibody titer >1:800.
Minor criteria
1. Predisposing heart condition or intravenous drug use2. Temp >38°C (100.4°F)3. Vascular phenomena: Arterial emboli, pulmonary infarcts,
mycotic aneurysms, intracranial bleed, conjunctival hemorr-
hages, Janeway lesions
4. Immunologic phenomena: Glomerulonephritis, Osler nodes,
Roth spots, rheumatoid factor
5. Microbiological evidence: Positive blood culture but does
not meet a major criterion as noted above or serological
evidence of active infection with organism consistent with
endocarditis (excluding coag neg staph, and other commoncontaminants)
Pnemonic to remember above criteria is  “BETI is the  Most Valuable
Person ” . B: Blood culture positivity , E: Echo features of vegetations,
T: temperature, I: immunologic phenomena, M: Microbiologic
evidence, V: Vascular phenomena, P: predisposing heart condition.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3176 Other Tests
/square6Serologic tests  are useful for organisms, which are
difficult to culture such as Brucella, Bartonella,Legionella, and Coxiella burnetii.
/square6Culture, microscopic examination and PCR tests  can
also be done on vegetations to identify the causativeorganism.
/square6Complete blood count may show anemia andincreased WBC counts.
/square6Urine examination  may show microscopic hematuria
(due to renal emboli or focal glomerulonephritis)
or macroscopic hematuria (due to renal infarction).
/square6Urea and creatinine  may be elevated due to
glomerulonephritis.
/square6Chest X-ray  may show emboli, cardiac enlargement,
and other abnormalities.
/square6ESR, CRP, circulating immune complex titer, andrheumatoid factor  concentration are commonly
increased in endocarditis.
/square6Cardiac catheterization  is useful to assess coronary
artery patency in older individuals who are toundergo surgery for endocarditis because CABG
also can be done in the same sitting.
Treatment
Antimicrobial Therapy
/square6Effective antimicrobial therapy for endocarditis
requires identification of the specific pathogen and
assessment of its susceptibility to various anti-
microbial agents. Therefore, every effort must bemade to isolate the pathogen before initiating
antimicrobial therapy, if clinically feasible.
/square6In patients with acute endocarditis and hemo-
dynamic instability, empirical antibiotic therapyshould be started as soon as possible after obtaining
blood cultures. Empirical therapy should be
targeted at the most likely pathogens in that
particular clinical setting.
/square6It is difficult to eradicate bacteria from the avascularvegetation in infective endocarditis because this
site is relatively inaccessible to host defenses.
Bactericidal drugs should be used to kill allthe bacteria in the vegetations. Antibiotics should
be given parenterally in high doses. Prosthetic
valve endocarditis requires longer duration oftherapy.
/square6In most patients, effective antibiotic therapy resultsin subjective improvement and resolution of fever
within 5 to 7 days. Blood cultures should be done
whenever there is fever and 4 to 6 weeks aftertherapy to document cure. When fever persists for
7 days in spite of appropriate antibiotic therapy,
patients should be evaluated for complications ofinfective endocarditis such as paravalvular abscess,
and extracardiac abscesses (spleen, kidney).
/square6Vegetations become smaller with effective therapy,
but some may remain unchanged. Patients whobecome afebrile during therapy without any
complications can complete remaining therapy as
outpatients.
/square6Serologic abnormalities (e.g. erythrocyte sedimen-tation rate, rheumatoid factor) resolve slowly anddo not reflect response to treatment.
Antibiotic Regimens for Infective Endocarditis
Empirical antibiotic therapy
/square6Empirical antibiotics are chosen based on whetherthe patient is having acute or subacute endocarditis,
and native valve or prosthetic valve endocarditis.
TABLE 3.17: Initial empirical antibiotic regimens for infective endocarditis
Type of endocarditis Antibiotic choice Reason for choosing these antibiotics
Native valve endocarditis (NVE) Vancomycin and gentamicin (VG) Standard treatment has often been penicillin
G and gentamicin. But emergence ofmethicillin-resistant S. aureus  (MRSA) and
penicillin-resistant streptococci has led to achange in empiric treatment with substitutionof vancomycin in lieu of a penicillin antibiotic.Linezolid or daptinomycin can be used ifvancomycin is contraindicated.
Prosthetic valve endocarditis (PVE) Vancomycin and gentamicin and PVE is often caused by MRSA or coagulase-
rifampicin (VGR) negative staphylococci; thus, vancomycin and
gentamicin are used. Rifampin is necessary intreating PVE because it can penetrate thebiofilm of most of the pathogens that infectthese devices.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System177
3Surgery
Indications for surgery
/square6Patients with direct extension of infection to
myocardial structures.
/square6Prosthetic valve dysfunction.
/square6Congestive heart failure from valvular damage.
/square6Badly damaged valve (requires replacement).
/square6Endocarditis caused by fungi or resistant organisms.
/square6Patients with recurrent (two or more) embolic events.
/square6Large vegetations (>10 mm) on echocardiography.
/square6Emergency surgery is required for new onset acute
aortic regurgitation and mitral valve and sinus of
Valsalva abscess ruptured into right heart.
Complications of Infective Endocarditis
/square6Heart failure: This is the most frequent major
complication of IE.
/square6Embolization:  The brain and the spleen are the most
common sites of embolization in left-sided IE,whereas septic pulmonary emboli are common in
right-sided IE.
/square6Mycotic aneurysms: These occur due to septic
embolization to the arterial vasa-vasorum, withsubsequent spread of infection and weakening ofthe vessel wall. They occur most frequently in theintracranial arteries and have a particular predilec-
tion for the middle cerebral artery and its branches.
Mycotic aneurysms are extremely dangerous,because they can rupture and produce sudden intra-
cranial hemorrhage.
/square6Periannular extension of infection:  Leads to abscess
formation, perforation, fistula development, and
hemodynamic deterioration. Persistent fever and
bacteremia despite antibiotic therapy, heart failure,or new conduction block should raise suspicion forthis complication.
/square6Renal dysfunction:  It is a common complication of IE
and is often multifactorial due to immune complex
deposition, drug-induced nephrotoxicity, and
hemodynamic perturbations.Prognosis
/square6Poor prognosis is seen in older age, severe comorbid
conditions, delayed diagnosis, involvement of
prosthetic valves, antibiotic-resistant pathogen,intracardiac complications, and major neurologiccomplications.
Q.Infective endocarditis prophylaxis.
/square6Since bacteremia is the first step in the causation of
infective endocarditis, prevention of bacteremia can
prevent the occurrence of infective endocarditis.
Bacteremia is prevented by the administration ofantibiotics prior to any procedure known to pro-duce bacteremia. However, not all cardiac lesionsare prone for infection. Hence, prophylaxis isrecommended only in specific lesions.
/square6The revised guidelines have narrowed theprocedures for which antibiotic prophylaxis isrecommended. Antibiotic prophylaxis is no longerrecommended for GI/genitourinary tract proce-dures (including diagnostic upper GI scopy or
colonoscopy).
High-risk Cardiac Conditions Requiring Antibiotic
Prophylaxis (Latest Guidelines)
/square6Prosthetic cardiac valve.
/square6Previous infective endocarditis.
/square6Congenital heart disease (CHD)
– Unrepaired cyanotic CHD, including palliative
shunts and conduits.
– Completely repaired congenital heart defect with
prosthetic material or device, whether placed bysurgery or by catheter intervention, during thefirst 6 months after the procedure.
– Repaired CHD with residual defects at the site or
adjacent to the site of a prosthetic patch or pros-thetic device (which inhibits endothelialization).
/square6Cardiac transplantation recipients with cardiac
valvular diseaseTABLE 3.18: Antibiotic choices based on the organism isolated from blood culture
Organism Antibiotic Dose and duration
Streptococcus viridans  and Benzyl penicillin and gentamicin 1.2 g 4-hourly  and 1 mg/kg 8 hourly for 4–6
Strep. bovis OR weeks
Ceftriaxone and gentamicin 2 gms IV OD and 1 mg/kg 8 hourly for 4–6 weeks
Enterococci Ampicillin-sensitive:  Ampicillin and 2 g 4-hourly and 1 mg/kg 8 hourly for 4–6 weeks
gentamicinAmpicillin-resistant:  Vancomycin and 1 g 12-hourly and 1 mg/kg 8 hourly for 4–6 weeks
gentamicin
Staphylococci Penicillin-sensitive : Benzyl penicillin 1.2 g 4-hourly for 4–6 weeks
Penicillin-resistant but methicillin- 2 g 4-hourly (<85 kg 6-hourly) for 4–6 weeks
sensitive:  Nafcillin or oxacillin
Both penicillin and methicillin-resistant : 1 g 12-hourly and 1 mg/kg 8-hourly for 4–6 weeks
Vancomycin and gentamicinAntibiotic choices based on the organism isolated from blood culture.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3178 Procedures which Require Infective Endocarditis
Prophylaxis
/square6Dental:  All dental procedures that involve manipu-
lation of gingival tissue or the periapical region of
teeth or perforation of the oral mucosa. The follow-
ing procedures and events do not need antibioticprophylaxis: Routine anesthetic injections throughnoninfected tissue, taking dental radiographs,placement of removable prosthodontic or ortho-dontic appliances, adjustment of orthodontic
appliances, placement of orthodontic brackets,
shedding of deciduous teeth, and bleeding fromtrauma to the lips or oral mucosa.
/square6Respiratory tract:  Invasive procedures of the
respiratory tract that involve incision or biopsy
of the respiratory mucosa, such as tonsillectomyor adenoidectomy. Routine prophylaxis forbronchoscopy is not recommended unless theprocedure involves incision of the respiratory tractmucosa.
/square6Infected skin or musculoskeletal:  Surgical procedures
that involve infected skin, skin structure, ormusculoskeletal tissue.
Antibiotic Regimens for IE ProphylaxisQ.Roth’s spots.
/square6Roth spots  are exudative, edematous, oval hemorr-
hagic lesions with a white centre, seen on retinain infective endocarditis. They are due embolioccluding small retinal vessels.
TABLE 3.19: Antibiotic regimens for IE prophylaxis
Situation Agent and dose (single dose
30–60 min before procedure)
Able to take oral medication Amoxicillin 2 g
Unable to take oral medication Ampicillin 2 g IM or IV  or
Cefazolin or ceftriaxone 1 gIM or IV
Allergic to penicillins or Cephalexin 2 g or other first-
ampicillin and able to take or second-generation cephalo-
orally sporin or clindamycin 600 mg
orAzithromycinorClarithromycin 500 mg
Allergic to penicillins or Cefazolin or ceftriaxone 1 g
ampicillin and unable to IM or IVtake oral medication or
Clindamycin 600 mg IM or IV
Q.Janeway leisons.
Q.Osler’s nodes.
/square6Janeway lesions  are due to septic emboli to skin seen
in infective endocarditis. They are macular,blanching, nonpainful, erythematous lesions seenon the palms and soles.
/square6Osler’s nodes  are painful, violaceous nodules
found in the pulp of fingers and toes and areseen more often in subacute than acute cases ofIE. They are due to immune complex deposition in
the skin.
Figure 3.6 Osler’s nodes and Janeway leisons
Q.Libman-Sacks endocarditis (verrucous, marantic, or
nonbacterial thrombotic endocarditis).
/square6Libman-Sacks endocarditis (otherwise known as
verrucous, marantic, or nonbacterial thromboticendocarditis) was first described by Libman andSacks. It is characterized by atypical, sterile,verrucous vegetations.
/square6Libman-Sacks endocarditis is the most charac-
teristic cardiac manifestation of the autoimmune
disease systemic lupus erythematosus. It alsooccurs in association with antiphospholipid anti-body (APLA) syndrome, malignancy and hyper-coagulable states.
/square6The verrucae are common on the aortic and mitral
valves and usually affect the edge of the valves.
They consist of accumulations of immune com-plexes, mononuclear cells, hematoxylin bodies, andfibrin and platelet thrombi.
/square6Healing leads to fibrosis, scarring, and calcification.If the scarring is extensive, it may lead to valve
deformity, stenotic or regurgitant lesions.
Figure 3.7 Roth spots

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System179
3/square6Verrucous endocarditis is usually asymptomatic.
However, the verrucae can fragment and producesystemic emboli, and infective endocarditis candevelop on already damaged valves.
/square6Treatment involves the management of underlyingcondition. Anticoagulation may be required if there
is atrial fibrillation. Valve surgery may be required
for hemodynamically significant valvular dys-function.
Q.Discuss the etiology, classification, and general
clinical features of congenital heart diseases.
/square6Congenital heart disease affects about 1% of live
births.
/square6Males are affected more commonly except atrialseptal defect (ASD) and persistent ductus arteriosus(PDA) which are more common in females.
/square6Because of improved medical and surgical manage-ment, more children with congenital heart diseaseare surviving into adolescence and adulthood.
Etiology
/square6Congenital heart diseases are due to abnormaldevelopment of a normal structure, or failure of anormal structure to develop fully. Such mal-
developments are due to multifactorial genetic and
environmental causes. The recognized risk factorsinclude:
/square6Maternal infections:  For example, rubella infection
(persistent ductus arteriosus, pulmonary stenosis).
/square6Drugs: Alcohol abuse (septal defects), phenytoin
(associated with pulmonary stenosis) and radiation.
/square6Genetic abnormalities: For example, familial form of
atrial septal defect and congenital heart block.
/square6Chromosomal abnormalities: For example, septal
defects and tetralogy of Fallot are associated withDown’s syndrome (trisomy 21) or coarctation of theaorta in Turner’s syndrome (45, XO).
Classification of Congenital Heart DiseasesGeneral Clinical Features of Congenital Heart Diseases
/square6Congenital heart disease (CHD) should be recog-
nized as early as possible, since early treatment isassociated with better outcome. Some general
clinical features of congenital heart diseases are as
follows:
/square6In as many as 80% of infants with critical disease,congestive heart failure is the presenting symptom.Difficulty in feeding is common and is oftenassociated with tachypnea, sweating and subcostalretraction. Suspicion of CHD should be raised if
feeding takes more than 30 minutes. A history of
feeding difficulty often precedes overt congestiveheart failure. On examination, signs of congestiveheart failure include an S
3 gallop and crepitations
in the lungs.
/square6Central cyanosis occurs in cyanotic congenital heart
diseases because of right-to-left shunting of bloodor because of mixing of systemic and pulmonary
blood flow.
/square6Pulmonary hypertension can happen in  left-to-right
shunts. Blood from left side of the heart under highpressure enters right side and then into pulmonaryartery. This leads to pulmonary hypertension.Pressure in the pulmonary arterial system canexceed that on left side of the heart which can cause
reversal of blood flow from right side to left side.
This reversal of blood flow is reffered to asEisenmenger’s syndrome.
/square6Clubbing of the fingers occurs due to prolonged
cyanosis in cyanotic congenital heart diseases.
/square6Paradoxical embolism of thrombus can occur from
systemic veins to systemic arterial system whenthere is a communication between the right and leftheart (e.g. VSD). This can lead to an increased riskof cerebrovascular accidents and abscesses.
/square6Polycythemia can develop secondary to chronic
hypoxemia, which lead to hyperviscosity and
increased risk of thromboembolism and strokes.
/square6Growth retardation is common in children with
cyanotic heart disease.
/square6Syncope is common when severe right or left ventri-
cular outflow tract obstruction is present. Exertionalsyncope, associated with deepening centralcyanosis, may occur in Fallot’s tetralogy. Exerciseincreases pulmonary vascular resistance and
decreases systemic vascular resistance. Thus, the
right to left shunt increases and cerebral oxygena-tion falls.
/square6Squatting posture is often adopted by children with
Fallot’s tetralogy. It results in decreased venousreturn and an increase in the peripheral vascularresistance. This leads to decreased pressure in theright side of heart and increased pressure in left
side of the heart which results in reduced right-to-
left shunt and improved cerebral oxygenation.TABLE 3.20: Classification of congenital heart diseases
Cyanotic congenital Acyanotic congenital
heart diseases heart diseases
• Tetralogy of Fallot • Atrial septal defect (ASD)
• Transposition of the great • Ventricular septal defect
vessels (VSD)
• Tricuspid atresia • Patent ductus arteriosus• Truncus arteriosus (PDA)
• Total anomalous pulmonary • Coarctation of the aorta
venous connection (TAPVC) • Aortic stenosis
• Congenital pulmonary
valve regurgitation
• Pulmonary stenosis
Mnemonic to remember above is “five Ts”

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3180 /square6Endocarditis  can occur at the sites of shunts and
damaged valves.
/square6Atrial and ventricular arrhythmias, right heart failuredue to pulmonary HTN, end-stage heart failure and
sudden cardiac death  can occur. This may be the first
time that the presence of congenital heart diseaseis noted.
Genetic Counselling
/square6A woman with congenital heart disease needs closefollow up during pregnancy. Pregnancy is usuallysafe except if pulmonary hypertension is presentwhen the prognosis for both mother and fetus is
poor.
/square6Fetal ultrasound screening during pregnancy is
necessary to r/o any heart malformations sincepatients with congenital heart disease are more
likely to have a baby with congenital heart disease.
Q.Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF).
/square6Tetralogy of Fallot is the most common cyanotic
congenital heart disease. It is characterized by4 features; pulmonary stenosis, VSD, overridingaorta, and right ventricular hypertrophy. Pulmo-
nary stenosis can be subvalvular (commonest),
valvular or supravalvular.
/square6Presence of ASD along with TOF is called pentologyof Fallot.
Pathophysiology
/square6Since the right ventricular pressure is more thanleft ventricle due to pulmonary stenosis, blood isshunted from right to left through the ventricularseptal defect, which leads to central cyanosis.Squatting episodes increase systemic arterial resis-tance and hence reduce the shunt from right to left
ventricle.
Clinical Features
/square6Children are usually asymptomatic at birth.
/square6Children with tetralogy of Fallot may present with
dyspnea and fatigue.
/square6Growth is usually retarded.
/square6Cyanotic spells:  Cyanotic spells occur during crying,
feeding, exercise and fever. Exercise leads to dropin systemic vascular resistance and increasespulmonary resistance. This leads to shunting ofblood from right to left ventricle leading to
increased cyanosis and syncope (cyanotic or Fallot’s
spells). Sudden death can occur during such spells.
/square6Squatting episodes  are common because it increases
peripheral vascular resistance and decreases right
to left shunt.
/square6Polycythemia and clubbing occur due to chronic
hypoxemia which may result in thrombotic strokes./square6A parasternal heave is common due to RVH.
/square6P2 is faint or inaudible because of pulmonary stenosis.
An ejection sound from aortic dilation and a diastolicmurmur from consequent aortic regurgitation can be
heard. VSD murmur is not heard because it is large.
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray:  It shows  “boot-shaped heart” heart.
This shape results from small concave pulmonaryartery and hypertrophied right ventricle coupledwith small to normal-sized left ventricle withupturned apex. Pulmonary vascularity is reduced.
/square6ECG:  It shows right ventricular hypertrophy and
right-axis deviation. Right bundle branch block mayalso be present.
/square6Echocardiogram: It can readily identify overriding
aorta and VSD. The degree of pulmonary stenosisand VSD are best assessed by Doppler.
/square6Cardiac catheterization:  It is done for patients in whom
operative treatment is contemplated or in whom
the integrity of the coronary circulation needs tobe verified.
Complications
/square6Intravascular thrombosis and thrombotic stroke canoccur.
/square6Brain abscess can occur because organisms enteringright ventricle by venous return can enter systemiccirculation through VSD and reach brain.
/square6Infective endocarditis.
/square6Higher incidence of pulmonary tuberculosis.
Treatment
/square6Neonates with severe cyanosis may be palliatedwith an infusion of prostaglandin E1 to open theductus arteriosus and thereby increase pulmonaryblood flow.
/square6Complete surgical repair consists of patch closureof the VSD and relief of pulmonary stenosis.
/square6Occasionally a palliative procedure—an anasto-mosis between subclavian artery and pulmonaryartery (Blalock-Taussig shunt)—is performed onvery young or premature infants.
/square6Antibiotic prophylaxis for endocarditis is needed.
Q.Transposition of the great arteries (TGA).
/square6Complete TGA is the second most common
congenital heart defect.
/square6Here the aorta arises from the right ventricle and
the pulmonary artery arises from the left ventricle.
This defect causes deoxygenated blood to entersystemic circulation, and oxygenated blood to enterpulmonary circulation. Since both systemic andpulmonary circulations are not connected with eachother, this condition is incompatible with life unless
a VSD, PDA, or ASD is present or an ASD is created.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System181
3Clinical Features
/square6Severe cyanosis is the presenting sign, making its
clinical appearance within the first few hours after
birth. Neonates who have a communication
between right and left heart due to a persistent
PDA, ASD or VSD, patent formane ovale, etc. may
survive for few weeks and present later.
/square6Examination shows intense cyanosis and tachypnea.
The right ventricular lift is forceful, and the first
sound is usually loud at the lower left sternal
border. Signs of heart failure may be present.
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray: Cardiomegaly, pulmonary plethora
may be seen.
/square6ECG:  May show abnormal right axis deviation and
marked right ventricular hypertrophy.
/square6Echocardiogram:  Confirms the presence of TGA.
/square6Cardiac catheterization:  May be necessary to evaluate
the coronary artery pattern and to perform a
balloon atrial septostomy to allow mixing of right
and left side blood.
Treatment
/square6The atrial switch operation:  The Senning or Mustard
procedure, are the corrective procedures, which
redirect oxygenated blood from the left atrium to
the right ventricle so that it may be ejected into the
aorta while deoxygenated blood enters the right
atrium and heads for the left ventricle and into the
pulmonary artery.
/square6Rastelli procedure:  Reroutes blood at the ventricular
level by tunneling the left ventricle to the aorta
inside the heart through a VSD. A conduit is then
inserted outside the heart between the left ventricle
and aorta.
/square6Arterial switch operation:  Transects the aorta and
pulmonary artery above their respective valves and
switches them to become realigned with their
appropriate ventricles. This is the most physio-
logical procedure.
Q.Ventricular septal defect (VSD).
/square6VSD is the most common congenital heart disease
(1 in 500 live births). It may occur as an isolated
anomaly or in association with other anomalies.
/square6Membranous VSD is the most common type. VSD
can close spontaneously or lead to congestive
cardiac failure and death in infancy.
/square6Maladie-de-Roger is a small VSD in muscular
portion presenting in older children. It produces a
loud pansystolic murmur without any hemo-
dynamic consequences. This defect usually closes
spontaneously.Pathophysiology
/square6As left ventricular pressure is higher than right
ventricular pressure, blood moves from left to right
leading to increased blood flow through pulmonary
vasculature. This increased flow leads to pulmonary
HTN and increased right ventricular pressure
so much that right ventricular pressure may be
equal to or more than left ventricular pressure. As
a result, the shunt is reduced or reversed (becoming
right-to-left) and central cya nosis may develop
(Eisenmenger syndrome).
0
Figure 3.8 VSD
Clinical Features
/square6Small VSDs  are asymptomatic and 90% of them
close spontaneously by 10 years of age.
/square6Moderate and large VSD leads to pulmonary HTN,
which causes exertional dyspnea, chest pain,
syncope, and hemoptysis.
/square6When there is reversal of shunt (right-to-left shunt),
central cyanosis, clubbing, and polycythemia develop.
/square6CVS examination reveals cardiac enlargement and
a prominent apex beat. There is often a palpable
systolic thrill at the lower left sternal edge. A loud
pansystolic murmur is heard in the same area.
Complications
/square6Congestive cardiac failure.
/square6Pulmonary hypertension.
/square6Eisenmenger’s syndrome (this is development of
severe pulmonary HTN and reversal of left to right
shunt causing cyanosis).
/square6Infective endocarditis.
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray may show features of increased pulmo-
nary flow and pulmonary HTN such as prominent
pulmonary artery, ‘pruned’ pulmonary arteries,
and right ventricular hypertrophy.
/square6ECG  shows features of both left and right ventri-
cular hypertrophy.
/square62-D echocardiography and color Doppler can
confirm the presence, size and location of the VSD,
and abnormal blood flow.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3182 Treatment
/square6Surgery is not recommended for patients with small
shunts and normal pulmonary arterial pressures.
/square6Diuretics, digoxin, and ACE inhibitors may be
useful to control symptoms of heart failure before
cardiac surgery.
/square6Surgical correction is indicated for moderate to
large VSD before the development of severe pulmo-
nary HTN. If severe pulmonary HTN has developed
already, it will not reverse or may progress even
after surgery.
Q. Atrial septal defect (ASD).
/square6ASD is a defect in interatrial septum. It is common
in females.
Figure 3.9 ASD
Types of ASD
/square6There are three main types of ASD, sinus venosus
type, ostium secundum and ostium primum.
/square6Sinus venosus type occurs high in the atrial septum
near the entry of he superior vena cava.
/square6Ostium secundum defect involves the fossa ovalis
in the atrial mid-septum and is the most common
ASD. Patent foramen ovale  (PFO) is a normal variant
and not a true septal defect. PFO is usually asympto-
matic but can be associated with paradoxical emboli
and an increased incidence of embolic stroke.
/square6Ostium primum type septal defect occurs imme-
diately adjacent to the atrioventricular valves. It is
common in patients with Down’s syndrome.
/square6Lutembacher’s syndrome is a rare combination of
ASD with rheumatic mitral stenosis.
Pathophysiology
/square6ASD allows shunting of blood from high pressure
left atrium to low pressure right atrium. Hence,
there is increase in right ventricular inflow, right
ventricular output, and pulmonary blood flow.
/square6Increased pulmonary blood flow gives rise to
increased pulmonary vascular resistance and
pulmonary HTN. This usually happens above the
age of 30 years.
/square6Severe pulmonary HTN may lead to increased right
atrial pressure, which can be more than left atriumand lead to right to left shunting with central
cyanosis (Eisenmenger’s syndrome). Ultimately,
heart failure may develop due to overloading of
both ventricles.
/square6Because of increased blood flow into right side,
right atrium and right ventricles dilate and there
may be atrial arrhythmias, especially atrial fibrilla-
tion.
Clinical Features
Symptoms
/square6Children with ASD are asymptomatic, but as they
reach 3rd decade, they may develop pulmonary
HTN as explained above.
/square6Dyspnea and weakness occur due to pulmonary
HTN .
/square6Recurrent respiratory infections are common due
to increased blood flow through pulmonary
vasculature and congestion.
/square6Palpitations may be experienced due to atrial
arrhythmias (atrial fibrillation).
Signs
/square6Precordium is hyperdynamic.
/square6Signs of pulmonary HTN such as right ventricular
heave, prominent pulmonary artery pulsations may
be noted.
/square6On auscultation, the second heart sound is widely
split and fixed in relation to respiration. A mid-
diastolic rumbling murmur is heard at the fourth
intercostal space and along the left sternal border
due to increased flow across the tricuspid valve.
An ejection systolic murmur may be heard over
pulmonary area due to increased blood flow across
pulmonary valve.
/square6Right heart failure may develop and lead to raised
JVP and peripheral edema.
/square6Development of Eisenmenger’s syndrome leads to
central cyanosis and digital clubbing.
Complications
/square6Congestive cardiac failure
/square6Pulmonary hypertension
/square6Eisenmenger’s syndrome
/square6Infective endocarditis
/square6Atrial fibrillation
/square6Paradoxical embolism
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray  shows  prominent pulmonary artery and
pulmonary vascular congestion. It may also show
right atrial and right ventricular enlargement.
/square6ECG  may  show right bundle branch block and right
axis deviation due to right ventricular hypertrophy
and dilatation.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System183
3/square6Echocardiogram  may show right ventricular hyper-
trophy, dilated pulmonary artery, and abnormal
motion of the interventricular septum. It may also
show ASD. Abnormal shunt and blood flow can be
assessed by color Doppler.
/square6Cardiac catheterization  can confirm the presence of
ASD but usually echo is enough for confirmation.
However, it is especially useful when associated
coronary artery disease is present as both coronary
arteries and ASD can be assessed in the same sitting.
Cardiac catheterization shows increased oxygen
content of right atrial blood due to blood flow from
left atrium.
Treatment
/square6Surgical closure should be done between 3 and
6 years of age or as soon as possible in significant
ASD.
/square6Closure should not be carried out in patients with
small defects and trivial left-to-right shunts or in
those with severe pulmonary hypertension.
/square6Angiographic closure is now possible by using a
transcatheter device.
/square6Uncorrected ASD does not usually require anti-
biotic prophylaxis for endocarditis unless there is
another accompanying valvular lesion.
Q.Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA).
/square6The ductus arteriosus is a vessel, which connects
the pulmonary artery to the descending aorta distal
to the subclavian artery.
/square6In fetal life, the ductus arteriosus is normally open
and diverts blood away from the unexpanded and
hence high resistance pulmonary circulation into
the systemic circulation, where the blood is re-
oxygenated as it passes through the placenta.
/square6The duct normally closes at birth, due to high
oxygen in the lungs and the reduced pulmonary
vascular resistance. After closure a fibrous band is
left behind (ligamentum arteriosum).
/square6If the duct is defective (e.g. less elastic tissue) it will
not close. Prenatal hypoxemia and high-altitude
environments may impair closure of ductus.
/square6PDA is more common in females and is sometimes
associated with maternal rubella. Premature babies
can have PDA which is normal and will close later.
Pathophysiology
/square6Since pressure in the aorta is more than pulmonary
artery, blood flows from aorta to pulmonary artery
throughout the cardiac cycle. This leads to increased
flow through the pulmonary vasculature leading
to pulmonary HTN.
/square6Left heart also gets overloaded due to increased
pulmonary venous return which may result in left
heart failure.
Figure 3.10 Patent ductus arteriosus
/square6If pulmonary HTN is very severe, it may lead to
reversal of flow from pulmonary artery to aorta
(Eisenmenger’s syndrome).
/square6One-third of patients with PDA die of heart failure,
pulmonary hypertension or endocarditis by the age
of 40; two-thirds by the age of 60.
Clinical Features
/square6Patients may remain asymptomatic until later in
life when heart failure or infective endocarditis
develops.
/square6High volume peripheral pulses (‘bounding’) may
be noted due to increased venous return to left heart
and hence increased stroke volume.
/square6Auscultation reveals a characteristic continuous
‘machinery’ murmur heard at the first or second
left intercostal space.
/square6Signs of pulmonary HTN such as loud P2, para-
sternal heave and prominent epigatsric pulsations
may be present.
/square6In patients with reversal of shunt (Eisenmenger
syndrome), venous blood from pulmonary artery
enters descending aorta and leads to differential
cyanosis, i.e. a cyanosis in the lower limbs and
sparing of upper limbs especially the right arm.
Complications
/square6Congestive cardiac failure.
/square6Pulmonary hypertension.
/square6Eisenmenger syndrome.
/square6Infective endocarditis.
/square6Paradoxical embolism.
/square6Rupture of the ductus.
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray may show prominent aorta and
pulmonary arterial system. It may also show dilated
left atrium and ventricle.
/square6ECG  shows left ventricular hypertrophy.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3184 /square6Echocardiogram  shows dilated left atrium and left
ventricle. Color Doppler can visualize PDA anddirection of blood flow.
Treatment
/square6Premature infants with PDA are treated medicallywith indomethacin. Indomethacin closes PDAby inhibiting prostaglandin production whichmaintains patency.
/square6In other cases, PDA can be closed surgically or viatranscatheter methods. Surgery should be done as
soon as possible and before the age of 5 years.
Closure should not be done if Eisenmengersyndrome has developed.
Q.Coarctation of aorta.
/square6Coarctation of the aorta refers to narrowing of the
aorta. It usually occurs at or just distal to theinsertion of ligamentum arteriosum, i.e. distal tothe left subclavian artery. Rarely it can occurproximal to the left subclavian artery.
/square6It is two times more common in men than inwomen. It is also associated with Turner’ssyndrome. Other coexisting anomalies are bicuspidaortic valve (most common), VSD and PDA.“Pseudocoarctation” refers to buckling or kinkingof the aortic arch without the presence of asignificant gradient.
Pathophysiology
/square6Coarctation causes obstruction of blood flow in thedescending thoracic aorta. This leads to theformation of collateral circulation from the internal
mammary, scapular, and superior intercostal
arteries to the intercostals of the descending aorta.Decreased renal perfusion activates rennin angio-tensin system which leads to the development ofhypertension. Lower part of the body may receiveless blood supply which leads to growth impairment.
Figure 3.11 Coarctation of aortaClinical Features
/square6Coarctation of the aorta is often asymptomatic formany years. Patients may present with headache,epistaxis (due to hypertension) and claudication,
leg fatigue, and cold legs (due to poor blood flow
to lower limbs). Older patients may present withangina and symptoms of heart failure.
/square6Physical examination shows prominent pulsationsin the neck. Suzman’s sign is dilated, tortuous,pulsatile arteries seen around the scapulae andintercostal spaces in the back. It is better seen whenthe patient bends forward with hands lying down.
Lower half of the body is less developed than the
upper half. The hips are narrow and the legs areshort, in contrast to broad shoulders and long arms.Blood pressure should be measured in both armsand any one leg. There is high pressure in the armsand low pressure in the legs. There are weak pulses
in lower limbs and radiofemoral delay. Signs of
LVH may be noted.
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray may show dilated aorta indented atthe site of the coarctation, which gives it theappearance of ‘Fig. 3.3’. Dilated intercostal arteriesdue to collateral flow may erode the undersurfacesof the ribs and cause rib notching (Dock’s sign).
/square6ECG shows left ventricular hypertrophy.
/square6Echocardiography shows the gradient in thedescending aorta, LVH and other associatedanomalies.
/square6MRI is the best modality for visualizing theanatomy of the descending aorta.
/square6Cardiac catheterization can measure pressures andassess collaterals when surgery is planned.
/square6Aortography can also show the exact site of coarcta-
tion.
Complications
/square6Left ventricular failure.
/square6Hypertension.
/square6Cerebral aneurysm and hemorrhage.
/square6Infective endocarditis at the site of coarctation.
/square6Aortic dissection and rupture of aorta.
Treatment
/square6Intervention is indicated if the pressure gradient
across the coarctation is more than 30 mmHg.
/square6Treatment involves surgical excision of thecoarctation and end-to-end anastomosis of the
aorta.
/square6Balloon dilatation is used in some centers either forinitial treatment or for recurrence of coarctation.
The incidence of incomplete relief and restenosis isdecreased by endovascular stent placement.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System185
3Q.What is Eisenmenger syndrome? Discuss the clinical
features, investigations and management of
Eisenmenger’s syndrome.
Definition
/square6Eisenmenger syndrome is defined as pulmonary
vascular obstructive disease that develops as aconsequence of a large pre-existing left-to-right
shunt such that pulmonary artery pressures
approach systemic levels and the direction of theflow becomes bidirectional or right to left. Right toleft shunting of blood leads to central cyanosis.
/square6Congenital heart defects which can causeEisenmenger syndrome are ASD, VSD, PDA,truncus arteriosus, aortopulmonary window, anduniventricular heart.
Clinical Features
/square6Patients may present with dyspnea on exertion,
syncope, chest pain, congestive heart failure,
hemoptysis and symptoms related to polycythemiaand hyperviscosity.
/square6On examination, central cyanosis and clubbing are
present. Parasternal heave and epigastric pulsations
are felt due to right ventricular hypertrophy.Pulmonary artery pulsation is commonly felt. P2 isloud and may be palpable. A tricuspid regurgitationmurmur is common, due to right ventricular dilata-tion. In addition to these, features of underlyingcongenital heart defect may be noted.
Investigations
/square6ECG  shows evidence of right atrial enlargement,
right ventricular hypertrophy, and right axis
deviation.
/square6Chest X-ray  shows dilated pulmonary artery,
cardiomegaly, and pulmonary oligemia.
/square6Echocardiography  confirms the right-sided pressure
overload and pulmonary artery enlargement, as
well as the intracardiac defect with right to left
shunting.
/square6Cardiac catheterization  can directly measure pulmo-
nary artery pressure and also assess the reversibility
of the elevated pulmonary vascular resistance aftergiving vasodilators which is useful to decidewhether a patient benefits from surgery.
Treatment
/square6Eisenmenger syndrome is the only type of pulmo-nary artery hypertension, where its developmentis preventable by early closure of underlying left
to right shunt. On the other hand, once it develops,
closure of the underlying defect is contraindicated.
/square6The main interventions are directed towardpreventing complications such as influenza vaccine
to prevent respiratory infections, iron replacementfor iron deficiency; antiarrhythmics for atrial
arrhythmias, digoxin and diuretics for right-sidedheart failure.
/square6When patients are severely incapacitated from
severe hypoxemia or congestive heart failure, lung
transplantation (plus repair of the cardiac defect)or heart-lung transplantation may be considered.
Q.Discuss the etiology (risk factors) of ischemic heart
disease (IHD).
OR
Q.Discuss the etiology (risk factors) of atherosclerosis.
/square6IHD is a life-threatening disease and there are many
risk factors for IHD. Some are modifiable and someare not modifiable.
/square6Atherosclerosis is responsible for almost all cases
of IHD. Most risk factors act by promoting athero-
sclerosis of the coronary arteries.
/square6An overview of the established and emerging riskfactors for cardiovascular disease is given below.
Risk Factors for IHD
Modifiable Risk Factors
/square6Dyslipidemia: Elevated LDL-cholesterol, low HDL-
cholesterol, increased total-to-HDL-cholesterolratio, hypertriglyceridemia are associated withincreased risk of IHD.
/square6Hypertension:  This is a well-established risk factor
for IHD. Both systolic and diastolic blood pressuresare important. Isolated systolic hypertension is nowestablished as a risk factor for coronary heartdisease and stroke.
/square6Diabetes mellitus:  Insulin resistance, hyperinsuli-
nemia, and elevated blood glucose are associatedwith atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease andIHD.
/square6Obesity:  Obesity is associated with a number of risk
factors for atherosclerosis, such as hypertension,insulin resistance and glucose intolerance, hyper-triglyceridemia, and reduced HDL-cholesterol.
/square6Metabolic syndrome:  Patients with the constellation
of abdominal obesity, hypertension, diabetes, anddyslipidemia are considered to have the metabolicsyndrome (syndrome X). Metabolic syndrome is
associated with higher risk of coronary artery
disease.
/square6Sedentary life style:  This leads to obesity, impaired
glucose tolerance and is a risk factor for IHD.
/square6Smoking:  Cigarette smoking is an important and
reversible risk factor. The incidence of MI increasesmanifold in people who smoke compared to thosewho do not.
/square6Socioeconomic factors:  Low socioeconomic status is
associated with higher risk.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3186 /square6Chronic kidney disease:  Patients with chronic kidney
disease have higher risk of IHD.
/square6Diet factors:  A diet rich in calories, saturated fat, and
cholesterol is a risk factor for IHD.
/square6Psychosocial factors:  Psychological stress can lead to
premature atherosclerosis and also aggravatetraditional risk factors such as smoking, hyper-tension, and lipid metabolism. People with
depression, anger, stress and other factors have
higher chances of developing IHD.
/square6C-reactive protein:  A higher level of C-reactive
protein (CRP) is associated with higher risk of IHD.
CRP is a marker of inflammation which may have
a role in promotion of atherosclerosis.
/square6Microalbuminuria:  Microalbuminuria reflects
vascular damage and is an important risk factor for
cardiovascular disease and early cardiovascular
mortality.
/square6Left ventricular hypertrophy:  Left ventricular hyper-
trophy (LVH), which is associated with hyper-
tension as well as with age and obesity, is a risk
factor for IHD.
/square6Homocysteine levels:  An elevated level of homo-
cysteine is associated with increased risk of IHD.
/square6Asymmetrical dimethylarginine (ADMA):  It is an
endogenous nitric oxide synthase inhibitor. It is anindependent risk factor for endothelial dysfunctionand IHD.
/square6Hyperuricemia:  Hyperuricemia is associated with an
increased risk of IHD and increased mortality inthose with IHD.
/square6Infection:  Certain infections may play a role in the
pathogenesis of atherosclerosis by establishing alow-grade persistent inflammatory process ofendohelium. Some organisms suspected areChlamydia pneumoniae , cytomegalovirus, and
Helicobacter pylori .
/square6Collagen vascular disease:  Patients with collagen
vascular disease, especially those with rheumatoidarthritis (RA) and systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE), have a significantly increased incidence of
cardiovascular disease.
/square6Air pollution:  Fine particulate air pollution is
associated with increased risk of IHD and cardio-
pulmonary mortality. This may be due to acute
arterial vasoconstriction and myocardial ischemiainduced by air pollution.
Non-modifiable Risk Factors
/square6Aging:  As the age advances, atherosclerosis of
vessels also increases. Most of the IHD cases occur
after 40 years of age. Aging is an independent riskfactor for IHD.
/square6Family history:  Family history is a significant
independent risk factor for IHD, particularly among
younger individuals with a family history of pre-mature disease.Q.Define angina. Describe the etiology, pathogenesis,
clinical features, investigations, and managementof angina.
Q.Angina equivalents.
Definition
/square6Angina pectoris may be defined as a discomfort in
the chest and/or adjacent area associated with
myocardial ischemia but without myocardial
necrosis.
/square6It is a common presenting symptom among patientswith coronary artery disease (CAD).
Types
/square6Stable angina  is usually reproducible and is consis-
tent over time. It is precipitated by effort, and
relieved by rest. Stable angina is caused by fixed
stenosis in coronary arteries.
/square6Unstable angina  is diagnosed when a patient has
new-onset angina, worsening angina (angina that
is more frequent, more prolonged, or precipitated
by less effort than before), or angina occurring atrest.
/square6Prinzmetals angina  is due to coronary vasospasm
occurring at rest.
/square6Postprandial angina  develops during or soon after
meals because of increased oxygen demand in thesplanchnic vascular bed thereby compromisingcoronary blood flow.
/square6Decubitus angina (nocturnal angina)  is caused by the
increase in LV wall stress because of the redistri-bution of the intravascular blood volume in therecumbent position.
Etiology
/square6Angina is due to transient decrease in blood supplyto myocardium.
/square6It may be due to fixed coronary stenosis, clot super-imposed on a fixed coronary stenosis, or coronaryvasospasm. In the absence of collateral circulation,stenosis of more than 75% of the cross-sectional area
(corresponding to >50% lumen diameter by
angiography) results in stable angina. Chest paincan occur at rest due to severe stenosis or thrombusformation or due to vasospasm as in Prinzmetal’sangina.
/square6Stenosis is most commonly due to atherosclerosis.
/square6Angina can also occur when myocardial oxygendemand increases in spite of normal coronary
arteries. Examples are patients with aortic stenosis
or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy who mayexperience angina due to markedly increased myo-cardial oxygen demand because of myocardialhypertrophy. Other factors which increase myo-cardial oxygen demand are anemia, thyrotoxicosis,
aortic regurgitation, exercise, and tachycardia.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System187
3/square6Mental stress, emotions, postprandial state,
exposure to cold may reduce coronary flow and
lead to angina.
/square6In syndrome X, patients may experience angina due
to failure of coronary vasodilatation with exercise.
Pathophysiology
/square6Myocardial ischemia is caused by an imbalance
between myocardial oxygen supply and oxygen
demand. Ischemic myocardium releases active
substances, such as adenosine and bradykinin,
which stimulate pain receptors and impulses are
carried by afferent nerves to upper fifth sympathetic
ganglia and upper thoracic spinal cord and from
there to thalamus and cortex. When the impulses
reach thalamus and cortex, patient perceives the
discomfort.
/square6Myocardial oxygen demand depends mainly on
heart rate, wall tension during systole (afterload),
the inotropic state of the myocardial cell
(contractility), and end-diastolic volume (preload).
Whenever there is increased oxygen demand, it is
met by coronary vasodilation. Coronary blood flow
can increase five to six folds during exercise from
resting values of 0.8 mL/g/min. This increase in
flow is due to release of substances like adenosine,
and nitric oxide (NO) which are potent vasodilators.
Coronary perfusion of the left ventricle occurs
mainly in diastole due to decreased wall tension
and coronary resistance. Wall tension is highest
in the subendocardium and lowest in the sub-
epicardium. Hence, subendocardium is more prone
to ischemia than epicardium. However, severe
ischemia involves full thickness myocardium from
endocardium to the epicardium (transmural
ischemia).
Clinical Manifestations
History
/square6Angina means tightening, not pain. Thus, the dis-
comfort of angina is often described as “pressing,”
“squeezing,” “strangling,” “constricting,” “bursting,”
and “burning”.
/square6Angina usually builds up within 30 seconds and
disappears in 5 to 15 minutes. Pain is usually
brought on by exertion. The intensity of pain ranges
from mild to severe discomfort. The discomfort is
most commonly midsternal and radiates to the
neck, left shoulder, and left arm. Rarely it can radiate
to the jaw, teeth, right arm, back, and epigastrium.
/square6The clenching of the fist over the sternum while
describing the pain (Levine’s sign) is classic.
/square6Pain may be associated with sweating, palpitations,
dizziness and dyspnea.
/square6There may be history of other comorbid conditions
like diabetes and hypertension. Smoking history
may be positive./square6Angina equivalents : Some patients instead of chest
pain or discomfort, experience dyspnea, dizziness,
fatigue, or gastrointestinal complaints (epigastric
burning, nausea and vomiting). These symptoms
are called angina equivalents. When these symp-
toms occur in response to exercise or other stress,
myocardial ischemia should be ruled out.
Figure 3.12 Levine’s sign
Physical Examination
/square6General examination:  May show signs of generalized
atherosclerosis like tendon xanthoma, xanthelasmas,
thickening of Achilles tendon, locomotor brachialis
and corneal arcus. Signs of peripheral vascular
disease such as absent peripheral pulses may be
noted. Heart rate and BP may be elevated. Excessive
sweating may be noted.
/square6Systemic examination:  Can be completely normal. 3rd
and 4th heart sounds; mitral regurgitation murmur
(due to ischemic papillary muscle dysfunction) may
be heard during ischemia. Paradoxical splitting of
S2 (from transient left ventricular dysfunction or left
bundle-branch block) may be noted. Bilateral basal
crepitations may be heard during ischemia due to
transient left ventricular dysfunction. Pain is
promptly relieved by nitroglycerin. Other systems
are usually normal.
Investigations
Resting ECG
/square6This is usually normal between attacks. During an
attack, ST depression and T wave inversions in the
leads corresponding to ischemic areas may be seen.
Changes of old myocardial infarction such as
pathological Q waves, and left bundle branch block
may be present.
Exercise ECG (Stress Test)
/square6Since the resting ECG can be normal in between
the attacks, exercise testing can be useful to confirm
the diagnosis of angina. Patient is asked to walk on
a treadmill and ECG is recorded continuously.
Patient may experience chest discomfort during
exercise and if ECG shows ST segment depression

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3188 of >1 mm, it suggests myocardial ischemia.
However, a normal test does not exclude coronaryartery disease (CAD) (false-negative test) and onthe other hand up to 20% of patients with positiveexercise tests may not have coronary artery disease(false-positive test).
Cardiac Scintigraphy
/square6Myocardial perfusion scans at rest and after stress
(i.e. exercise or dobutamine), is a sensitive indicator
of ischemia and useful in deciding if a stenosis seenat angiography is giving rise to ischemia.
Echocardiography
/square6Ischemic or infarcted ventricular wall does notmove properly. This is called regional wall motionabnormally (RWMA) and reflect ischemia or previousinfarction. Stress echocardiography, can be abnormal
if resting echo doe not show any abnormalities.
Coronary Angiography (CAG)
/square6When all the above tests do not provide an answer
to chest pain, CAG can be useful. It can delineatethe exact coronary anatomy and areas of stenosis.It is always done in patients being considered forrevascularization (i.e. coronary artery bypassgrafting or coronary angioplasty).
/square6The indications for coronary angiography are asfollows.
– Angina refractory to medical therapy
– Strongly positive exercise test
– Unstable angina
– Angina occurring after myocardial infarction
– Patients under 50 years with angina or myo-
cardial infarction
– Where the diagnosis of angina is uncertain
– Severe left ventricular dysfunction after myo-
cardial infarction
– Non-Q-wave myocardial infarction
Treatment of Angina
General Management
/square6Patients should be reassured. Comorbid conditions
such as anemia, hyperthyroidism, diabetes, hyper-tension, and hypercholesterolemia should betreated. Smoking should be stopped; regular
exercise and low fat diet should be encouraged.
Medical Treatment
Glyceryl trinitrate (GTN)
/square6Used sublingually, either as a tablet or as a spray,
gives prompt relief (peak action 4–8 minutes andlasts 20–30 minutes). If relief is not obtained within
2 or 3 min after nitroglycerin, a second or third dose
may be given at 5 min intervals. It can be givenprior to any activity known to induce angina.Transdermal GTN preparations are also available
and their action lasts up to 24 hours. All patientswith angina require nitrates as regular prophylactictherapy. Oral long acting preparations of nitratescan be used for daily therapy.
Long-acting nitrates (e.g. isosorbide dinitrate and
mononitrate)
/square6These are helpful for long-term prophylactictherapy. They reduce venous return and henceintracardiac diastolic pressures, reduce afterloadand dilate coronary arteries. Tolerance with loss ofefficacy develops with 12 to 24 h of continuous
exposure to long-acting nitrates. To prevent
tolerance, patient should be kept free of nitrates fora minimum of 8 hours each day. Nitrates shouldbe used with caution in patients with low BP.Sildenafil can precipitate hypotension if given topatients taking nitrates.
Antiplatelet agents
/square6Aspirin inhibits cyclooxygenase activity and
inhibits platelet aggregation. It reduces the risk ofcoronary events in patients with coronary arterydisease. All patients with angina should be givenaspirin (75–325 mg daily) unless contraindicated.
Clopidogrel (300 mg loading and 75 mg daily) is
another antiplatelet agent which acts by blockingADP receptor-mediated platelet aggregation. It isas effective as aspirin and especially useful whenaspirin is contraindicated due to allergy, dyspepsiaand GI bleed. Prasugrel and ticagrelor are other
options and are similar to clopidogrel.
Beta-blockers
/square6Beta-blockers reduce myocardial oxygen demand
by decreasing heart rate (negative chronotropiceffect) and the force of ventricular contraction(negative inotropic effect). If there is coexistent
hypertension, beta-blockers help in controlling that
also. All patients with angina should be givenbetablockers unless there are contraindications(asthma, heartblocks, COPD). Cardioselective beta-blockers like atenolol, metoprolol, carvedilol, andnebivolol are used commonly.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
/square6Clinical trials have shown that ACE inhibitors
reduce major adverse events (death, myocardialinfarction, and stroke), angina, and the need forrevascularization in patients with CAD.
Statins
/square6Lipid lowering drugs such as atorvastatin or
rosuvastatin reduce the risk of major cardiovascularevents (MI, cardiac arrest, and stroke) in patientswith angina.
Calcium channel blockers
/square6These drugs block calcium flux into the cell. They relax
coronary arteries, cause peripheral vasodilatation

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System189
3and reduce the force of left ventricular contraction,
thereby reducing myocardial oxygen demand. Thenon-dihydropyridine calcium antagonists (e.g.diltiazem and verapamil) also reduce the heart rateand are particularly useful anti-anginal agents. Long
acting dihydropyridines (e.g. amlodepine, felo-
depine) are also useful as they have a smooth profile
of action with no significant effect on the heart rate.Short-acting dihydropyridines (e.g. nifedipine) cancause reflex tachycardia and worsen angina. Case–control studies have shown that long term nifedipineis associated with adverse outcome and should not
be used.
Nicorandil
/square6This is a potassium-channel activator with a nitrate
component. It has both arterial and venous vaso-dilating properties. It can be used when there arecontraindications to other drugs or can be added if
angina is not responding to above drugs.
Ranolazine
/square6This is a cardioselective anti-ischemic agent
(piperazine derivative) that partially inhibits fattyacid oxidation. Also inhibits late sodium currentinto myocardial cells and prolongs QTc interval.
Indicated for chronic angina unresponsive to other
antianginal treatments. Unlike beta blockers orcalcium channel blockers, it does not reduce bloodpressure or heart rate.
Coronary Angioplasty
/square6Percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty(PTCA) is the technique of dilating coronary stenosisby passing and inflating a balloon inside the stenosis.The balloon is threaded into the site of stenosis bya thin catheter inserted through radial or femoralartery. PTCA improves symptoms of angina, but
confers no significant prognostic benefit. Complica-
tions of PTCA include mortality (1%), acutemyocardial infarction (2%), and the need for urgentcoronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) (2%). Astent can be placed at the site of stenosis to preventrestenosis. There are many types of stents available
in the market. PTCA plus stent implantation is
superior to PTCA alone for reducing cardiovascularevents and the need for repeat intervention asrestenosis is less after stent placement.
Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting (CABG)
/square6CABG is indicated when patients remain sympto-
matic despite optimal medical therapy and whose
disease is not suitable for PTCA. CABG dramati-cally improves angina in about 90% of cases. It isalso indicated for patients with severe three-vesseldisease (significant proximal stenoses in all threemain coronary vessels), and in those with left main
stem artery disease. CABG provides improved
survival in such situations. Usually the left or rightinternal mammary artery is used in CABG. Long
saphenous vein can also be used but is used lesscommonly now because of higher risk of athero-matous occlusion.
Transmyocardial Laser Revascularization (TMR)
/square6Patients who remain symptomatic despite optimalmedical therapy and are not suitable for PTCA orCABG may benefit from transmyocardial laserrevascularization (TMR). Here laser is used to makechannels (small holes) in the myocardium to allow
direct perfusion of the myocardium from blood
within the ventricular cavity. However, studieshave not shown much benefit.
Q.Prinzmetal’s angina (variant angina).
/square6Prinzmetal’s angina or variant angina is angina pectoris
secondary to coronary artery spasm. Many patientswith variant angina also have significant fixed obstruc-
tion of at least one major coronary artery.
Clinical Features
/square6Angina mainly occurs during rest, often at night,
and only rarely during exertion. Attacks tend tooccur regularly at certain times of day.
Diagnosis
/square6Diagnosis is suspected if ST-segment elevation occursduring the attack. Between anginal attacks, the ECGmay be normal or show a stable abnormal pattern.
/square6Confirmation is by provocative testing with ergo-novine or acetylcholine, which may precipitatecoronary artery spasm. Coronary artery spasm isidentified by finding significant ST-segment eleva-tion on ECG or by observation of a reversible spasmduring cardiac catheterization. Testing is done most
commonly in a cardiac catheterization laboratory.
Treatment
/square6Calcium channel blockers (diltiazem, verapamil,
amlodipine) prevent the attacks. Amiodarone isuseful in refractory cases.
/square6Sublingual nitroglycerin relieves angina attacks.
Q.What are acute coronary syndromes?
/square6The term acute coronary syndrome (ACS) is applied
to patients in whom there is a suspicion or confir-mation of acute myocardial ischemia or infarction.It is almost always associated with rupture of anatherosclerotic plaque and partial or completethrombosis of a coronary artery.
/square6Acute coronary syndromes (ACS) include:
– Unstable angina
– Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI)
– ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI).

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3190 Q.Define unstable angina. Describe the etiology,
clinical features, investigations, and management
of unstable angina.
Q.Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI).
Definition
/square6Unstable angina is defined as angina with at least
one of three features: (1) It occurs at rest (or with
minimal exertion) usually lasting >10 min, (2) it is
severe and of new onset (i.e., within the prior 4 to6 weeks), and/or (3) it occurs with a crescendo
pattern (i.e. previously diagnosed angina that has
become distinctly more frequent, longer induration, or more severe in nature).
/square6Non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI)
is unstable angina with evidence of myocardial
necrosis as evidenced by elevated cardiac bio-markers (CK-MB and troponins). Hence, unstable
angina + elevated CKMB/tropnin is NSTEMI. In
NSTEMI, there will not be any ST elevation on ECG.
/square6Since the pathogenesis, clinical features and manage-ment of both unstable angina and NSTEMI are same,
both are described together here.
Etiology
/square6Unstable angina/NSTEMI is caused by rupture or
erosion of the atherosclerotic plaque with formation
of partially occlusive thrombus. Progressive athero-
sclerosis is another cause. Sometimes, it is caused
by coronary spasm (Prinzmetal’s angina) or increase
in myocardial oxygen demand superimposed on pre-existing CAD.
Clinical Features
/square6Patients with unstable angina/NSTEMI presentwith substernal chest pain. Characteristics of chestpain are same as those of stable angina but more
severe. Pain usually radiates to the neck, left
shoulder, and left arm.
/square6Anginal “equivalents” such as dyspnea and epi-gastric discomfort may also occur.
/square6Examination may be normal or may show diapho-
resis, pale cool skin, sinus tachycardia, third and/
or fourth heart sound, bilateral basal crepitations,and sometimes hypotension.
Investigations
/square6ECG:  Usually shows ST-segment depression, and/
or T-wave inversion in the leads corresponding toischemic area.
/square6Cardiac enzymes: CK-MB and troponins may be
elevated.
/square6Other investigations are same as stable angina.
Treatment
/square6Patients with unstable angina/NSTEMI should beadmitted to ICU and placed on bedrest. High flow
oxygen should be started for all patients.Continuous ECG monitoring should be done to
detect ST-segment deviation and any arrhythmias.
Medical management involves administration of
anti-ischemic and antithrombotic treatment.
Antiplatelet agents (aspirin, clopidogrel, glycoprotein
IIB/IIIA inhibitors)
/square6Platelets play an important role in the formation of
thrombus in coronary arteries. When there is
rupture of the atheromatous plaque, platelets getexposed to collagen tissue factor, ADP (adenosine
diphosphate), thromboxane A2 (TXA2), and
thrombin which results platelet activation. Plateletactivation leads to the expression of glycoprotein
(GP) Ilb/IIIa receptors on the platelet surface which
leads to platelet aggregation. Aspirin  prevents
platelet aggregation by blocking thromboxane A2
synthesis. All patients with ACS should receive
325 mg loading dose aspirin and then 75–150 mgdaily unless contra-indicated.
/square6Clopidogrel inhibits ADP-dependent activation of
the glycoprotein (GP) Ilb/IIIa receptors. A loading
dose of 300 mg clopidogrel followed by 75 mg dailyalong with aspirin is more effective than either drug
alone.
/square6Ticagrelor is the first reversible oral antiplatelet
agent. It has faster, greater, and more consistentADP-receptor inhibition than clopidogrel.
/square6Abciximab ( a monoclonal antibody), eptifibatide, and
tirofiban  are recently developed GP Ilb/IIIa receptor
antagonists. These are powerful inhibitors of plate-let aggregation and can be given intravenously.
Antithrombotic therapy
/square6Unfractionated heparin should be started at a dose
of 5000 U IV bolus, followed by infusion of 1000 U/h
titrated to aPTT 1.5–2.5 times control. Alternativelylow molecular weight heparins such as dalteparin
or enoxaparin can be used subcutaneously. APTT
need not be monitored for low molecular weightheparins.
Other drugs and further treatment for unstable
angina is same as stable angina.
Q.Describe the etiopathogenesis, clinical features,
diagnosis and management of acute myocardial
infarction (STEMI).
/square6Myocardial infarction (MI) (i.e. heart attack) is theirreversible necrosis of heart muscle secondary toprolonged ischemia. This usually results from an
imbalance in oxygen supply and demand, which is
most often caused by plaque rupture with thrombusformation in a coronary vessel, resulting in an acute
reduction of blood supply to a portion of the myo-
cardium.
/square6Myocardial injury is reflected by elevated cardiac
enzymes CK-MB, troponin I and troponin T. Two
patterns of MI can be recognized based on ECG
findings.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System191
3/square6Non-ST segment elevation MI (NSTEMI) : Here, there
will be elevated markers of myocardial injury, such
as troponins and CK-MB, but no ST segment eleva-
tion in ECG.
/square6ST segment elevation MI (STEMI): When myocardial
injury is accompanied by both enzyme and ST
segment elevation it is reffered to as ST segment
elevation MI (STEMI) .
/square6It is important to differentiate between NSTEMI and
STEMI because early revascularization therapy
improves the outcome in STEMI but not in NSTEMI.
NSTEMI has been described along with unstable
angina. The following description is about STEMI.
Etiology
/square6Atherosclerosis is the disease responsible for mostacute coronary syndrome (ACS) cases including
myocardial infarction. Approximately 90% of myo-
cardial infarctions result from an acute thrombus
that obstructs an atherosclerotic coronary artery.
/square6Non-atherosclerotic causes of myocardial infarction
include: coronary occlusion secondary to vasculitis,
hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy, coronary
artery emboli, congenital coronary anomalies, coro-
nary trauma, coronary vasospasm (due to cocaine
abuse, ephedrine), increased oxygen requirement
(as in heavy exertion, fever, or hyperthyroidism);
decreased oxygen delivery (severe anemia, carbon
monoxide posoning); aortic dissection, with
retrograde involvement of the coronary arteries.
Pathogenesis
/square6Rupture or erosion of an atherosclerotic plaque inthe coronary artery induces local thrombus forma-
tion which occludes coronary artery leading to
myocardial infarction. Initially subendocardium is
affected because this is the least supplied area. With
continued ischemia the infarct zone extends
through to the subepicardial myocardium, produc-
ing a transmural Q-wave myocardial infarction.
Areas of myocardium which are ischemic but not
yet undergone infarction can be salvaged by early
reperfusion therapy.
/square6Microscopy shows coagulative necrosis of myo-
cardial fibres that is ultimately followed by
myocardial fibrosis.
Clinical Features
/square6In up to one-half of cases, a precipitating factor
appears to be present before MI, such as vigorous
physical exercise, emotional stress, or a medical or
surgical illness.
/square6Patients usually present with chest pain, located in
the substernal region which frequently radiates to
the neck, left shoulder, and left arm. Chest pain of
MI is more severe than angina and lasts for more
than 20 minutes. Patient may also have dizziness,
syncope, dyspnea, and fatigue./square6Anginal “equivalents” such as dyspnea and epi-
gastric discomfort may also occur.
/square6Examination may reveal diaphoresis, pale cool skin,
tachycardia, a third and/or fourth heart sound, bila-
teral basal crepitations (due to pulmonary edema),
and sometimes hypotension. A transient systolic
murmur may be heard over the apex due to
ischemic dysfunction of the mitral valve apparatus.
Investigations
Electrocardiogram
/square6Initial ECG may be normal. If normal, it should be
repeated every 15 minutes. ECG shows ST elevation
in MI. Complete heart block, bundle branch block
and arrhythmias may be seen. ECG changes are
seen in leads which correspond to the infarcted
region of myocardium. The presence of new ST
elevation > 2 mm in chest leads and > 1 mm in other
leads suggests MI.
Figure 3.13 Normal ECG (left) and abnormal ECG with ST
elevation (right)
/square6ECG may show pathological Q waves after few
hours when the MI has evolved fully. Some patients
may have only ST elevation and may not develop
Q waves (non-Q-wave MI). Presence of Q waves
suggests that MI has fully evolved and there is full
thickness infarct.
/square6New onset LBBB also suggests MI.
ECG leads showing ST, T changes Correspond to
• V3, V4, V5, V6 • Anterior wall MI
• V2, V3 • Septal MI• II, III, aVF • Inferior wall MI• I, aVL, V5, V6 • Lateral wall MI
Biochemical Markers
/square6CK–MB, troponin-I and troponin-T  levels are
elevated whenever there is myocardial injury (in
STEMI and NSTEMI). Troponins are more specific
for myocardial injury because elevated CK-MB
levels may be found in skeletal muscle damage also.
New markers are becoming available such as
myeloperoxidase and glutathione peroxidase-1.
Echocardiogram
/square6Hypokinesia or akinesia of ventricular wall may be
present due to ischemia or infarction. Echocardiogram

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3192 can assess left ventricular (LV) function and also
identify the presence of right ventricular (RV) infarc-tion, ventricular aneurysm, pericardial effusion,and LV thrombus. VSD and mitral regurgitationmay develop in MI, which can be identified by echo-cardiogram.
Coronary Angiography (CAG)
/square6It can identify the site of block and allow percuta-neous coronary intervention.
Radionuclide Imaging
/square6These imaging techniques are not used commonlybecause they lack sensitivity and specificity andare available in few centres. Myocardial perfusion
imaging with Thallium-201 or technetium-99m-
sestamibi can show uptake defects (cold spots) dueto infarction. Perfusion scanning cannot distinguishnew infarcts from old infarcts. Radionuclideventriculography, with technetium-99m-labeledred blood cells, can demonstrate wall motion
disorders and reduction in the ventricular ejection
fraction in MI.
Other Investigations
/square6Full blood count, renal function tests, serum electro-lytes, glucose, and lipid profile should be done forall patients.
Management of Myocardial Infarction
Immediate Measures
/square6Note that time is muscle and treatment should beinitiated as early as possible. More delay meansmore myocardial damage.
/square6Oxygen by nasal prongs or face mask (2–4 liters/minfor 6–12 hours after infarction).
/square6Aspirin 300 mg oral and clopidogrel 300 mg oral
loading dose should be given and continued at
lower doses thereafter.
/square6Sublingual glyceryl trinitrate 0.4 mg. Repeat at5 min intervals up to 3 doses. This relieves chest
pain and improves coronary circulation.
/square6Intravenous heparin is given for all patients unless
there is a contraindication.
/square6Injection morphine 2–5 mg intravenously, improveschest pain and controls anxiety.
/square6Intravenous beta-blocker, e.g. metoprolol, 5 mg
every 2 to 5 min for a total of three doses. Beta-
blockers decrease heart rate and sympathetic overactivity and hence reduce myocardial oxygendemand. Beta blockers should be avoided, if PRinterval is >0.24 s, 2nd or 3rd degree atrioventricularblock is present, heart rate is <60 beats/min, systolic
blood pressure <90 mmHg, history of asthma or
COPD is present and severe left ventricular failureis present.Reperfusion Therapy
/square6Coronary reperfusion can be established by twoways: (1) Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI)and (2) thrombolytic therapy.
/square6PCI is the treatment of choice if facilities for PCIare available. If there are no facilities for (PCI), thepatient is treated with fibrinolytic therapy.
/square6Patients with continued chest pain or failure to
resolve ST-segment elevation by about 90 min after
fibrinolysis should be referred for rescue PCI.
/square6Prehospital treatment, including thrombolysis, canbe given by trained personnel under strict guide-lines if there is going to be significant delay before
reaching the hospital.
Fibrinolysis
Indications
/square6Fibrinolysis is indicated in people with acute STEMI
presenting within 12 hours of onset of symptoms if
primary PCI cannot be delivered within 120
minutes of onset of symptoms. If PCI can be donewithin 120 minutes, then the preferred therapy isPCI. Fibrinolytic therapy reduces infarct size, limitsLV dysfunction, and reduces the incidence ofcomplications such as septal rupture, cardiogenic
shock, and malignant ventricular arrhythmias.
/square6Highest benefit is obtained if fibrinolysis is done
within 1 to 3 hours of the onset of symptoms. Modestbenefit is seen if given 3 to 6 h after the onset ofinfarction. Benefit may be seen up to 12 hours if
chest pain is persisting and ST segment remains
elevated without Q waves. Fibrinolytic agentsactivate plasminogen to plasmin which breaksdown the thrombus. Currently available fibrinolyticagents include streptokinase, tissue plasminogenactivator (tPA), reteplase and tenecteplase.
Drugs and dosage
/square6Streptokinase is given in a dose of 1.5 million units
as intravenous infusion over 1 hour. tPA is givenas 15 mg bolus IV, followed by 0.75 mg/kg IV over
30 minutes followed by 0.5 mg/kg IV over the next
60 minutes. Streptokinase is not fibrin specificwhere as tPa is fibrin specific and hence associatedwith less chances of hemorrhage.
/square6Trials have shown that tissue plasminogen activator
(tPA) plus heparin is better than streptokinase in
improving survival as well as patency of coronaryartery. Longer-acting variants of tPA, given by single(tenecteplase) or double bolus (reteplase) injections,have been developed and are more convenient to give.
Complications of fibrinolysis
/square6The major risk of thrombolytic therapy is bleeding.
Intracerebral hemorrhage is the most serious andfrequently fatal complication.
/square6Note that fibrinolysis is not useful in NSTEMI andmay be harmful.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System193
3Percutaneous Coronary Intervention (PCI)
/square6PCI includes angioplasty and/or stenting. If PCI is
done without preceding fibrinolysis, it is referred
to as primary PCI. It is useful for patients who havecontraindications to fibrinolytic therapy, when thediagnosis is in doubt, cardiogenic shock is present,increased bleeding risk is present, or symptomshave been present for at least 2 to 3 hours when the
clot is more mature and fibrinolytics are less effec-
tive. Even if there are no contraindications, PCI canbe a treatment option because it is more effectivethan fibrinolysis in opening occluded coronaryarteries and has better short and long-term clinicaloutcomes. Disadvantages of PCI are increased cost,
limited availability and requirement of experts.
Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting (CABG)
/square6CABG is indicated for patients with left main stem
or triple vessel disease with impaired left ventri-cular function.
Post-MI Drug Therapy
/square6Extensive clinical trials have shown that manydrugs taken indefinitely by MI patients reduce theincidence of recurrent MI and cardiovascular death.Therefore, all post-MI patients should be taking the
following medications unless there are contra-
indications.
/square6Aspirin and clopidogrel  should be given to all patients
lifelong. Aspirin is given at a dose of 75– 150 mg/
day and clopidogrel at 75 mg/day.
/square6Beta-blocker , e.g. metoprolol, carvedilol, atenolol.
They decrease myocardial oxygen demand andshould be given to all patients with MI unless there
is a contraindication like asthma or severe LV dys-
function./square6Oral nitrates , e.g. isosorbide dinitrate or mono-
nitrate. They improve the symptoms of angina andheart failure and should be considered for allpatients.
/square6ACE-inhibitors , e.g. enalapril, ramipril, lisinopril,
perindopril. They prevent adverse myocardialremodeling after acute MI and reduce heart failureand death. They also reduce atherosclerosis
progression and acute MI recurrence. All patients
should be given ACE inhibitor unless there is acontraindication like renal failure and hypotension.
/square6Statins , e.g. atorvastatin, rosuvastatin, etc. LDL-
cholesterol should be brought down to less than100 mg/dL. In addition to cholesterol loweringeffect, statins also help in plaque stabilization andregression of atherosclerosis. Recent data show
statins are effective in secondary prevention regard-
less of age or baseline lipid levels, even when theLDL is less than 100.
/square6Control of comorbid conditions : Like diabetes and
hypertension help in reducing recurrent MI. ForHTN, ACE inhibitors or β-blockers are the first
choice because they also reduce cardiovascularmortality and morbidity as described above. Angio-
tensin receptor blockers (ARBs) can be considered
when ACE inhibitors are not tolerated. ACEinhibitors and ARBs also reduce the long-termcomplications of diabetes. Diabetes should bestrictly controlled by oral drugs or insulin or both.
/square6Calcium channel blockers : They have negative
inotropic effect and are not routinely given. Theymay be given to selected patients without LV
dysfunction (ejection fraction greater than 40%)
who are intolerant of β-blockers. Short acting
nifedipine should be avoided as it cause reflextachycardia has been shown to increase mortalityrate.
/square6Smoking cessation : Continued smoking doubles
subsequent mortality risk after acute MI andcessation reduces risk of reinfarction and death.
Complications of Myocardial Infarction
Heart Failure
/square6Cardiac failure can happen after MI if significantmyocardium is damaged.
Myocardial Rupture and Aneurysmal Dilatation
/square6Infarcted myocardium is weak and cannot toleratethe pressure inside the ventricular chamber. Thismay lead to rupture of the free wall of the left
ventricle or aneurysmal dilatation. Rupture is
usually an early, catastrophic and fatal event.
/square6Ventricular aneurysm impairs cardiac outputbecause of paradoxical motion of its wall. Double,
diffuse, or displaced apical impulse is noted on
physical examination.Contraindications to thrombolysis
TABLE 3.21: Contraindications to thrombolysis
Absolute contraindications
• Hemorrhagic stroke or stroke of unknown origin at any time
and ischemic stroke in preceding 6 months
• Intracranial or spinal cord neoplasms• Active bleeding or bleeding diathesis• Suspected or known aortic dissection
Relative contraindications
• Severe uncontrolled hypertension (systolic blood pressure
>180 mmHg)
• Recent major trauma/surgery/head injury (within preceding
3 weeks)
• Anticoagulation with INR >2–3
• Old ischemic stroke
• Oral anticoagulant therapy• Pregnancy or within 1 week postpartum• Recent non-compressible vascular punctures• Recent retinal laser therapy

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3194 Ventricular Septal Defect (VSD)
/square6Infarcted septum may perforate and lead to VSD.
It is common in elderly and hypertensive patientsand after delayed thrombolysis. It requires emer-
gency surgical repair.
Mitral Regurgitation
/square6Severe mitral regurgitation can occur early in the
course of MI. Three mechanisms are responsible formitral regurgitation in MI, which are as follows.
/square6Left ventricular dysfunction and dilatation, causing
annular dilatation of the valve and subsequent
regurgitation
/square6Infarction of the inferior wall, producing dys-function of the papillary muscle.
/square6Infarction and rupture of the papillary muscles,producing sudden severe mitral regurgitation,pulmonary edema and cardiogenic shock.
/square6If there is rupture of papillary muscles, emergencysurgery should be undertaken.
Cardiac Arrhythmias
/square6Ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation (VT
and VF): Both are common after MI, especially after
reperfusion therapy. VF is a common cause of deathafter MI in first 24 hours. Hemodynamicallyunstable (hypotension, cyanosis) VT and VF shouldbe treated with DC shock. Hemodynamically stableVT should be treated with intravenous beta-
blockers (metoprolol, esmolol), IV lidocaine, or IV
amiodarone. Refractory VT and VF may respondto IV magnesium sulphate.
/square6Atrial fibrillation: It is common after MI and can be
treated with beta-blockers and digoxin. DC shockmay also be given provided there is no clot in the
heart. Intravenous diltiazem or verapamil can be
used if there is any contraindication to β-blocker use.
Amiodarone can be used daily to prevent recurrence.
/square6Bradyarrhythmias: These are common following MI
and may be due to sinus node dysfunction andconduction disturbances. AV block may occur
during acute MI, especially after inferior wall MI
(the right coronary artery usually supplies the SAand AV nodes). Heart block, with hemodynamiccompromise (hypotension) requires treatment withatropine or a temporary pacemaker. AV blocks areusually transient and recover later. Permanent
pacemaker may be needed if they persist even after
2 weeks.
Acute Pericarditis
/square6It happens with large, “transmural” infarctionscausing pericardial inflammation and presents ondays 2 to 4 after MI. Pericardial effusion may devlopand cause tamponade. Pericarditis developing later(2 to 10 weeks) after acute MI may representDressler’s syndrome , which is immune-mediated.
Treatment includes aspirin or other NSAIDs(indomethacin). Corticosteroids may be requiredfor severe pericarditis.
Post-MI Assessment
/square6Patients, in whom primary angioplasty has not beenperformed need to undergo exercise test to identifyresidual ischemia and to determine the need for
coronary angiography. This can be done prior to dis-
charge in patients without angina or 6 weeks later.A positive test requires diagnostic/therapeuticcoronary angiography/stenting. Alternatively,nuclear scintigraphy or dobutamine stress echo-cardiography can be used at 5 days to determine
the amount of viable myocardium and the extent
of myocardial ischemia.
Q.Biomarkers in acute myocardial infarction.
/square6Cardiac biomarkers are substances that are released
into the blood when the heart is damaged orstressed. Measurements of these biomarkers areused to help diagnose acute coronary syndrome
(ACS) and cardiac ischemia,
/square6Current cardiac biomarker tests that may be usedto help diagnose, evaluate, and monitor individuals
suspected of having acute coronary syndrome(ACS) include:
/square6Troponin (I or T):  This is the most commonly ordered
and most specific of the cardiac markers. Troponinsappear in the serum 3 to 4 hours after the onset ofMI. Troponin levels peak at 12–48 h and remainelevated for 10–14 days. Rising levels in a series of
troponin tests performed over several hours can
help diagnose a heart attack. High-sensitivitycardiac troponin test detects the cardiac troponinsat much lower levels than the standard troponintest. Hence, it becomes positive sooner and mayhelp detect ACS earlier than the standard test. The
high sensitivity troponin test may also be positive
in left ventricular hypertrophy, valvular heartdisease, stable congestive heart failure, pulmonaryhypertension, and stable angina.
/square6CK-MB:  This is found mostly in heart muscle; it rises
when there is damage to myocardium and may beused along with troponin or when the troponin test
is not available. It starts rising in 3 to 6 hours after
heart attack, peaks in 12 to 14 hours and remainselevated for 2 to 3 days.
/square6Myoglobin:  This test may be used along with
troponin to detect a heart attack early, but not usedfrequently. It rises within 2 to 3 hours after cardiacinjury and comes back to normal within a day.
/square6BNP:  Although usually used to recognize heart
failure, an increased level in people with ACS
indicates an increased risk of recurrent events.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System195
3Q.Pain relief in acute coronary syndrome.
/square6Prompt treatment of chest pain in MI is an essential
part of MI management. Rapid and effective pain
relief in acute MI is necessary to prevent detrimental
pathophysiologic effects, such as increases in bloodpressure, heart rate, and stroke volume. Thesechanges may disrupt the balance between myo-cardial oxygen supply and demand, and thereforeresult in the extension of infarction. Persistent,
unrelieved pain can also initiate catecholamine
release producing an increased workload on analready compromised coronary circulation.
/square6Morphine:  This is the usual drug of choice in MI.
however, many studies have shown that there is
no mortality benefit. On the other hand it has beenshown to be associated with higher risk of death inpatients presenting with NSTEMI and perhaps a
higher infarct size in patients presenting withSTEMI. When using morphine, the goal of therapyshould be to use the lowest effective dose withminimal side effects.
/square6Nitrates:  These drugs are especially useful in the
setting of persistent ischemia, heart failure or hyper-tension. Nitroglycerin infusion is commonly used.
/square6Beta blockers:  These drugs decrease the heart rate
and decrease myocardial oxygen demand which isuseful in myocardial ischemia and myocardialinfarction.
Q.How do you differentiate between stable angina,
unstable angina, and myocardial infarction based
on clinical features and lab investigations?
TABLE 3.22: Differences between stable angina, unstable angina, and MI
Characteristics Stable angina Unstable angina Myocardial infarction
Definition Angina that is reproducible and Angina that occurs at rest, severe Myocardial infarction (MI) (i.e.
consistent over time. It is precipi- and new onset angina or previous heart attack) is the irreversible
tated by effort, and relieved by angina that has clearly worsened necrosis of heart muscle secon-
rest dary to prolonged ischemia
Chest pain Occurs on physical exertion and Occurs at rest, lasts more than Chest pain of MI is more severe
lasts 2–5 minutes 10 minutes and lasts for more than 20 minutes
Pathology Fixed stenosis of a coronary artery Ischemia use to dynamic obstruction Plaque rupture with thrombus
leading to ischemia. No myocardial of coronary artery, resulting from formation in a coronary vessel
necrosis rupture of atherosclerotic plaque leading to myocardial necrosis
with superimposed spasm and
thrombosis
Predictability Predictable Not predictable Not predictable
ECG Often normal. Tread mill test (TMT) Usually shows ST segment Usually shows ST segment eleva-
is usually positive depression and T wave inversions, tion (STEMI). Sometimes no ST
but no pathological Q waves elevation (NSTEMI). Pathological
Q waves usually seen
Cardiac markers Normal Normal or only mildly elevated Elevated
(CK-MB, troponin I
and troponin T)
Echocardiogram Usually normal May show regional wall motion Usually show regional wall motion
abnormalities (RWMA) abnormalities (RWMA)
Treatment Rest, sublingual nitrates Emergency treatment is necessary Primary PCI or thrombolysis
because of risk of MI and cardiacarrest
Q.Cardiac rehabilitation.
/square6Cardiac rehabilitation is a long term programme
involving medical evaluation, prescribed exercise,cardiac risk factor modification, education, andcounseling.
/square6It is helpful for patients who have had acute coro-nary syndrome, heart failure, heart transplantationor any type of cardiac surgery.
/square6Cardiac rehabilitation aims to reverse limitationsexperienced by patients who have suffered theadverse pathophysiologic and psychological
consequences of cardiac events or cardiac surgery.Components of Cardiac Rehabilitation
/square6Health behavior change and education.
/square6Lifestyle risk factor management (physical activity
and exercise, diet, smoking cessation).
/square6Psychosocial health.
/square6Medical risk factor management.
/square6Cardioprotective therapies.
/square6Long term management.
/square6Audit and evaluation.
Rehabilitation Team
/square6Rehabilitation requires help from a team of differentprofessionals and family members. The team may

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3196 include cardiologist, physician, general practitioner,
nurse, physiotherapist, dietitian, psychologist,physiotherapist, occupational therapist, and familymembers.
Benefits of Cardiac Rehabilitation
/square6Reduction in morbidity and mortality.
/square6Reduced hospital admissions.
/square6Improvement in psychological well-being andquality of life.
/square6Improved cardiovascular risk profile.
Barriers to Cardiac Rehabilitation Participation
/square6Poor patient adherence.
/square6Lack of endorsement by a doctor.
/square6Multiple morbidities, leading to poor functionalcapacity.
/square6Poor exercise habits.
/square6Problems with transport.
/square6Poor social support.
/square6Lack of leave from work to attend centre-based
sessions.
Q.Killip classification of heart failure.
The Killip classification is used to assess heart failure
severity in patients with MI. It has prognostic value.
/square6Killip class I:  Individuals with no clinical signs of
heart failure.
/square6Killip class II:  Individuals with rales or crackles in
the lungs, an S3 gallop, and elevated jugular venouspressure.
/square6Killip class III:  Individuals with frank acute pulmo-
nary edema.
/square6Killip class IV:  Describes individuals in cardiogenic
shock or hypotension (measured as systolic blood
pressure <90 mmHg), and evidence of low cardiacoutput (oliguria, cyanosis, or impaired mentalstatus).
Q.Cardiogenic shock.
/square6Cardiogenic shock is defined as a primary cardiac
disorder that results in tissue hypoperfusion.
Causes of Cardiogenic Shock
/square6Acute MI (most common cause)
/square6Acute mitral regurgitation
/square6Acute aortic regurgitation
/square6Acute ventricular septal defect due to rupture ofinterventricular septum
/square6End stage cardiomyopathy
/square6Severe myocarditis
/square6Left ventricular free wall rupture
/square6Pericardial tamponade.Clinical Features
/square6Sinus tachycardia.
/square6Severe systemic hypotension (systolic bloodpressure below 80 mmHg or a mean blood pressure30 mmHg lower than the patient’s baseline level).This is due to acute decrease in stroke volume.
/square6Signs of systemic hypoperfusion (e.g. cool extremi-ties, oliguria).
/square6Dyspnea due to pulmonary congestion.
Differential Diagnosis
/square6Hemorrhagic shock.
/square6Septic shock.
/square6Neurogenic shock.
Investigations
/square6ECG:  May show acute MI or other causes of cardio-
genic shock.
/square6Echocardiography:  It can assess ventricular function,
detect tamponade, severe mitral and aortic regurgi-tation, and ventricular septal rupture.
/square6Coronary angiography:  To assess the coronary
anatomy should be performed in all patients withcardiogenic shock who are candidates for percuta-neous coronary intervention or coronary arterybypass graft surgery.
Management
General Measures
/square6Admit in ICU
/square6Strict bedrest
/square6High flow oxygen
/square6Endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation
if required.
Pharmacologic Agents
/square6Dopamine or norepinephrine infusion or both can
used to correct hypotension. Amrinone or milrinoneinfusion can be used if there is myocardial pumpfailure. Dobutamine should be used cautiously inthe presence of hypotension as it has peripheralvasodilating action.
Mechanical Devices
/square6IABP (intra-aortic balloon pump) can producerapid, although temporary, stabilization of the
patient with cardiogenic shock. It is usually inserted
through the femoral artery and placed in thedescending thoracic aorta distal to the left sub-clavian artery. The balloon inflates during diastoleand deflates during systole (in a synchronousfashion with the cardiac cycle), resulting in diastolic
blood flow augmentation and systolic reduction in
afterload. The decline in afterload is due to a briefvacuum effect created by rapid balloon deflation.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System197
3/square6Other circulatory support devices are left ventricular
and biventricular assist devices and percutaneouscardiopulmonary bypass support with use of anextracorporeal membrane oxygenator.
Temporary Biventricular Pacing
/square6May help improve the symptoms and survival ofcardiogenic shock.
Treatment of Underlying Cause
/square6Underlying cause such as acute MI, acute mitral andaortic regurgitations, etc. require specific therapy.
Q.Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG).
/square6Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) involves
bypassing native coronary arteries that have high-grade stenosis or occlusion not amenable to angio-plasty with stent insertion.
/square6There are two types of CABG surgical procedures:on-pump and off-pump. In on-pump technique, heartlung machine is used to bypass the heart and is heartis arrested using cardioplegic drugs during surgery.In off-pump technique, there is no use of heart lungmachine and surgery is done on beating heart. CABG
is usually done through a mid strnotomy incision.
/square6The conduits used as bypass grafts are routinely
the left internal mammary artery (LIMA) and thesaphenous vein grafts (SVG). Other conduits thatmay be grafted include the right internal mammary
artery (RIMA), the radial artery, and the gastro-
epiploic artery.
Indications for CABG
/square6Left main coronary artery stenosis >50% (both PCIand CABG have almost similar results).
/square6Left main equivalent: >70% stenosis of proximal left
anterior descending (LAD), and proximal circum-
flex artery (PCA).
/square6Three vessel disease particularly in diabetics.
/square6One or two vessel disease with extensive myo-cardium at risk, and not suitable for percutaneoustransluminal coronary angioplasty (PTCA).
/square6Coronary occlusive complications during PTCA orother endovascular interventions.
/square6Surgery for life-threatening complications afteracute MI, including VSD, ventricular free-wall
rupture or acute MR.
Contraindications to CABG
/square6Patient refusal.
/square6Coronary arteries incompatible with grafting.
/square6Absence of viable myocardium to graft.
Complications of CABG
/square6Stroke
/square6Infection/square6Graft failure
/square6Renal failure
/square6Postoperative atrial fibrillation
/square6Death
Q.Sudden cardiac death.
Definition
/square6Sudden cardiac death (SCD) is death due to instan-
taneous, unanticipated circulatory collapse due tocardiac causes within 1 hour of initial symptoms.
/square6SCD has a circadian pattern with a peak in themorning hours after awakening, from 6 am to12 noon. This peak may be due to a surge in sympa-thetic activity with its attendant arrhythmogeniceffects.
Etiology
/square6Most of the time it is due to cardiac arrhythmias(ventricular tachycardia and ventricular fibrillation)
or asystole.
/square6It is more common in men.
/square6Pre-existing heart disease may or may not to be
present, but the time and mode of death areunexpected. Risk factors for SCD are identical tothose for coronary artery disease and include oldage, male gender, hypertension, tobacco use, hyper-cholesterolemia, and left ventricular hypertrophy.
Cardiac diseases associated with sudden cardiac death
/square6Ischemic heart disease.
/square6Cardiomyopathies.
/square6Congenital long QT syndrome.
/square6Brugada’s syndrome.
/square6Cardiac failure.
/square6Acute myocarditis.
/square6Valvular heart disease (aortic stenosis, mitral valve
prolapse).
/square6Congenital heart disease (tetralogy of Fallot,transposition of great arteries, VSD, PDA).
Clinical Features
/square6Patients at risk for SCD may have prodromes ofchest pain, fatigue, palpitations, and other non-
specific complaints.
/square6The physical examination may reveal evidence of
underlying myocardial disease or may be entirelynormal.
Investigations
/square6ECG: Should be done in all patients. Evidence of
MI, prolonged QT interval, short QT interval,
epsilon wave, short PR interval, a WPW pattern, orother conditions should be sought.
/square6Echocardiogram: May show evidence of underlying
heart disease.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3198 /square6Cardiac enzymes (CK-MB, troponins):  Elevations in
these enzyme levels may indicate acute coronarysyndrome.
/square6Electrolytes, calcium, and magnesium:  Severe
metabolic acidosis, hypokalemia, hyperkalemia,
hypocalcemia, and hypomagnesemia are some ofthe conditions that can increase the risk forarrhythmia and sudden death.
/square6Quantitative drug levels (quinidine, procainamide,tricyclic antidepressants, digoxin):  Drug levels higher
than the levels indicated in the therapeutic indexmay have a proarrhythmic effect. Subtherapeuticlevels of these drugs in patients being treated forspecific cardiac conditions also can lead to an
increased risk for arrhythmia. Most of the anti-
arrhythmic medications also have a proarrhythmiceffect.
/square6Toxicology screen:  Drugs such as cocaine can lead to
vasospasm-induced ischemia.
/square6Thyroid function tests:  Hyperthyroidism can lead to
tachycardia and tachyarrhythmias. Over a period,it also can lead to heart failure. Hypothyroidism
can lead to QT prolongation.
/square6Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP):  Raised level indicates
cardiac failure.
Treatment
/square6Immediate cardiopulmonary resuscitation shouldbe started for cardiac arrest. Immediate defibrilla-
tion is very important for a good outcome.
/square6An implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD)
prevents sudden death due to ventricular arrhyth-mias and cardiac arrest in people with high risk.
/square6Antiarrhythmic drugs such as amiodarone may beused as an alternative to an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator but are less effective.
/square6Beta blockers, ACE inhibitors and spironolactonehave been shown to reduce the risk of suddencardiac death.
Q.Define cardiac arrest. Discuss the causes and
management of cardiac arrest.
Q.Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR).
/square6Cardiac arrest is is defined as sudden loss of
pumping ability of the heart. This leads to abruptloss of consciousness due to lack of cerebral bloodflow. It leads to death in the absence of an active
intervention, although spontaneous reversions
occur rarely.
/square6Cardiac arrest occurring in hospital has betterchances of suvivval than out of hospital arrest.
Similarly cardiac arrest due to VT or VF has better
chances of survival than cardiac arrest due toasystole and pulseless electrical activity.
/square6The onset of irreversible brain damage usually begins
within 4 to 6 minutes after loss of cerebral circulation.Causes of Cardiac Arrest
/square6VF (ventricular fibrillation)
/square6VT (ventricular tachycardia)
/square6Asystole
/square6Pulseless electrical activity
/square6Rupture of the ventricle
/square6Cardiac tamponade
/square6Massive pulmonary embolism
/square6Acute disruption of a major blood vessel
/square6Myocardial infarction
/square6Electrolyte imbalance (hypokalemia and hyper-
kalemia)
/square6Drugs
Management of Cardiac Arrest (Cardiopulmonary
Resuscitation)
/square6The most important thing which increases the
survival after cardiac arrest is immediate CPR. Thesooner it is initiated the better is the prognosis.
/square6The goals of CPR in cardiac arrest are (1) restoringa spontaneous circulation as quickly as possible;
and (2) maintaining continuous artificial circulatory
support until return of a spontaneous circulationhas been achieved.
/square6The keys to survival from sudden cardiac arrest areearly recognition, early CPR, early defibrillationand early transfer to hospital.
/square6CPR consists of 4 main parts:
1. Circulation (C)2. Airway (A)
3. Breathing (B)
4. Defibrillation (D)
/square6Note that as per new American Heart Association
guidelines, the sequence of CPR is CAB and notABC. The management strategy for cardiac arrest
can be divided into five steps:
1. Initial assessment and activation of emergency
medical services
2. Basic life support (BLS)
3. Early defibrillation by a first responder (if available)4. Advanced life support (ALS)5. Postresuscitation care.
Initial Assessment and Activation of
Emergency Medical Services
/square6Assess the victim for response. If no response, call for
help. If you are alone activate emergency servicesand get an automatic external defibrillator if available.
BLS
/square6Check for pulse. This is best done by feeling forcarotid pulse at the neck. You should take at least5 seconds and no more than 10 seconds to assesspulse.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System199
3/square6If there is no carotid pulse, chest compressions
should be started at a rate of 100/minute. Chestshould be compressed in the middle of chest at thelevel of nipple line.
/square6Open the victim’s airway and check for breathing.Airway can be opened by head tilt–chin liftmaneuver.
/square6If there is no breathing, give 2 breaths (either mouth
to mouth or by using a face mask). The breaths
should make the chest rise and fall.
/square6This cycle of 30 compressions and 2 breaths shouldbe continued until the return of spontaneous
circulation and breathing or till the patient is
declared dead. Breaths can be given by mouth tomouth breathing or by using bag and mask device.Patient can also be intubated using endotrachealtube for more effective ventilations.
Early Defibrillation by a First Responder
/square6Since the terminal event in most cases of cardiacarrest is ventricular fibrillation, defibrillation as earlyas possible is very important for successful resuscita-tion of the victim. For this purpose, automated external
defibrillators (AED) can be made use of in a setting
outside the hospital. Such AEDs are kept at publicplaces such as airports, railway stations, shoppingmalls, etc. AED can be used even by lay people.
Advanced Life Support (ALS)
/square6This involves use of various drugs during CPR suchas injection adrenaline (1 mg of 1:10,000 solution)and atropine (1 mg). These drugs are given intra-venously. Adrenaline can be repeated many times.Atropine can be given up to three times. Other
drugs which are useful in cardiac arrest are calcium
gluconate, sodium bicarbonate, magnesiumsulphate (2 gm IV for torsades-de-pointes), andamiodarone (for ventricular tachycardia). Bag maskventilation or endotracheal intubation is done formaintaining airway and breathing. Manual defibril-
lators are used inside the hospital for defibrillation
because the rescuer needs to have knowledge ofadvanced life support and ECG interpretation skills.
Post-resuscitation Care
/square6After revival, patient should be kept in recovery
position and monitored in ICU. The cause of cardiac
arrest should be established and treated.
Q.Cardioversion and defibrillation.
/square6Cardioversion is the delivery of electrical shock that
is synchronized to the R wave of QRS complex,while defibrillation is nonsynchronized delivery ofshock (delivered randomly during the cardiaccycle). The machine used for cardioversion and
defibrillation is called defibrillator./square6During defibrillation and cardioversion, electrical
current travels from the negative to the positiveelectrode by traversing myocardium. It causes allof the heart cells to contract simultaneously. Thisinterrupts and terminates abnormal electricalrhythm. This, in turn, allows the sinus node to
resume normal pacemaker activity.
/square6Old defibrillators delivered energy in a monophasic
waveform, meaning that electrons flowed in asingle direction. Latest defibrillators deliver a
biphasic waveform. Biphasic defibrillators success-
fully terminate arrhythmias at lower energies thanmonophasic defibrillators.
Indications
/square6Atrial fibrillation
/square6Atrial flutter
/square6Supraventricular tachycardia
/square6VT (ventricular tachycardia)
/square6VF (ventricular fibrillation).
Precautions
/square6Patient should be anesthetized or sedated beforeelective cardioversion. This does not apply to emer-gency situations.
/square6Patients with chronic atrial fibrillation should beanticoagulated for 6 weeks before elective cardio-version.
Method
/square6There are two electrodes in the defibrillator. One isapplied below the right clavicle. Another is appliedon the lower part of left axilla. Required amount of
energy is selected. After clearing everybody from
the patient, shock is delivered by pressing the shockbutton.
Complications
/square6ECG changes (ST segment and T wave changes).
/square6Precipitation of new arrhythmias.
/square6Embolization (pulmonary or systemic emboliza-tion). This complication is more likely to occur inpatients with AF who have not been anticoagulatedprior to cardioversion.
/square6Myocardial dysfunction and necrosis.
/square6Transient hypotension.
/square6Pulmonary edema.
/square6Skin burns.
Q.Define and enumerate the causes of left ventricular
hypertrophy (LVH) and LV dilatation.
/square6LVH is defined as an increase in the mass of the
left ventricle, due to increase in wall thickness.
/square6Left ventricular dilatation refers to increase in cavity
size.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3200 Causes of LVH
/square6Hypertension
/square6Aortic stenosis
/square6Coarctation of aorta
/square6Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy
Causes of Left Ventricular Dilatation
/square6Aortic regurgitation
/square6Mitral regurgitation
/square6VSD
/square6PDA
/square6Dilated cardiomyopathy
/square6Myocardial infarction
/square6Cardiac failure
/square6Hyperkinetic circulatory states (anemia, thyro-
toxicosis, beriberi, AV fistula).
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investiga-
tions, and management of acute rheumatic Fever.
Q.Aschoff nodule.
Q.Erythema marginatum.
Q.Rheumatic chorea (Sydenham’s chorea; St. Vitus
Dance).
Q.Jones criteria.
Q.Rheumatic fever prophylaxis.
Definition
/square6Rheumatic fever is an autoimmune inflammatory
process that develops as a sequela of group A beta-hemolytic streptococcus infection.
/square6Rheumatic fever involves the heart, joints, centralnervous system, skin, and subcutaneous tissueswith varying frequency. Involvement of the heart,though rarely fatal during the acute stage, may leadto rheumatic valvular disease, which can lead to
cardiac disability or death many years after the
initial event.
Etiology
/square6Rheumatic fever follows pharyngeal infection withgroup A beta hemolytic Streptococcus. It usuallyoccurs two to three weeks after the attack ofpharyngitis. However, at least one-third of patientsdeny previous sore throat, and cultures of the
pharynx are often negative for group A streptococci
at the onset of rheumatic fever. However, antibodyresponse against Streptococcus can be demons-trated in almost all the cases.
/square6Skin infections are not associated with rheumaticfever but they can cause post-streptococcal glomerulo-nephritis.
/square6The serotypes causing rheumatic fever (rheumato-
genic strains) are types 3, 5, 6, 14, 18, 19, and 24.Epidemiology
/square6Rheumatic fever is a major health problem in the
developing countries of Asia, Africa, the MiddleEast, and Latin America.
/square6The incidence of rheumatic fever has decreased nowbecause of the availability of antibiotics.
/square6Outbreaks of rheumatic fever closely followepidemics of streptococcal pharyngitis or scarletfever with associated pharyngitis. Patients whohave suffered an initial attack tend to experience
recurrences of the disease following group A
streptococcal infections. Adequate treatment ofstreptococcal pharyngitis markedly reduces theincidence of rheumatic fever. Recurrence is rarebeyond age 34.
/square6Acute rheumatic fever is most common among
children in the 5 to 15-year age group. There is no
clear-cut sex predilection, although there is a femalepreponderance in rheumatic mitral stenosis and inSydenham’s chorea.
Pathogenesis
/square6Molecular mimicry is thought to play an importantrole in tissue injury. There are shared epitopesbetween cardiac myosin and streptococcal M
protein that lead to cross-reactive humoral and
T cell immunity against group A streptococci andthe heart. Epitopes of streptococcal M protein alsoshare antigenic determinants with heart valves,sarcolemmal membrane proteins, synovium, andarticular cartilage. Circulating antibodies against
group A streptococcal cell membranes which cross
react with neurons of the caudate and subthalamicnuclei have been found in children with Sydenham’schorea.
/square6Host factors may also play a role. Associationsbetween disease and human leukocyte antigen(HLA) class II alleles have been identified. Certain
B cell alloantigens are expressed to a greater level
in patients with rheumatic fever.
/square6During active rheumatic carditis, there is T cell andmacrophage infiltration of heart valves, and theproduction of interleukin-1 and interleukin-2 isincreased. All these result in scarring and collagendeposition in the valves and destruction of
myocytes. There will be exudative and proliferative
inflammatory lesions in the connective tissue of theheart, joints, and subcutaneous tissue. All the threelayers of the heart are involved (pancarditis).
Pericardium
/square6Pericarditis is common and fibrinous pericarditisis occasionally present. Thick exudates gives breadand butter appearance macroscopically. Pericarditis
usually heals without any sequelae. Tamponade is
rare.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System201
3Myocardium
/square6In the myocardium, there is fragmentation of
collagen fibers, lymphocytic infiltration, fibrinoiddegeneration and the presence of Aschoff nodules,
which are considered pathognomonic of acute
rheumatic fever.
/square6The Aschoff nodule consists of an area of centralnecrosis surrounded by lymphocytes, plasma cells,
and large mononuclear and giant multinucleate
cells. Many of these cells have an elongated nucleuswith a clear area just within the nuclear membrane(“owl-eyed nucleus”).
/square6Aschoff nodules may also be found in endomyo-cardial biopsy specimens obtained from patientswith acute rheumatic carditis.
Endocardium
/square6Endocarditis is responsible for chronic rheumaticvalvulitis. Small vegetations, 1 to 2 mm in diameter,are seen on the atrial surface of valve margins andchordae tendineae. There is edema and inflamma-
tion of the valve leaflets.
/square6A thickened and fibrotic patch (MacCallum’s patch)
may be found in the posterior left atrial wall. It isbelieved to be due to mitral regurgitant jet imping-
ing on the left atrial wall.
/square6Healing of the valvulitis leads to fibrosis of the
leaflets and fusion of the chordae resulting invalvular stenosis or incompetence.
/square6The mitral valve is affected most commonly, follo-wed by the aortic valve. Tricuspid and pulmonicvalves are rarely affected.
Extracardiac Lesions
/square6Inflammation can affect the joints (rheumaticarthritis). Skin (subcutaneous nodules), lung
(rheumatic pneumonitis) and brain.
Clinical Features
General
/square6High fever, lassitude, prostration, tachycardia.
Fever is usually low grade and rarely lasts for morethan 3 to 4 weeks.
Sore Throat
/square6Only two-thirds of patients give history of preceding
sore throat.
Cardiac
/square6Carditis occurs in 40 to 50 percent of patients with
rheumatic fever. Carditis usually occurs within thefirst 3 weeks of the illness.
/square6Carditis is the only manifestation of acute rheumatic
fever that has the potential to cause long-term
disability and death. Cardiac failure can occur dueto severe mitral regurgitation or severe myocarditis/square6It involves all the three layers of the heart, i.eendocardium, myocardium and pericardium.
Endocarditis
/square6Valvulitis is associated with characteristic murmurs.
/square6Mitral regurgitation produces a pansystolic murmur
best heard at the apex and radiating to the axilla.
/square6Increased flow across the mitral valve in thepresence of valvulitis may produce a middiastolicmurmur (Carey Coombs murmur). Carey Coombsmurmur can be differentiated from the diastolic
murmur of mitral stenosis by the absence of an
opening snap, absence of presystolic accentuation,and absence of loud S1.
/square6Aortic regurgitation produces a high-pitched
decrescendo early diastolic murmur.
Myocarditis
/square6Inappropriate tachycardia.
/square6S3, S4, or summation gallops may be audible.
/square6Cardiomegaly.
/square6Acute congestive heart failure can develop leading
to hepatic congestion and right upper-quadrant painand tenderness. Congestive heart failure is usually
caused by left ventricular volume overload asso-
ciated with severe mitral or aortic regurgitation.
Pericarditis
/square6Pericardial friction rub.
/square6Muffled heart sounds due to pericardial effusion.
Large effusions leading to tamponade are rare.
Polyarthritis
/square6Arthritis is the most frequent major manifestation
of rheumatic fever (occurs in approximately 75%
of patients). Arthralgia is pain in the joints withoutsigns of inflammation.
/square6It is migratory polyarthritis (joints are involved in
quick succession, and each for a brief period of
time).
/square6Usually larger joints such as knees, ankles, elbows,and wrists are involved.
/square6Small joints and spine are involved rarely.
/square6Polyarthritis responds dramatically to salicylate
therapy.
/square6Inflammation of any one joint subsides sponta-
neously within a week and the entire bout of poly-athritis rarely lasts more than 4 weeks. Resolution
is complete with no residual deformity. However,
rarely Jaccoud deformity of the metacarpophalan-geal joints can occur after repeated attacks ofrheumatic fever. This is a periarticular fibrosis andnot a true synovitis.
Subcutaneous Nodules
/square6It occurs in less than 10% of patients. These areusually associated with carditis and isolatedoccurrence of nodules is rare.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3202 /square6They are round, firm, painless, freely movable
subcutaneous lesions varying in size from 0.5 to2 cm.
/square6Common sites of occurrence are over bony surfaces
and over tendons such as elbows, knees, and wrists,
the occiput and vertebrae.
/square6They last for 1 to 2 weeks and disappear sponta-neously.
/square6Similar nodules also occur in rheumatoid arthritisand SLE.
Erythema Marginatum
/square6It occurs in less than 10% of patients. This rash isusually found on the trunk and proximal parts ofthe extremities. Face is spared.
/square6It appears as erythematous macule or papule withclear centre. Lesions may merge and form serpigi-nous patterns.
/square6They are not pruritic, nonindurated and blanch onpressure.
/square6The rash is transient, migrating from place to place
without leaving residual scarring. Erythema
marginatum has also been reported in sepsis, drugreactions, and glomerulonephritis.
Chorea (Sydenham’s Chorea; St. Vitus Dance)
/square6It occurs in 15 percent of rheumatic fever cases. Itcan occur in isolation, several months after theattack of rheumatic fever.
/square6It is most common in the age group 7 to 14 yearsand is rare after puberty.
/square6It is characterized by rapid, purposeless, involun-
tary movements, most noticable in the extremities
and face. The speech is usually slurred and jerky./square6The involuntary movements disappear during sleep
and may be suppressed by sedation. Emotionallability is characteristic of Sydenham’s chorea andmay often precede other neurologic manifestations.
/square6Most patients recover in 6 months.
Other Clinical Features
/square6Abdominal pain in rheumatic fever is due toperitoneal inflammation and may be confused withacute appendicitis or sickle cell crisis.
/square6Epistaxis has been reported in some patients.
Jones Criteria for the Diagnosis of the Initial Attack of
Rheumatic Fever (Table 3.23)
/square6The diagnosis of initial ARF requires two major orone major and two minor Jones criteria, along withevidence of a preceding streptococcal infection.
Differential Diagnosis
Rheumatic fever may be confused with the following:
/square6Rheumatoid arthritis
/square6Osteomyelitis
/square6Infective endocarditis
/square6Chronic meningococcemia
/square6SLE
/square6Lyme disease
/square6Sickle cell anemia
Laboratory Findings
General Tests
/square6Mild to moderate normochromic normocytic anemia.
/square6Polymorphonuclear leukocytosis.
/square6Elevated CRP and ESR are usually present.
TABLE 3.23: 2015 Jones criteria for the diagnosis of ARF
Low-risk population Moderate/high risk population
ARF incidence ≤2 per 100,000 school-aged children or all-age Children not clearly from a low-risk population.
RHD prevalence of ≤1 per 1000 population year
Major criteria
Carditis (clinical and/or subclinical) Clinical and/or subclinicalPolyarthritis Monoarthritis, polyarthritis, and/or polyarthralgia
Chorea ChoreaErythema marginatum Erythema marginatumSubcutaneous nodules Subcutaneous nodules
Minor criteria
Prolonged PR interval Prolonged PR intervalPolyarthralgia MonoarthralgiaFever ≥38.5°C Fever ≥38°C
ESR ≥60mm in 1 hour and/or CRP ≥3.0 mg/dL (ESR of ≥30 in ESR ≥30mm in 1 hour and/or CRP ≥3.0 mg/dL
high risk population)
Evidence of preceding streptococcal infection (any one of the following)
Increased or rising anti-streptolysin O titer or other streptococcal antibodies (anti-DNASE B)A positive throat culture for group A B-hemolytic streptococciA positive rapid group A streptococcal carbohydrate antigen test in a child whose clinical presentation suggests a high pre-tes t
probability of streptococcal pharyngitis

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System203
3Evidence of Preceding Streptococcal Infection
/square6Throat cultures are usually negative for group A
streptococci by the time rheumatic fever appears.
/square6Streptococcal antibody tests (antistreptolysin O(ASO), anti-DNAse B, antihyaluronidase andantistreptozyme test). ASO titre is elevated in 80%or more of patients with rheumatic fever. ASO titersgreater than 200 Todd units/ml in adults and 320
Todd units in children are considered elevated.
Rising titers are more significant than a single test.Antistreptozyme test (ASTZ) which measures5 different streptococcal antibodies including ASOand anti-DNAse is a very sensitive test for recentstreptococcal infection.
ECG
/square6Persistent sinus tachycardia that does not resolve
during sleep is common in carditis. Prolongation
of the PR interval is a consistent finding.
/square6AV conduction abnormalities, atrial flutter andfibrillation can occur due to carditis.
/square6Low QRS voltage may be noted if a large pericardialeffusion is present.
Echocardiogram
/square6Rheumatic mitral valvulitis associated with annulardilation and elongation of the chordae to theanterior leaflet, resulting in mitral regurgitation.
/square6Valvular thickening and the presence of nodularlesions on the body and tips of the mitral leaflethave been described.
/square6Heart failure.
Endomyocardial Biopsy
/square6It has limited role in the diagnosis of rheumaticfever. Presence of Aschoff nodules, interstitialmononuclear infiltrates with or without myocytenecrosis is seen in biopsy specimens. Biopsy can bedone by percutaneous transvenous route.
Treatment
Management of Acute Episode of Rheumatic Fever
/square6The patient should be kept at strict bed rest untilthe fever subsides and ESR, pulse rate, ECG haveall returned to baseline.
/square6Antibiotics:  Although evidence of active infection
is unusual during the acute phase, it is recommen-ded that patients receive a single dose of benzathinepenicillin or a 10-day course of penicillin-V (orerythromycin if penicillin allergic) to curtail expo-
sure to streptococcal antigens. After completion of
the course, secondary prophylaxis should becommenced.
/square6Anti-inflammatory drugs: They provide symptomatic
relief of fever, and joint pain. They are not curative
and do not prevent the development of rheumaticheart disease. Aspirin is very effective for fever and
joint inflammation. Corticosteroids are used inpatients with carditis manifest by heart failure andin patients who do not tolerate aspirin. Prednisone40 to 60 mg per day is given for 2 to 3 weeks andthen gradually tapered over the next 3 weeks. There
is limited experience with other NSAIDs.
/square6Cardiac failure is managed by diuretics, ACE
inhibitors, and beta blockers. Digoxin should beused cautiously in the presence of myocarditis.
Mitral valve repair or replacement may be life-
saving in acute intractable heart failure.
Prevention of Rheumatic Fever
/square6Primary prevention:  Primary prevention refers to
antibiotic treatment of group A streptococcalpharyngitis to prevent the first attack of acuterheumatic fever. All attacks of streptococcalpharyngitis should be treated adequately with
antibiotics using penicllins or erythromycin. An
outbreak of rheumatic fever in a closed populationshould be controlled by mass pencillin prophylaxis.
/square6Secondary prevention (rheumatic fever prophylaxis):
Patients who have already suffered an attack of
rheumatic fever are at risk of developing recurrentattacks of rheumatic fever. Recurrent attacks leadto progressive cardiac damage. Hence, rheumaticfever patients should be protected from subsequentstreptococcal infections by giving continuous
antimicrobial prophylaxis. The risk of recurrence
decreases as the age advances.
Drugs used for prophylaxis
Benzathine penicillin G 1.2 million units deep IM (buttocks)
every month. However, injections every three weeks may be more
effective in preventing recurrences of acute rheumatic fever.
OR
Penicillin V 250 mg twice daily oral (for patients who cannot
be given IM injection such as patients on anti-coagulation).
OR
Erythromycin 250 mg twice daily oral for patients who are
allergic to penicillin.
The WHO recommendations for the duration of secon-
dary prophylaxis are given in Table 3.24.
TABLE 3.24: Rheumatic fever prophylaxis
Type Duration of prophylaxis after last attack
Rheumatic fever with 10 years or until age 40 years (whichever
carditis and residual is longer); lifetime prophylaxis may beheart disease (persis- needed
tent valvular disease
Rheumatic fever with 10 years or until age 21 years (whichever
carditis but no residual is longer)
heart disease (no
valvular disease
Rheumatic fever 5 years or until age 21 years (whichever
without carditis is longer)

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3204 Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investiga-
tions, complications, and management of mitral
stenosis.
/square6In normal adults, the cross-sectional area of themitral valve orifice is 4 to 6 cm
2. If the orifice is
reduced to less than this, it is called mitral stenosis.
/square6Usually patients will not experience any symptoms
until the valve area is reduced to less than 2.5 cm2.
Mitral stenosis is considered mild when valve areais 2.5 to 1.5 cm
2, moderate when 1.5 to 1 cm2, and
severe or critical when less than 1.0 cm2.
Etiology
/square6Rheumatic heart disease is the most common causeof MS, but only 50% patients remember the attackof rheumatic fever. MS is the most common valve
lesion due to rheumatic fever. Rheumatic mitral
stenosis is more common in women.becomes symptomatic as the severity of mitral
stenosis increases. The latent period between theinitial attack of rheumatic carditis and the develop-ment of symptoms due to MS is generally about20 years. Once the patient becomes seriouslysymptomatic, death occurs in 2 to 5 years unless
the stenosis is corrected.
/square6Patients complain of dyspnea due to pulmonary
venous congestion and development of pulmonaryhypertension. Dyspnea is exertional initially, but
as the severity of MS increases, it may be present at
rest also.
/square6Orthopnea and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea canoccur because of increased venous return in supine
position and consequent congestion of pulmonary
vasculature.
/square6Recurrent lower respiratory infections are common.A cough productive of blood-tinged, frothy sputum
is common.
/square6When RV failure occurs, ascites and edema develop.
/square6Dilated left atrium may lead to atrial fibrillation,
giving rise to symptoms such as palpitations. Atrialfibrillation may result in left atrial clot formationand systemic emboli , most commonly to the
cerebral vessels resulting in stroke.
Physical Examination
/square6Patients may have a typical look called “mitralfacies” or malar flush. This is a bilateral, cyanoticor dusky pink discoloration over the cheeks due to
arteriovenous anastomoses and vascular stasis.
/square6Pulse is low volume and may be irregularly
irregular due to atrial fibrillation.
/square6When right heart failure develops, there may bejugular venous distension, ascites, and pedaledema. Prominent a wave may be noted in JVP
due to pulmonary HTN provided there is no atrialfibrillation.
/square6Cardiac apex is tapping in nature due to palpablefirst heart sound.
/square6Parasternal heave may be present due to rightventricular hypertrophy.
/square6Loud first heart sound and opening snap may beheard on auscultation. P2 component of S2 may be
loud due to pulmonary HTN. A low-pitched mid-
diastolic ‘rumbling’ murmur is heard with the bellof the stethoscope over the apex with the patientlying on the left side. Murmur becomes louder atthe end of diastole as a result of atrial contraction(presystolic accentuation). Presystolic accentuation
is absent in atrial fibrillation due to loss of atrial
contraction.
/square6An opening snap may precede the mid-diastolicmurmur. The gap between S2 and the opening snap
provides an estimation of the severity of the mitral
stenosis. More severe MS causes higher left atrialpressure. Higher left atrial pressure makes theTABLE 3.25: Etiology of mitral stenosis
• Rheumatic heart disease
• Congenital mitral stenosis• Carcinoid tumors• Amyloidosis• Systemic lupus erythematosus• Rheumatoid arthritis• Mucopolysaccharidoses (Hurler syndrome)• Gout• Fabry disease• Whipple disease
Pathophysiology
/square6When there is mitral stenosis, blood from left atrium
cannot flow easily into left ventricle. Hence, bloodcollects in the left atrium and pressure increases in
the left atrium. Because of increased pressure, left
atrial hypertrophy and dilatation occur.
/square6Due to increased left atrial pressure, pulmonaryvenous, pulmonary arterial and right heart
pressures also increase. Increase in pulmonary
vascular pressure leads to pulmonary edema andpulmonary hypertension.
/square6Pulmonary hypertension leads to right ventricular
hypertrophy, dilatation and failure. Right ventri-
cular dilatation results in tricuspid regurgitation.
/square6An increase in heart rate shortens diastole andhence the time available for ventricular filling. In
the presence of MS (in which already there is
problem with ventricular filling due to stenosis),any increase in heart rate reduces ventricular fillingand raises left atrial pressure.
Clinical Features
History
/square6Patients are usually asymptomatic until the valveorifice is moderately stenosed. Patient gradually

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System205
3mitral valve open earlier (i.e. immediately after S2).
Hence, mitral valve opening snap becomes closer
to S2. More severe the MS, lesser the gap between
S2 and opening snap. Other findings which indicatethe severity of MS are presence of pulmonary
hypertension (implies severe mitral stenosis),
and length of the mid-diastolic murmur which isproportional to the severity of MS. When the valve
cusps become immobile, the loud first heart sound
softens and the opening snap disappears.
/square6Pulmonary hypertension can cause pulmonaryvalvular regurgitation resulting in an early diastolic
murmur in the pulmonary area known as Graham
Steel murmur.
/square6Other findings include, tender hepatomegaly,pleural effusions due to right heart failure.
Complications of Mitral Stenosis
/square6Atrial fibrillation with clot formation and systemic
embolization.
/square6Pulmonary hypertension and right heart failure.
/square6Recurrent chest infections.
/square6Hemoptysis.
/square6Dysphagia due to esophageal compression by the
enlarged left atrium.
/square6Infective endocarditis (rare).
Investigations
Chest X-ray
/square6Chest X-ray shows left atrial enlargement, whichproduces straightening of the left heart border and
a double density at the right heart border due to
combined shadows of the right atrium and left
atrium. Increased pulmonary vascularity is seen
due to pulmonary venous hypertension. Kerley B
lines, which represent distended interlobular septaand lymphatics, may be seen due to pulmonary
venous engorgement. Calcified mitral valve may
be visible in advanced MS.
Electrocardiogram
/square6ECG usually shows a bifid P wave due to left atrial
enlargement and consequent delayed activation.
Atrial fibrillation is frequently present. If pulmo-nary hypertension has developed, there may be
features of right ventricular hypertrophy (right axis
deviation and tall R waves in lead V1).
Echocardiogram
/square6This is the most important tool to diagnose and
confirm MS. It can assess the mitral valve apparatus,
calculate mitral valve area, left atrial and right ventri-cular size and function. Estimation of pulmonary
artery pressure can be made through measurement
of the degree of tricuspid regurgitation. In mostcases, echocardiography is enough to judge the
severity of mitral stenosis and to make decisions
regarding surgery.Cardiac Catheterization
/square6This is required only if coexisting coronary arterydisease is suspected or cardiac surgery is anticipated.If there is coronary artery disease, both CABG and
mitral valve replacement can be done in the same
sitting.
Treatment
Medical Therapy
/square6Mild mitral stenosis in sinus rhythm does notrequire any treatment.
/square6If the patient develops atrial fibrillation, it shouldbe treated with oral digoxin, a beta-blocker, or acalcium channel blocker (verapamil, diltiazem) tocontrol heart rate.
/square6Anticoagulation with warfarin should be done(target INR of 2.5 to 3.5) to prevent clot formation
if there is atrial fibrillation.
/square6Although infective endocarditis in pure mitral
stenosis is rare, antibiotic prophylaxis is advisedbefore any invasive procedures.
/square6Early symptoms of mitral stenosis such as milddyspnea and orthopnea can usually be treated with
diuretics. When symptoms worsen to more than
mild or if pulmonary hypertension develops,mechanical correction of the stenosis is necessary.
Mechanical Correction of the Stenosis
/square6This is done by mitral valvotomy. Mitral valvotomycan be done by by two techniques: Percutaneousballoon mitral valvotomy and surgical valvotomy.
Balloon mitral valvotomy (BMV)
/square6A catheter is passed into the right atrium via the
femoral vein. The interatrial septum is then punc-tured and the catheter is advanced into the leftatrium and then across the mitral valve. A balloonis then passed over the catheter into the mitral valveand inflated briefly to split the fused valve
commissures. This procedure is performed under
local anesthesia in the cardiac catheter laboratory.This procedure may result in mitral regurgitationwhich may require mitral valve replacement.
/square6Contraindications to the procedure include morethan mild mitral regurgitation, calcified mitral valve(valve cannot be opened), and involvement of sub-valvular apparatus. The presence of thrombus inthe left atrium is also a contraindication to balloon
valvotomy because it can be dislodged leading to
systemic emboli. Hence, presence of clot should beruled out by transesophageal echocardiographyprior to this technique. The short- and long-termresults of this procedure are similar to surgicalvalvotomy, with less morbidity and mortality rate.
Hence, this has become the procedure of choice for
suitable patients.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3206 Surgical valvotomy
/square6This procedure is done for patients in whom percuta-
neous valvotomy is not possible, unsuccessful, orin those with restenosis. Here, the cusps are care-
fully dissected apart under direct vision. Cardio-
pulmonary bypass is required for this procedure.
Mitral Valve Replacement
/square6Replacement of the mitral valve is necessary when:
– Significant mitral regurgitation is present.
– Mitral valve is badly damaged and calcified,
hence cannot be opened without producingsignificant regurgitation.
– There is thrombus in the left atrium.
/square6Either mechanical prosthetic valves or bioprosthetic
valves can be used to replace the mitral valve.
/square6Mechanical prosthetic valves include caged-ballvalve (Starr-Edwards prosthesis) and tilting discvalve (Björk-Shiley valve). Mechanical prostheticvalves require lifelong anticoagulation.
/square6Bioprosthetic valves include porcine bioprostheticvalve and pericardial xenograft prosthetic valve.Bioprosthetic valves do not last long and hence arenot used for patients below 35 years. Bioprostheticvalves do not require anticoagulation and hence are
especially useful in pregnancy when oral anticoagu-
lants are contraindicated.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of mitral regurgitation.
/square6Mitral regurgitation (MR) is defined as an abnormal
reversal of blood flow from the left ventricle (LV)to the left atrium (LA).
Etiology
/square6Rheumatic heart disease (most common cause).
/square6Mitral valve prolapse.
/square6Ischemic heart disease (due to papillary muscle
dysfunction or rupture of chordae tendinea).
/square6Infective endocarditis—mitral regurgitation mayresult from destruction of the mitral valve leaflets.
/square6Myocarditis (due to dilatation of left ventricle).
/square6Dilated cardiomyopathy (due to dilatation of left
ventricle).
/square6Aortic valve disease (due to dilatation of leftventricle).
/square6Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy—left ventricularcontraction is disorganized and mitral regurgitationoften develops.
/square6Connective tissue disorders—systemic lupuserythematosus (SLE) may cause mitral regurgita-tion due to Libman-Sacks endocarditis.
/square6Marfan’s syndrome and Ehlers-Danlos syndromecause mitral regurgitation due to myxomatousdegeneration of the valve./square6Trauma (after balloon mitral valvotomy and bluntchest trauma).
/square6Congenital (endocardial cushion defects, endo-cardial fibroelastosis).
/square6Cardiac surgery.
/square6Chest trauma.
/square6Drugs, e.g. fenfluramine.
Out of these causes, ruptured chordae tendinea,
ischemic papillary muscle dysfunction or rupture,infective endocarditis, cardiac surgery and chest
trauma cause acute severe mitral regurgitation
Pathophysiology
/square6Regurgitation of blood into the left atrium increases
the left atrial pressure and leads to left atrialdilatation. In long-standing mitral regurgitation,increase in left atrial pressure may not be presentdue to atrial dilatation which accommodates theregurgitant blood. However, in acute regurgitation
there can be significant increase in left atrial
pressure leading to pulmonary venous congestion,pulmonary edema and pulmonary HTN.
/square6Pulmonary HTN leads to right ventricular hyper-trophy and right heart failure.
/square6Regurgitated blood as well as blood coming frompulmonary veins both enter the left ventricle indiastole leading to volume overload. Volume over-load of left ventricle leads to left ventricular hyper-trophy, dilatation and failure.
Clinical Features
History
/square6Mild mitral regurgitation can remain silent formany years.
/square6Patients may complain of palpitations due toincreased stroke volume
/square6Dyspnoea, orthopnoea and PND can occur due to
pulmonary venous congestion, pulmonary edema
and left ventricular failure.
/square6Fatigue and lethargy develop due to reducedcardiac output as the blood regurgitates back into
left atrium during systole.
/square6Patients complain of peripheral edema in the late
stages of the disease due to right heart failure.
/square6Clot formation in the dilated left atrium leading tosystemic emboli can occur but less common thanin mitral stenosis.
/square6Patients may present with fever due to Infectiveendocarditis.
Physical Examination
/square6Pulse may be irregularly irregular if there is atrialfibrillation.
/square6Cardiac apex is displaced laterally and outward dueto dilated and hypertrophied left ventricle.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System207
3/square6Palpation may reveal a hyperdynamic, diffuse apex
beat and a systolic thrill. Parasternal heave may bepresent due to right ventricular hypertrophy.
/square6Auscultation reveals soft S1 due to incomplete
opposition of the mitral valve, pansystolic murmur
(PSM) due to regurgitation of blood throughout thesystole. PSM is loudest at the apex and may radiateto other areas and axilla. S-3
 may be heard due to
rapid filling of the left ventricle in diastole by thelarge volume of blood coming from left atrium.
Sometimes, a short mid-diastolic flow murmur may
follow the third heart sound due to increased flowacross the mitral valve. Loud P2 may be presentdue to pulmonary HTN. Bilateral basal lung crepita-tions may be present due to pulmonary venouscongestion.
/square6Signs of right heart failure such as raised JVP, andperipheral edema, congestive hepatomegaly maybe present.
Investigations
Chest X-ray
/square6Chest X-ray may show cardiomegaly due to leftatrial and left ventricular enlargement. Prominentpulmonary artery and vasculature may be seen dueto pulmonary HTN.
Electrocardiogram
/square6The ECG usually shows LV hypertrophy and leftatrial enlargement. Atrial fibrillation may be present.
Echocardiogram
/square6This is the investigation of choice to confirm and
assess the extent of mitral regurgitation. It shows
the dilated left atrium and left ventricle. Color flowDoppler can determine the severity of regurgitation.Echo can also show the cause of regurgitation (likechordal or papillary muscle rupture) and also thecomplications of mitral regurgitation (like left atrial
clot formation, infective endocarditis and pulmonary
HTN). Transesophageal echocardiography canmore exactly assess the anatomy and abnormalitiesof mitral valve which is useful before surgery.
Cardiac Catheterization
/square6This is helpful to accurately assess the severity ofthe lesion and to assess coronary arteries in patientsabove 40 years of age.
Complications
/square6Atrial fibrillation
/square6Systemic embolism
/square6Infective endocarditis
/square6Left ventricular failure
/square6Pulmonary HTN
/square6Right ventricular failureTreatment
Medical Therapy
/square6Mild mitral regurgitation without any symptomscan be managed conservatively by following thepatient with serial echocardiograms.
/square6Infective endocarditis prophylaxis if indicated.
/square6ACE inhibitors reduce LV volume and afterloadand hence decrease mitral regurgitation.
/square6Diuretics, beta-blockers and dogoxin are helpful totreat heart failure.
/square6When atrial fibrillation develops, long-term anti-coagulation is required to prevent clot formation.
Surgical Therapy
/square6Mitral valve repair or replacement is indicated ifthere is evidence of progressive cardiac enlarge-ment. Most patients with the symptoms of dyspnea,orthopnea, or fatigue should undergo surgery.
/square6Acute mitral regurgitation, as seen with chordal orpapillary muscle rupture or infective endocarditis,requires emergency mitral valve replacement.
/square6Percutaneous mitral valve repair can be tried inselected patients.
Q.Mitral valve prolapse (MVP).
/square6MVP is also known as systolic click-murmur
syndrome, Barlow’s syndrome, floppy-valve
syndrome, and billowing mitral leaflet syndrome.Here mitral valve leaflets prolapse into the leftatrium during systole.
Etiology
TABLE 3.26: Etiology of MVP
• Excessively large mitral valve leaflets
• Enlarged mitral annulus
• Abnormally long chordae
• Papillary muscle dysfunction• Myxomatous degeneration of the mitral valve leaflets
• Connective tissue diseases: Marfan’s syndrome, Ehler-Danlos
syndrome, osteogenesis imperfecta
• Rheumatic heart disease
• Ischemic heart disease• Cardiomyopathies
• Thyrotoxicosis
• Idiopathic
Pathophysiology
/square6During ventricular systole, a mitral valve leaflet
(most commonly the posterior leaflet) prolapsesinto the left atrium. This may result in abnormalventricular contraction, papillary muscle strain and
some mitral regurgitation. Usually the syndrome
is not hemodynamically serious. Thromboembo-lism can occur rarely.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3208 Clinical Features
History
/square6Most patients with MVP are asymptomatic.
/square6Some patients complain of chest pain, palpitation,
light-headedness and syncope.
/square6Chest pain  is the most common symptom and is
usually felt in substernal area with stabbing quality.Exact cause of chest pain is not known but maybe due to papillary muscle ischemia because ofexcessive tension on the papillary muscles during
systole.
/square6Palpitation and syncope may be due to autonomic
dysfunction which is common in MVP.
/square6Transient ischemic attacks may occur due to plateletaggregation and emboli formation.
/square6Sudden cardiac death due to fatal ventricular
arrhythmias  is a very rare but recognized complica-
tion.
Physical Examination
/square6The most common sign is a mid or late systolic click,which occurs due to sudden prolapse of the valveand the tensing of the chordae tendineae duringsystole. This click may be followed by a late systolicmurmur owing to some regurgitation. With more
regurgitation, the murmur becomes pansystolic.
Maneuvers that make the left ventricle smaller, suchas the Valsalva maneuver, or standing position dueto decreased venous return, make the click andmurmur more prominent. This happens because ofincreased prolapse of mitral valve leaflets into the
left atrium when the ventricular volume is less.
Conversely, squatting and isometric exercise, whichincrease LV volume, diminish the click and murmur.
Investigations
ECG
/square6It is usually normal but sometimes nonspecific ST-
T changes in leads II, III and aVF may be seen.
Echocardiogram
/square6This is the investigation of choice to confirm MVP.
Two-dimensional echocardiography shows poste-rior movement of one or both mitral valve cuspsinto the left atrium during systole. Echo can alsoshow if there is any associated mitral regurgitation.
Treatment
/square6Most patients with MVP have a benign clinicalcourse. No treatment is required for asymptomatic
patients.
/square6However, some may progress to have mitral
regurgitation and infective endocarditis. Patientswith significant mitral regurgitation require
standard infective endocarditis prophylaxis before
invasive procedures./square6Palpitations and chest pain can be controlled bybeta-blockers like propranolol.
/square6Antiplatelet agents such as aspirin should be givento patients with transient ischemic attacks.
Q.Classify aortic stenosis (AS). Describe the etiology,
clinical features, investigations, and managementof valvular aortic stenosis.
Q.Clinical assessment of severity of aortic stenosis.
/square6Aortic stenosis is the obstruction of blood flow
across the aortic valve.
/square6The normal aortic valve area is 3 to 4 cm2. When
the area is less than this, it is called aortic stenosis.In severe aortic stenosis, valve area is less than1 cm
2.
/square6AS can be valvular, subvalvular or supravalvular.
Etiology
TABLE 3.27: Etiology of aortic stenosis
Valvular
• Congenital bicuspid valve with superimposed calcification
• Age-related degenerative calcific AS  (aortic sclerosis)
• Rheumatic heart disease
Subvalvular
• Membranous diaphragm
• Tunnel deformity• Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy
Supravalvular
• Williams syndrome• Familial hypercholesterolemia
• Hourglass constriction of aorta
• Hypoplasia of aorta
/square6Congenital aortic valve stenosis:  Congenitally
abnormal (usually bicuspid) aortic valve can
undergo progressive narrowing due to turbulentblood flow. Such congenitally abnormal aorticvalves are common in men.
/square6Rheumatic fever:  Rheumatic endocarditis produces
commissural fusion, thickening and calcification ofaortic valve leading to narrowing. Rheumatic ASis almost always associated with involvement ofthe mitral valve and by associated severe AR.
/square6Age-related degenerative calcific AS (also known assenile AS or aortic sclerosis):  About 30% of persons
>65 years exhibit aortic valve sclerosis. An ejectionsystolic murmur may be heard but true stenosis israre. Valve changes are due to inflammatory
reaction similar to atherosclerosis.
/square6Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy:  This condition is
associated with massive hypertrophy of the inter-ventricular septum which blocks the ventricular
outflow during systole. It causes subaortic obstruc-
tion.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System209
3Pathophysiology
/square6Obstruction to left ventricular outflow leads to
increased left ventricular pressure and compensa-tory concentric hypertrophy. The hypertrophied LV
muscle mass elevates myocardial oxygen require-
ments. In addition, coronary vessels may be com-pressed by increased intraventricular pressureleading to decreased blood flow. Both these factorslead to ischemia of myocardium which increaseson exertion.
/square6Since there is obstruction to LV outflow, cardiacoutput cannot increase on exertion, which leads toexertional syncope, chest pain and dyspnea.Syncope and light-headedness is due to decreased
cerebral perfusion.
/square6BP may also drop during exertion due to peripheral
vasodilation.
/square6Ultimately, left ventricle may dilate and fail.
Clinical Features
History
/square6Patient is usually asymptomatic until aortic stenosisis moderately severe (aortic orifice is one-third of
its normal size).
/square6When the AS is moderate to severe, exercise-
induced syncope, angina and dyspnea  develop.
Orthopnea and PND may be present if there is heart
failure. When these symptoms develop, prognosis
is poor and death usually occurs within 2 to 3 yearsunless surgical intervention is done.
Physical Examination
/square6Pulse is of low volume and slow-rising in nature.
/square6The apex beat is usually not displaced unless thereis LV failure and dilatation. Apex is diffuse and wellsustained.
/square6A systolic thrill may be felt in the aortic area due toturbulent blood flow through narrowed aorticvalve.
/square6Auscultation shows a classic ejection systolicmurmur which is usually ‘diamond shaped’(crescendo-decrescendo). More severe the AS, the
longer the murmur because longer ejection time is
needed. The murmur is rough in quality, best heardin the aortic area with patient leaning forward andbreath held in expiration. It radiates to carotidarteries especially to the left carotid. The murmurpeaks in the mid or late systole because the flow
is maximum during the middle of systole. The
intensity of the murmur and the severity of ASdo not have any correlation because in severecases, the murmur may be inaudible due to reducedflow. Sometimes, the murmur may not be heard inaortic area and heard only over the LV apex,
mimicking mitral regurgitation (Gallivardan’s
phenomenon)./square6A systolic ejection click may be heard before themumur. Presence of an ejection click suggests aorticvalve involvement and excludes supravalvular orsubvalvular causes of stenosis.
/square6Aortic component of second heart sound (A2) isdelayed, resulting in narrow splitting of second heartsound in mild to moderate AS. Reversed splitting ofthe second heart sound may be seen in severe AS.
/square6When the aortic valve becomes immobile due tosevere stenosis or calcification, aortic second heartsound becomes soft or inaudible.
/square6Left ventricular S3 may be heard in left heart failure.
An S-4 gallop is common due to stiff left ventricle.
Clinical Assessment of Severity of Aortic Stenosis
/square6Severe aortic stenosis is suggested by one or more
of the following findings.
– Low systolic BP
– Heaving apex
– Soft A2 or single second heart sound
– Paradoxical splitting of S2
– Harsh, loud, long ESM with late peaking
– Orthopnea, PND and S3
Investigations
Chest X-ray
/square6initial stages of AS, chest X-ray shows a normal
sized heart. But in later stages, when there is dilata-
tion of heart due to failure, there is cardiomegaly.Ascending aorta shows dilatation because turbulentblood flow above the stenosed aortic valve producesso-called ‘poststenotic dilatation’. Sometimes, aorticvalve calcification may be visible on X-ray.
ECG
/square6ECG shows left ventricular hypertrophy. Inadvanced cases, left ventricular ‘strain’ pattern dueto ‘pressure overload’ (depressed ST segments andT wave inversion in leads orientated towards theleft ventricle (i.e. leads I, AVL, V5 and V6) is seen.
Echocardiogram
/square6Echo shows LV hypertrophy and thickened, calci-fied, immobile aortic valve cusps. Transesophagealecho shows the obstructed aortic orifice very well.Echo can also show other valvular abnormalitiessuch as MS and AR, which may accompany AS,
and to identify non-valvular causes of LV outflow
obstruction such as obstructive hypertrophiccardiomyopathy.
Cardiac Catheterization
/square6Catheterization of the left side of the heart andcoronary angiography should be done in patients with
severe AS who are being considered for surgery.
Aortic valve replacement and CABG can be carriedout at the same time, if there is coronary artery disease.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3210 Natural Course of AS
/square6AS is a progressive disease, with 0.1 cm2/year
reduction in the valve area. Symptomatic patientsusually die within 4 years after the onset of
symptoms.
/square6Death usually occurs due to congestive heart failure
or arrhythmias.
Treatment
Medical Treatment
/square6Patients with severe AS should avoid strenuousphysical activity.
/square6Nitrates can be used for angina.
/square6Sodium restriction, diuretics and digoxin can beused to treat congestive heart failure.
/square6HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins) have beenshown to slow the progression of leaflet calcifica-tion and aortic valve area reduction. Hence,treatment with these agents should be consideredfor all patients.
/square6Infective endocarditis prophylaxis.
Balloon Aortic Valvotomy
/square6This procedure can be used in children and youngadults with congenital, noncalcific AS. It is notrecommended for adults because of high restenosisrate, except as a “bridge to operation” in patientswith severe LV dysfunction who are too ill to
tolerate surgery.
Surgical Treatment
/square6Patients with severe calcific AS (valve area <1.0 cm2)
who are symptomatic, those with LV dysfunction,and those with an expanding poststenotic aorticdilatation require aortic valve replacement. Asympto-matic patients should be followed up regularly fordevelopment of symptoms and echocardiography
should be done to assess the progression of AS.
Q.Aortic sclerosis (age-related degenerative calcific
aortic sclerosis or senile aortic sclerosis).
/square6Aortic sclerosis refers to aortic valve thickening
(sclerosis) which can progress to aortic stenosis.
/square6It is common in elderly.
/square6Pathologically it is characterized by lipid accumula-tion and calcification of the valve.
/square6It is usually asymptomatic. Physical examinationmay show an ejection systolic murmur, best heardover the aortic area. In general, the murmur is briefand not very loud. Carotid pulse and S2 are normalindicating the absence of aortic stenosis.
/square6Echocardiography shows leaflet thickening, stiff-ness, and/or increased echogenicity (calcification)of the aortic valve. Leaflet excursion is normal as
the commissures are not fused./square6Clinical significance:  Aortic sclerosis can progress to
aortic stenosis. It is a marker for increased cardio-vascular risk probably due to increased rate ofatherosclerosis.
/square6Management:  HMG Co-A reductase inhibitors and
ACE inhibitors may slow the progression ofcalcification and prevent future aortic stenosis.There is no need for endocarditis prophylaxis.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of aortic regurgitation (AR).
Q.Peripheral signs of aortic regurgitation (AR).
/square6Aortic regurgitation can be either due to problem
in the valve itself or problems in the aortic root. Itcan be acute or chronic. Rheumatic fever and infec-tive endocarditis are the commonest causes of AR.
Etiology of AR
/square6Out of these, acute aortic regurgitation is causedby acute rheumatic fever, infective endocarditis,
aortic dissection, ruptured sinus of Valsalva, and
failure of prosthetic heart valve (Table 3.28).
TABLE 3.28: Etiology of AR
Aortic valve problems Aortic root problems
• Bicuspid aortic valve • Marfan syndrome
• Infective endocarditis • Severe hypertension• Rheumatic heart disease • Aortic dissection• Anorexigenic drugs • Syphilis
(fenfluramine) • Ankylosing spondylitis
• Ruptured sinus of Valsalva • Psoriatic arthritis
aneurysm • Idiopathic dilatation of
• Failure of prosthetic heart valve the aorta• Trauma • Osteogenesis imperfecta
• Aneurysm of aorta• Takayasu disease
Pathophysiology
/square6In AR, some of the blood pumped into the aorta by
the left ventricle comes back into the left ventriclethrough the aortic valve during diastole. This is alsojoined by the blood coming from left atrium whichleads to volume overload of left ventricle (increase
in end diastolic volume). There is increase in stroke
volume of left ventricle due to this volume over-load.
/square6Increase in stroke volume causes all the peripheralsigns of aortic regurgitation. Chronic volume over-load causes eccentric hypertrophy and dilatationof left ventricle, which may ultimately fail.
/square6Increased stroke volume leads to increase in systolicBP and high volume pulses. Since the blood ejectedinto the aorta regurgitates back into left ventricle,
there is drop in diastolic BP. Rise in systolic BP
and fall in diastolic BP leads to increased pulsepressure

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System211
3/square6An early diastolic murmur is produced due to blood
regurgitating back into left ventricle.
/square6In advanced cases of AR, there may be increase inleft atrial and pulmonary venous pressures leadingto right heart failure.
/square6Myocardial ischemia may occur in patients with ARbecause myocardial oxygen requirement is elevatedby both LV hypertrophy and systolic HTN.
/square6Acute AR may lead to left ventricular failure
because left ventricle is not prepared to handle this
sudden volume overload.
Clinical Features
Symptoms
/square6In early stages, patients may remain asymptomatic.
/square6Patients may care of palpitations and head pound-
ing due to increased stroke volume.
/square6When left ventricular dysfunction appears, symptoms
such as exertional dyspnea, orthopnea, PND andfatigue appear. Thickened left ventricular wall alsoleads to diastolic dysfunction which can also cause
above symptoms even if systolic function is normal.
/square6Anginal chest pain may occur in patients with
severe AR due to increased myocardial oxygendemand but less common than in aortic stenosis.
Signs
/square6Aortic regurgitation produces a myriad of signs dueto increased stroke volume and hyperdynamiccirculation.
/square6The pulse is bounding or collapsing. Systolic BP istypically high and diastolic BP low leading to widepulse pressure. Systolic pressure in the upper limbis at least 40 mm Hg or more than the lower limb(Hill’s sign).
/square6The following peripheral signs may be present inaortic regurgitation.
/square6All the above peripheral signs may be absent inacute aortic regurgitation.
/square6All these peripheral signs are not specific for AR,since they can be seen in any condition associatedwith a marked increase in stroke volume and ahyperdynamic circulation. Examples are sym-pathetic hyperactivity, anemia, fever, pregnancy,thyrotoxicosis, large arteriovenous fistula, patent
ductus arteriosus, and severe bradycardia.
/square6The apex beat is displaced laterally and downwards
and is forceful in quality.
/square6On auscultation, S1 and S2 are usually normal. S2 is
followed by an early diastolic high pitch blowing
murmur heard best along the left sternal borderwith the patient sitting and leaning forward.
/square6The regurgitant jet can impinge on the anteriormitral valve leaflet making it vibrate and cause a
middiastolic murmur (Austin Flint murmur).
Austin Flint murmur can be mistaken for mid-diastolic murmur of mitral stenosis. However, MSTABLE 3.29: Peripheral signs of aortic regurgitation
Sign Description
• Corrigan’s neck sign Prominent carotid pulsations in the
or dancing carotids neck
• Quincke’s sign Systolic plethora and diastolic blanch-
ing in the nail bed when gentle
pressure is applied on the nail
• De Musset’s sign Head nodding with each heartbeat
• Duroziez’s sign Combined systolic and diastolic
bruits created by compression of the
femoral artery with the stethoscope.
It is seen in severe AR
• Traube’s sign (pistol A sharp bang heard on auscultation
shot femorals) over the femoral arteries in time with
each heartbeat
• Hill’s sign Systolic pressure in the upper limb is
at least 40 mm Hg or more than the
lower limb.
• Collapsing pulse This is characterized by rapid up-
(water hammer pulse) stroke, rapid
down stroke and high volume
• Pulsus bisferiens This is a pulse with double peak. It is
seen in severe AR
• Mullers sign Pulsations of the uvula• Lighthouse sign Alternate flushing and blanching of
the forehead
• Beckers sign Visible pulsations of retinal artery and
pupil
• Rosenbach’s sign Systolic pulsations of the liver
• Gerhardt’s sign Systolic pulsations of the spleen• Mayne’s sign More than a 15 mmHg decrease in
diastolic blood pressure with arm
elevation from the value obtainedwith the arm in the standard position
murmur is usually accompanied by a thrill, which
is, absent in Austin Flint murmur.
/square6Because of increased stroke volume, there can be afunctional ejection systolic murmur mimickingaortic stenosis. However, absence of slow risingpulse differentiates functional ejection systolicmurmur from true AS.
Clinical Assessment of Severity of AR
Presence of one or more of the following features
suggests that AR is severe
/square6Peripheral signs
/square6Pulsus bisferiens
/square6Hills sign more than 60 mm Hg
/square6Hyperdynamic apex
/square6Early diastolic murmur lasting more than two-
thirds of diastole
/square6Presence of Austin Flint murmur
Investigations
Chest X-ray
/square6Chest X-ray shows cardiomegaly due to left ventri-cular enlargement. Poststenotic dilatation of the
aorta may be visible. Aortic valve calcification may
be visible in some cases.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3212 ECG
/square6The ECG features of left ventricular hypertrophy
with strain pattern (tall R waves in the left-sidedchest leads, deep S waves in the right-sided leads,
ST-segment depression and T-wave inversion in
leads I, aVL, V
5, and V6).
Echocardiogram
/square6Echo can confirm the diagnosis and cause of AR. Itcan also assess LV function and the status of othervalves. The regurgitant jet causing fluttering ofanterior mitral leaflet can be detected by color flowDoppler.
Cardiac Catheterization
/square6It is the most accurate way of confirming and assess-
ing the degree of AR. It can also assess LV function
and status of coronary arteries.
Other Tests
/square6VDRL and TPHA to rule out syphilitic etiology.
/square6ANA, RA factor, CRP and ESR to rule out connec-tive tissue disease.
/square6ASO titre and throat swab culture if rheumaticetiology is suspected.
Treatment
Medical
/square6For asymptomatic patients with normal LV function,afterload reduction is recommended because it delaysor reduces the need for aortic valve surgery. Vasodila-tors like ACE inhibitors, nitrates, hydralazine andnifedifine are helpful to reduce afterload.
/square6Digoxin, diuretics, ACE inhibitors and salt restric-tion are useful if there is heart failure.
/square6The underlying cause of aortic regurgitation (e.g.
rheumatic, syphilitic or infective endocarditis)
requires specific treatment.
/square6Infective endocarditis prophylaxis is recommendedfor AR.
Surgical
/square6Surgical aortic valve replacement is necessary after
the onset of LV dysfunction but before the develop-
ment of severe symptoms.
/square6In general, operation should be carried out in patientswith left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) <55%
or a LV end-systolic volume >55 mL/m
2. These para-
meters have been referred to as the “55/55 rule.”
/square6Surgical treatment is also necessary in patients withacute severe AR.
Q.Austin Flint murmur.
/square6This is a mid-diastolic, low-pitched, rumbling mur-
mur heard over the apex in severe aortic regurgitation./square6It is due to the aortic regurgitant jet impinging on
anterior mitral leaflet causing it to vibrate.
/square6It may be confused with mid-diastolic murmur(MDM) of mitral stenosis. MDM of mitral stenosis
is characterized by loud S1, opening snap, and
presystolic accentuation. All these features areabsent in Austin Flint murmur.
Q.Tricuspid stenosis (TS).
/square6This is an uncommon valve lesion, seen more often
in women than in men.
Etiology
/square6TS is usually due to rheumatic heart disease and isfrequently associated with mitral and/or aortic
valve disease. Rarely can it be due to carcinoid
syndrome or congenital.
Pathophysiology
/square6Tricuspid valve stenosis results in collection ofblood in the right atrium raising its pressure. Risein right atrial pressure causes systemic venouscongestion resulting in hepatomegaly, peripheraledema and ascites.
/square6Reduced blood flow into right ventricle results inreduced blood flow into left ventricle and hencereduced cardiac output.
/square6Cardiac output cannot increase on exertion becauseTS will not allow increased venous return into rightand then left ventricle.
Clinical Features
/square6Patients usually complain of dyspnea and fatiguedue to reduced cardiac output.
/square6Abdominal pain may be there due to congestivehepatomegaly. JVP is raised and shows a prominent‘a’ wave. Ascites and peripheral edema may be
present.
/square6A mid-diastolic murmur may be heard at the lowerleft sternal border, which becomes louder oninspiration. A tricuspid opening snap may occasio-nally be heard.
/square6Patients usually develop atrial fibrillation due toright atrial dilatation.
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray shows prominent right atrial bulge.
/square6ECG shows features of right atrial enlargement suchas tall, peaked, P waves (>3 mm) in lead II and
prominent, upright P waves in lead V
1.
/square6Echo may show a thickened and immobile tricuspid
valve.
Treatment
/square6Systemic venous congestion can be brought down
by diuretics and salt restriction.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System213
3/square6Surgical repair should be carried out in patients
with moderate or severe TS. If repair is not possibletricuspid valve replacement is necessary withpreferably a bioprosthetic valve.
Q.Tricuspid regurgitation.
Etiology
/square6Tricuspid regurgitation is usually functional,secondary to dilatation of the tricuspid annulus.Dilatation of the tricuspid annulus occurs wheneverthere is right ventricular dilatation, e.g. in cor-pulmonale, myocardial infarction and pulmonary
hypertension.
/square6Organic  tricuspid regurgitation may occur with
rheumatic heart disease, infective endocarditis,
carcinoid syndrome, and congenital abnormalities.
Clinical Features
/square6The symptoms of tricuspid regurgitation are thoseof right-sided heart failure, including ascites,edema, and right upper quadrant pain due to con-
gested liver. JVP is raised with prominent ‘ v’ wave.
/square6Regurgitation into the hepatic veins causes hepatic
enlargement and liver pulsation.
/square6Right ventricular enlargement produces a para-sternal heave in the left sternal border.
/square6A blowing pansystolic murmur is heard at the lowerleft sternal edge, which increases on inspiration.
/square6Atrial fibrillation is common due to right atrialenlargement.
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray shows right atrial and ventricularenlargement.
/square6ECG shows features of right ventricular hyper-
trophy.
/square6ECHO can confirm the presence and severity of TR
and show right atrial and ventricular enlargement.
Treatment
/square6Functional tricuspid regurgitation usually dis-appears with treatment of underlying disease.
/square6Severe organic tricuspid regurgitation may requireoperative repair or replacement of the tricuspid valve.
/square6In drug addicts with infective endocarditis of thetricuspid valve, surgical removal of the valve isrecommended to eradicate the infection.
Q.Pulmonary stenosis (PS).
Etiology
/square6PS is usually a congenital lesion due to maternalrubella infection during pregnancy. Congenitalpulmonary stenosis may be isolated or associatedwith tetralogy of Fallot./square6Other causes are rheumatic fever and carcinoidsyndrome.
/square6Pulmonary stenosis may be valvular, subvalvularor supravalvular.
Clinical Features
/square6PS causes obstruction to right ventricular emptyingand results in right ventricular hypertrophy, right
heart failure and right atrial enlargement. Patients
may have signs and symptoms of right heart failure.JVP is raised with prominent a wave.
/square6PS decreases the blood flow from right to left
ventricle and hence causes decreased cardiac output
which does not increase on exertion. This causesfatigue and syncope on exertion.
/square6A midsystolic ejection murmur is heard in the
pulmonary area which increases on inspiration. The
murmur is often associated with a thrill. P2 isusually delayed and soft.
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray shows a prominent pulmonary arterydue to poststenotic dilatation.
/square6ECG shows features of right atrial and right ventri-cular hypertrophy.
/square6Echo can confirm the diagnosis and assess theseverity of PS.
/square6Cardiac catheterization can also assess the level anddegree of the stenosis by measuring the systolicpressure gradient across pulmonary valve.
Treatment
/square6Mild to moderate PS does not require endocarditisprophylaxis.
/square6Treatment of severe pulmonary stenosis requiresballoon valvotomy or surgery.
Q.Pulmonary regurgitation (PR).
/square6PR is usually due to dilatation of the pulmonary
valve ring, which occurs with pulmonary hyper-
tension.
/square6It is characterized by an early diastolic murmur,which is difficult to distinguish from the murmur
of aortic regurgitation. This murmur is called
Graham Steell murmur.
/square6Pulmonary regurgitation usually causes no symp-toms and treatment is rarely necessary.
Q.Discuss the causes and differential diagnosis of
ejection systolic murmur (ESM).
/square6Ejection systolic murmurs (ESM) are due to turbu-lent forward flow across the aortic or pulmonaryvalve. Turbulence is produced by obstruction toblood flow, vascular dilation, and increase in thevelocity of flow or a combination.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3214 /square6The ejection of blood begins after closure of the
atrioventricular (mitral and tricuspid) valves andis preceded by the time it takes for the ventricularpressures to sufficiently exceed the aortic andpulmonary diastolic pressure and force open theaortic and pulmonary valves. Because of this delay,
there is a silent interval between the first heart
sound (S1 is produced by closure of the AV valves)and onset of the murmur.
/square6An ESM begins after S1, terminates before S2,
clearly heard over the cardiac apex, and is usually
crescendo-decrescendo configuration.
Figure 3.14 Ejection systolic murmur
Causes/square6S2 may be normal, narrowly split or paradoxicallysplit with decreased intensity of A2.
Pulmonary Stenosis
/square6Murmur is harsh and best heard over the left secondinterspace. It may radiate to the left side of the neckand is frequently accompanied by a palpable thrill.
/square6Signs of RVH may be present such as left para-sternal heave and prominent epigastric pulsations.
/square6Pulmonary ejection sound may be heard.
/square6S2 is widely split with a decreased intensity of P2.
Atrial Septal Defect (ASD)
/square6ESM is produced due to increased flow acrosspulmonary valve. Murmur is short and soft. It isheard over pulmonary area.
/square6S2 is widely split and fixed.
/square6Mid-diastolic rumble over the tricuspid area due
to increased flow across tricuspid valve.
/square6Pulsation in the pulmonary area due to dilated
pulmonary artery
/square6Hyperdynamic left parasternal impulse due tovolume overload of right ventricle.
Coarctation of Aorta
/square6Murmur can extend beyond the second heartsound, at the left paravertebral interscapular area,
due to flow across the narrow coarctation area.
/square6Continuous murmurs may be due to flow through
large collateral vessels.
/square6Cardiac examination is usually normal. S1 and S2are usually normal.
/square6Underdeveloped lower segment of the body.
/square6Differential pressures between the upper and lowerlimbs (hypertension in the upper limbs).
/square6Radiofemoral delay.
/square6Heaving apical impulse.
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM)
/square6Murmur is best heard at the apex and left lower
sternal border.
/square6Murmur increases with maneuvers which increase
the obstruction. These are standing, Valsalvamaneuver, and nitroglycerin. Murmur decreases on
sitting or squatting, with handgrip, and following
passive elevation of the legs.
/square6Rapidly rising (jerky) carotid pulse.
/square6Double apical impulse.
Q.Discuss the causes and differential diagnosis of
pansystolic murmur (PSM).
/square6Pansystolic murmur (holosystolic murmur) is heard
throughout the systole. PSM occurs when the bloodflows from a chamber whose pressure throughoutsystole is higher than pressure in the chamber
receiving the flow.TABLE 3.30: Causes of ejection systolic murmurs
Valvular diseases
• Aortic stenosis• Pulmonary stenosis• Aortic sclerosis• Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy• Tetralogy of Fallot
Flow murmurs (functional murmurs)
• Hyperdynamic states (thyrotoxicosis, anemia, AV fistula)• Pregnancy• Increased systolic flow across the valve (ASD, aortic regurgi-
tation, mitral regurgitation)
Miscellaneous
• Coarctation of aorta• Straight back syndrome• Aneurysm of ascending aorta
Differential Diagnosis
Aortic Valve Sclerosis
/square6The murmur is brief and not very loud. It is usually
best heard over the right second interspace.
/square6It is not associated with hemodynamic conse-quences. Carotid pulse and S2 are normal.
Aortic Stenosis
/square6Murmur is harsh and best heard in the right secondintercostal space. It radiates to carotids especially
to right carotid.
/square6Aortic ejection click sound may be heard.
/square6It produces hemodynamic consequences such as
slow rising pulse and low systolic BP.
/square6LVH is present and apex is heaving type.
/square6Systolic thrill at right second intercostal space maybe present.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System215
3
Figure 3.15 Pansystolic murmur
Causes of Pansystolic Murmur
/square6Mitral regurgitation
/square6Tricuspid regurgitation
/square6Ventricular septal defect
Differential Diagnosis of Pansystolic Murmur
Mitral Regurgitation
Murmur
/square6Murmur is high pitched.
/square6It is best heard with the diaphragm of the stetho-
scope with the patient in the left lateral decubitusposition.
/square6It usually radiates to left axilla, and inferior angleof the left scapula.
Associated features
/square6Apex is shifted out and laterally due to left ventri-
cular enlargement in significant MR. Apex is hyper-
dynamic in character.
/square6Systolic thrill at the apex.
/square6S1 is soft, S2 is widely split but mobile.
/square6There may be an S3 gallop due to high diastolicflow across the mitral valve.
/square6Loud P2, parasternal heave and epigastric pulsa-
tions due to pulmonary HTN and RVH.
/square6There may be findings of right heart failure.
Tricuspid Regurgitation
Murmur
/square6Murmur is best heard with the diaphragm of the
stethoscope over the lower left second and thirdintercostal spaces and along the left sternal border.
It may radiate to the epigastrium.
/square6Intensity of the murmur varies with respiration. It
increases during inspiration (Carvallo’s sign) dueto increase in regurgitant flow following the
inspiratory increase in right ventricular volume.
Associated features
/square6Prominent ‘ v’ wave and rapid ‘ y’ descent in the
jugular venous pulse.
/square6Hepatomegaly and systolic hepatic pulsation.
/square6Right ventricular S3 gallop and a mid-diastolic flowmurmur in severe TR.
Ventricular Septal Defect
Murmur
/square6Murmur is harsh and is best heard along the left
sternal border.Associated features
/square6High volume collapsing pulse.
/square6Apex is shifted down and out and is hyperdynamic.
/square6S2 is normal and pulmonary hypertension is absent.
Q.Discuss the causes and differential diagnosis of
early diastolic murmur (EDM).
/square6EDM is a high frequency and (usually) decrescendo
murmur that begins with S2 and results from aorticor pulmonic valve regurgitation.
/square6EDM starts at the time of semilunar valve closureand the onset coincides with S2.
Figure 3.16 Early diastolic murmur
Causes
/square6Aortic regurgitation.
/square6Pulmonary regurgitation.
Differential Diagnosis of EDM
Aortic Regurgitation
/square6Murmur is high-pitched decrescendo murmur. Ithas high-frequency and is of “blowing” character.
/square6It begins with A2 and usually terminates before S1.
/square6It is best heard with the diaphragm of the stetho-
scope over the aortic area or over the left sternal
border, with the patient sitting and leaning forwardand the breath held in full expiration.
/square6Murmur radiates towards cardiac apex.
/square6Apex is hyperdynamic and shifted out and down-wards.
/square6Wide and collapsing pulse.
/square6Peripheral signs of aortic regurgitation present.
Pulmonary Regurgitation
/square6The murmur of pulmonary regurgitation due topulmonary hypertension (Graham-Steell murmur)is high-pitched and “blowing.” It is decrescendo type.
/square6The murmur begins with P2 and is best heard overthe left second and third interspaces.
/square6It may increase in intensity during inspiration.
/square6P2 is loud.
Q.Discuss the causes and differential diagnosis of mid
diastolic murmur (MDM).
/square6MDM is a low-frequency murmur in mid diastole
that results from obstruction to blood flow through
stenotic mitral or tricuspid valve or increased bloodflow through normal mitral or tricuspid valve.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3216
Figure 3.17 Mid-diastolic murmur
Causes of Mid-diastolic Murmurs
• Mitral stenosis
• Tricuspid stenosis• Atrial myxoma• Austin Flint murmur• Carey-Coombs murmur• Flow murmurs (TR, MR, ASD, VSD, PDA)
Differential Diagnosis
Mitral Stenosis
Murmur
/square6It has a rumbling character and is best heard with
the bell of the stethoscope over the apex with the
patient in the left lateral decubitus position.
/square6It starts with an opening snap. Its duration corre-
lates with the severity of mitral stenosis. The longer
the duration of the murmur, the more severe is themitral stenosis.
Associated features
/square6Tapping apex
/square6Mitral valve opening snap
/square6Diastolic thrill at the apex
/square6Loud first heart sound
/square6Features of pulmonary HTN (parasternal heave,
loud P2)
/square6Presence of atrial fibrillation.
Tricuspid Stenosis
Murmur
/square6Best heard along the left sternal border.
/square6Intensity of the murmur increases with inspiration(Carvallo’s sign).
Associated features
/square6Peripheral edema and ascites.
/square6Tricuspid opening snap.
/square6Wide splitting of S1 due to delayed closure of the
tricuspid valve.
/square6Presence of atrial fibrillation.
/square6Prominent ‘a’ wave and slowly descent in the JVP.
/square6Presystolic hepatic pulsation.
Atrial Myxoma
/square6Atrial myxoma may cause obstruction of the atrio-ventricular valves and a mid-diastolic murmur.
Murmur
/square6Murmur has presystolic accentuation and crescendo
character.
/square6The character and intensity of the murmur may
change with position.Associated features
/square6A “tumor plop” sound may be present.
/square6Atrial fibrillation is usually absent.
/square6No opening snap.
/square6Systemic features such as fever, fatigue and weight
loss may be present.
Austin Flint Murmur
Murmur
/square6This is an apical diastolic rumbling murmur seenin aortic regurgitation. It is best heard at the apex.
Associated features
/square6Amyl nitrate inhalation decreases the murmur due
to decrease in afterload.
/square6No opening snap unlike mitral and tricuspidstenosis.
/square6Peripheral signs of aortic regurgitation present.
/square6Hyperdynamic apex which is shifted out and down-wards.
Carey-Coombs Murmur
Murmur
/square6This is seen in acute rheumatic fever, due to acutemitral valvulitis.
/square6Murmur is best heard over the apex.
Associated features
/square6There may be features of rheumatic fever such as
joint pains, erythema marginatum, subcutaneousnodules, etc.
Flow Murmurs
/square6Mid-diastolic murmurs may occur due to increased
flow across the atrioventricular valve even when
there is no stenosis. Examples are mitral regurgita-tion, ASD, VSD, and PDA.
Mitral regurgitation
/square6Mid-diastolic rumbling murmur is best heard over
the apex.
/square6Hyperdynamic apex, which is shifted down and out.
/square6Left ventricular S3.
/square6Systolic thrill at the apex
/square6Soft S1
/square6Pansystolic murmur best heard over the apex andradiating to axilla.
VSD
/square6Mid-diastolic rumbling murmur is best heard over
the apex.
/square6Hyperdynamic apex which is shifted down and out.
/square6Left ventricular S3.
/square6Systolic thrill at the 3rd or 4th left intercostal space.
/square6Widely split but mobile S2.
/square6Pansystolic murmur best heard over the 3rd or 4thleft intercostal space radiating all over the precordium.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System217
3Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)
/square6Mid-diastolic rumbling murmur is best heard over
the apex.
/square6Hyperdynamic apex which is shifted down and out.
/square6Left ventricular S3.
/square6Continuous thrill at the left sternal angle.
/square6Continuous machinery murmur with late systolic
accentuation at the left sternal border.
Tricuspid regurgitation (see differential diagnosis of
pansystolic murmur).
ASD
/square6Murmur is best heard over the lower left sternal
border.
/square6Visible pulmonary artery pulsations in the leftsecond intercostal space.
/square6Wide, fixed, splitting of S2.
Q.Define continuous murmur. Enumerate the causes
of continuous murmurs.
/square6Continuous murmurs are defined as murmurs that
begin in systole and extend up to diastole withoutinterruption. Continuous murmurs occur if there
is a pressure gradient both in systole and diastole.
Causes
/square6Patent ductus arteriosus.
/square6Aortopulmonary window.
/square6Rupture of aneurysm of sinus of Valsalva.
/square6Arteriovenous fistulas.
/square6Coarctation of aorta.
/square6Venous hum.
/square6Mammary soufflé.
Figure 3.18 Continuous mumur
Q.Define arrhythmia. Classify different types of
arrhythmias.
/square6An abnormality of the cardiac rhythm is called a
cardiac arrhythmia.
/square6Arrhythmias may cause sudden death, syncope,heart failure, dizziness, and palpitations or canbe asymptomatic. They can be either transient orsustained.
/square6An arrhythmia with a rate of <60 per min is calledbradyarrhythmia.
/square6An arrhythmia with a rate of >100 per min is calledtachyarrhythmia./square6Tachyarrhythmias are more symptomatic thanbradyarrhythmias. Tachyarrhythmias can be further
divided as supraventricular (arise from the atriumor the atrioventricular junction) and ventricular(arise from the ventricles).
TABLE 3.31: Classification of arrhythmias
Bradyarrhythmias
• Sinus bradycardia
• Sick sinus syndrome
• A-V nodal block
– First degree
– Second degree (Wenckebach)
– Third degree (complete heart block)
Tachyarrhythmias
• Supraventricular
– Sinus tachycardia
– Atrial flutter
– Atrial fibrillation
– Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia (PSVT)
• Ventricular
– Ventricular tachycardia
– Ventricular flutter
– Ventricular fibrillation
Q.Sinus arrhythmia.
Q.Sinus bradycardia.
Q.Sick sinus syndrome.
Sinus Arrhythmia
/square6Fluctuation of autonomic tone due to respiration
results in phasic changes of the sinus discharge rate.During inspiration, para-sympathetic tone falls andthe heart rate increases, whereas on expiration theheart rate falls. This is known as sinus arrhythmia.
/square6Sinus arrhythmia is a normal phenomenon andresults in a regularly irregular pulse ( note:  irregu-
larly irregular pulse is seen in atrial fibrillation). It
is more prominent in children and young adults.
/square6Loss of sinus arrhythmia is seen in autonomicneuropathies (e.g. due to diabetes) and also in
transplanted heart.
Sinus Bradycardia
/square6A heart rate of less than 60 beats per minute originat-ing in sinus node is called sinus bradycardia. It isusually asymptomatic unless the rate is very slow.
Causes of Sinus Bradycardia
/square6Treatment of symptomatic bradycardia includesinsertion of temporary pacemaker if there is a rever-sible cause or permanent pacemaker if the cause isirreversible. Injection of atropine may help tempo-
rarily.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3218
Sick Sinus Syndrome
/square6This refers to episodes of sinus bradycardia, sino-
atrial block, or sinus arrest.
/square6It is caused by idiopathic fibrosis of the sinus node.Other causes are ischemic heart disease, cardio-myopathy, myocarditis and drugs.
/square6Patient experiences a combination of symptoms(dizziness, confusion, fatigue, and syncope). Thesesymptoms are due to cerebral hypoperfusion andreduced cardiac output.
/square6Usually these episodes are intermittent. If thesymptoms are recurrent, permanent pace maker
insertion is required.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of atrioventricular blocks (heart
blocks).
/square6The specialized cardiac conducting system normallyensures synchronous conduction of each sinusimpulse from the atria to the ventricles. Heart blockor conduction block may occur at any level in theconducting system. Block in either the AV node orthe His bundle results in atrioventricular (AV)
block, whereas block lower in the conduction
system produces bundle branch block.
Atrioventricular Block
/square6AV block is defined when some or all impulses aredelayed or do not reach the ventricle during normalsinus rhythm or sinus tachycardia.
/square6Conduction through AV node may be delayed (first-degree AV block), intermittent (second-degree AV
block) or absent (third-degree AV block).First-degree AV Block
/square6This is simple prolongation of the PR interval to
more than 0.20 seconds. Here all sinus impulses areconducted to the ventricles but with delay.
Second-degree AV Block (Intermittent AV Block)
/square6This occurs when some P waves conduct and others
do not. It can be further divided as follows.
/square6Mobitz type I block (Wenckebach phenomenon):  Here
there is progressive PR interval prolongation untila P wave fails to conduct. Usually it does not
progress to complete AV block.
/square6Mobitz type II block : Here the conduction fails
suddenly and unexpectedly without a precedingchange in PR intervals. It can progress to complete
AV block. If the ventricular rate is slow and patient
is symptomatic pacemaker insertion is necessary.
Third-degree AV Block (Complete AV Block)
/square6Here no atrial impulse is conducted to ventricles.Usually there is escape rhythm originating eitherfrom bundle of His or ventricles. Atria and ventri-cles beat independently. Heart rate is usually lessthan 55 beats/min.
/square6ECG shows constant P-P and R-R intervals but withcomplete AV dissociation, i.e. atria and ventriclesbeat independently and there is no relation betweenP waves and QRS complexes. QRS complexes may
be broad if the escape rhythm is originating from
ventricles.
Etiology of Atrioventricular BlocksTABLE 3.32: Causes of sinus bradycardia
Physiological
• Sleep (due to decreased sympathetic tone)
• Elderly
• Athletes (due to increased vagal tone)
Pathological
• Hypothyroidism
• Cholestatic jaundice
• Raised intracranial pressure
• Myocardial infarction (due to ischemia or infarction of sinus
node)
• Hypothermia
• Typhoid fever
• Brucellosis
• Vasovagal syncope• Severe hypoxia, hypercapnia, acidosis
• Acute hypertension
• Idiopathic
• Drugs (beta blockers)
TABLE 3.33: Etiology of atrioventricular blocks
• Fibrosis and sclerosis of the conduction system
• Ischemic heart disease• Drugs (digitalis, calcium channel blockers, beta blockers,
amiodarone)
• Increased vagal tone• Valvular disease• Congenital heart disease (VSD)• Cardiomyopathies• Myocarditis• Hyperkalemia• Infiltratve diseases (sarcoidosis, amyloidosis)• Inflammatory diseases (SLE, scleroderma)
Clinical Features
/square6First and second degree heart blocks are usually
asymptomatic.
/square6Third degree heart block may present with dizzi-ness, syncope and hemodynamic instability.
Investigations
/square6Serum electrolytes (sodium, potassium)
/square6Drug levels (e.g. digoxin)
/square6ECG

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System219
3/square6ECHO
/square6Electrophysiological testing.
Treatment
/square6First degree heart block requires no specific
treatment other than correcting the underlyingcause.
/square6In symptomatic second and third degree heartblocks, atropine (0.5 to 2.0 mg intravenously) andisoproterenol (1 to 4 μg/min intravenously) are
useful to temporarily increase the heart rate.
Temporary pacemaker insertion may help stabilize
the patient, if there is a reversible cause such asmyocardial ischemia. For long-term treatmentpermanent pacemaker insertion is the treatment ofchoice.
/square6Underlying cause should be identified andtreated.
Q.Bundle branch blocks.
/square6The bundle of His divides into right and left bundle
branches. The left bundle subdivides into theanterior and posterior divisions. Various conduc-
tion disturbances can occur in these bundle
branches and are called bundle branch blocks.
/square6Right bundle branch block (RBBB) : Since the right
bundle branch supplies right ventricle, its blockproduces late activation of the right ventricle. Thisis manifested in ECG as deep S waves in leads Iand V6 and tall late R wave in lead V1.
/square6Left bundle branch block (LBBB): This produces
delayed activation of left ventricle which ismanifested in ECG as deep S wave in lead V1 and atall late R wave in leads I and V6.
CausesTreatment
/square6Usually no treatment is required. LBBB may indicate
an underlying coronary artery disease whichshould be investigated.
Q.Define supraventricular tachycardias. List all supra-
ventricular tachycardias.
/square6Supraventricular tachycardias (SVTs) are tachy-
arrhythmias which arise above the ventricle, i.e.from the atrium or the atrioventricular junction.
/square6Since the conduction is via the His-Purkinje system,QRS shape is normal (narrow QRS complex).
/square6Following is a list of supraventricular tachycardias.
– Sinus tachycardia
– Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardias
(PSVTs) (AV nodal re-entry tachycardia and AVreciprocating tachycardia)
– Atrial fibrillation– Atrial flutter
– Atrial tachycardia
– Multifocal atrial tachycardia– Accelerated junctional tachycardia.
Q.Sinus tachycardia.
/square6A heart rate of more than 100 beats per minute
originating in sinus node is called sinus tachycardia.In the ECG, it is characterized by normal P waves,PR interval and QRS complexes. QRS complexesmay be broad if there is intraventricular conductiondefect. Sinus tachycardia may be experienced as
palpitations.
Causes of Sinus Tachycardia
/square6Management includes treating the underlying cause
or beta blockers.
TABLE 3.34: Causes of bundle branch blocks
RBBB
• Congenital heart disease (ASD, Fallot's tetralogy, pulmonary
stenosis, VSD)
• Acute myocardial infarction
• Cardiomyopathy
• Conduction system fibrosis• Cor pulmonale
• Pulmonary embolism
LBBB
• Acute myocardial infarction
• Severe coronary disease (two- to three-vessel disease
• Aortic stenosis• Hypertension
Clinical Features
/square6Bundle branch blocks are usually asymptomatic. RBBB
produces widely split second heart sound. LBBB may
produce reverse splitting of the second sound.TABLE 3.35: Causes of sinus tachycardia
Physiological
• Anxiety, fear• Exertion
Pathological
• Fever• Anemia• Hypovolemia• Hypotension• Heart failure• Hyperthyroidism• Pheochromocytoma• Sympathomimetic drugs (ephedrine, pseudoephedrine,
β-adrenoceptor agonists)
Q.Pre-excitation syndromes.
Q.Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome.
/square6Pre-excitation syndromes are due to accessory path-
ways between the atria and the ventricle that avoid

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3220 the conduction delay of the AV node. This results
in earlier activation (pre-excitation) of the ventricles.Accessory pathways allow the impulses to enter into
the ventricles or allow the impulses to travel backto atria thus predisposing to reentrant arrhythmias.
Lown-Ganong-Levine syndrome
/square6Here the accessory pathway  may be wholly or
partly within the node (Mahaim fibers). Conductionoccurs more rapidly than normal from the atria tothe ventricles, explaining the short PR. The QRScomplex is normal, since ventricular activation isvia the normal conduction pathway (His Purkinje
system).
Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome
/square6WPW syndrome is the most common accessory
pathway SVT. Here an accessory pathway (Kentbundles) directly connects the atria and ventricle.There are two main forms of WPW syndrome:classic and concealed.
/square6In classic (or manifest) WPW syndrome, antegradeconduction occurs through both the accessorypathway and the AV node. The accessory pathway,being faster, depolarizes some of the ventricle early,
resulting in a short PR interval and a slurred
upstroke to the QRS complex (delta wave). Thedelta wave prolongs QRS duration to >0.12 second.
/square6In concealed WPW syndrome, the accessorypathway does not conduct in an antegradedirection; the sinus impulse travels normallythrough the AV node and activates ventriclesnormally. Hence, above electrocardiographic (ECG)abnormalities do not appear. However, accessory
pathway can allow retrograde conduction of
impulse from ventricle to atria and thus canparticipate in reentrant tachycardia.
/square6Orthodromic tachycardia is a reentrant rhythmthat conducts antegrade down the AV node andretrograde up the accessory pathway, resulting ina narrow QRS complex.
/square6Antidromic tachycardia conducts down theaccessory pathway and retrograde through the AVnode, resulting in a wide QRS complex. Up to 30%of patients with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndromewill develop atrial fibrillation or flutter with ante-
grade conduction down the accessory pathway and
a rapid ventricular response. If this conduction isvery rapid, it can potentially degenerate to ventri-cular fibrillation.
/square6Most patients present during young adulthood ormiddle age. Typical symptoms are abrupt onsetpalpitations with abrupt termination with symp-toms of hemodynamic compromise (e.g. dyspnea,chest discomfort, light-headedness). Attacks may
last only a few seconds or persist for several hours.
Heart rate is usually 140 to 220 beats/minute duringpalpitations.Investigations
/square6ECG
/square6Electrophysiological studies.
Treatment
/square6Vagotonic maneuver during SVT.
/square6Adenosine for emergency management of SVT.
/square6Verapamil or diltiazem if narrow QRS complex. Thesedrugs increase the refractory period of accessorypathway and reduce conduction rate through it.
/square6For frequent recurrence, radiofrequency catheter
ablation is the procedure of choice.
Q.Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia (PSVT).
/square6PSVT is paroxysmal and recurrent and often seen
in young patients with no structural heart disease.Heart rate is usually 140–220 per minute with 1:1conduction.
Etiology
/square6PSVT is triggered by a reentry mechanism. This
may be induced by premature atrial or ventricular
ectopic beats. Other triggers include anxiety, hyper-thyroidism and stimulants, including caffeine,drugs, and alcohol.
/square6It can be idiopathic also or rarely may be associatedwith congenital heart diseases such as Ebstein’sanomaly, atrial septal defect, and Fallot’s tetralogy.
Mechanism
/square6The most common mechanism for paroxysmalsupraventricular tachycardia is reentry, which maybe initiated or terminated by a fortuitously timed
atrial or ventricular ectopic.
/square6The reentry circuit most commonly involves dual
pathways (a slow and a fast pathway) within theAV node (known as AV nodal reentrant tachycardia
(AVNRT)).
/square6Less commonly, reentry is due to an accessory
pathway between the atria and ventricles, referredto as AV reentrant tachycardia (AVRT). Example
is WPW syndrome.
Clinical Features
/square6It is usually seen in young people. The first presen-
tation is common between ages 12 and 30.
/square6Attacks may occur spontaneously or may be pre-cipitated by exertion, excess coffee, tea and alcohol.
/square6Most common symptom of PSVT is rapid regularpalpitations, usually with abrupt onset, which can
occur spontaneously or precipitated by factors
described above. Palpitations are usually termi-nated by Valsalva maneuvers.
/square6Other symptoms may include anxiety, dizziness,
dyspnea, neck pulsation, chest pain, and weakness.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System221
3/square6Very fast heart rate may compromise cardiac output
and cause hypotension and congestive heartfailure.
/square6Polyuria may occur because of release of atrialnatriuretic peptide in response to increased atrialpressures during the tachycardia.
ECG
/square6Rate is usually 140–220 per minute.
/square6P waves are not visible and are buried within theQRS complex.
/square6QRS complexes are narrow and occur at regularintervals.
Management
/square6Patients with hemodynamic instability (e.g. hypo-tension, pulmonary edema) require emergencycardioversion.
/square6If the patient is hemodynamically stable, vagalmaneuvers, including right carotid massage,
Valsalva maneuver, and facial immersion in cold
water can be tried. Of these, Valsalva maneuver isthe best and often easier for the patient to perform.
/square6If these maneuvers are not successful, intravenousadenosine (6 mg IV fast bolus) should be tried. Ifrequired, a second and third dose of 12 mg can berepeated in 1–2 minutes. Adenosine is very short-acting (half-life <10s) and causes complete heart
block for a fraction of a second and terminates
SVT. Side-effects of adenosine include broncho-spasm, flushing, and chest pain which are transient.It is contraindicated in patients with a history ofasthma.
/square6An alternative treatment is verapamil 5–10 mg IVover 5–10 minutes, IV diltiazem, or beta-blockers(esmolol, propranolol, metoprolol).
/square6Verapamil, diltiazem, beta blockers or amiodaronecan be given to prevent reccurence of SVT.
/square6Radiofrequency catheter ablation of accessorypathway can cure SVT.
Q.Describe the etiology, clinical features, investiga-
tions, and management of atrial fibrillation (AF).
/square6Atrial fibrillation (AF) is a supraventricular tachy-
arrhythmia characterized by uncoordinated atrial
activation with consequent deterioration of mecha-nical atrial function.
/square6AF is the most common  arrhythmia in adults. It can
be paroxysmal, persistent or chronic. Paroxysmal
AF refers to an episode that terminates sponta-neously or with intervention in less than seven days.Persistent AF refers to episode sustained for morethan seven days, or AF that terminates only withcardioversion. Chronic or permanent AF is the one
that is unresponsive to cardioversion.Pathophysiology
/square6During AF, the atria have disorganized, rapid,
irregular electrical activity (300–600 per minute).
The ventricular response is also irregular and
variable (irregularly irregular).
/square6There is no coordinated mechanical contraction ofatria giving rise to turbulence and stasis of blood
in the atria leading to clot formation. With subse-
quent resumption of atrial contraction, clot can gointo left ventricle and then into systemic circulationcausing embolism.
/square6Excessive ventricular rate does not allow properfilling of ventricles, which leads to reduced cardiacoutput, pulmonary congestion, or angina pectoris.
Clinical Features
Symptoms
/square6Atrial fibrillation can be asymptomatic and detected
incidentally in some patients.
/square6Patients may complain of anxiety, palpitations,
fatigue and dyspnea. Patients may also present withstroke due to systemic embolism.
Signs
/square6Irregularly irregular pulse which is usually 100–150per minute.
/square6Varying volume of pulse.
/square6Apex pulse deficit.
/square6Loss of ‘a’ wave in JVP due to absent atrial contraction.
/square6Variable intensity S1.
/square6Signs of cardiac failure such as bilateral basal lung
crepitations may be there due to fast heart rate.
/square6There may be features of underlying disease
causing atrial fibrillation.
Complications
/square6Syncope
/square6Thromboembolism
/square6Cardiac failure
/square6AnginaEtiology
TABLE 3.36: Etiology of AF
• Emotional stress or following surgery, exercise, excessive
caffeine use, smoking, and acute alcoholic intoxication
• Rheumatic heart disease (mitral valve disease such as mitral
stenosis or mitral regurgitation)
• Hypertension• Heart failure• Hyperthyroidism• After coronary artery bypass surgery• COPD• Cardiomyopathy• Pericardial disease• Pulmonary embolism• Idiopathic (lone atrial fibrillation)

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3222 /square6Hypotension
/square6Pulmonary edema
Investigations
/square6ECG shows varying RR intervals. P waves are
absent and there may be undulating baselineinstead of P waves.
/square6Echocardiogram can detect underlying conditionsuch as mitral stenosis and atrial dilatation and clotformation.
/square6Other tests include complete blood count (to
identify anemia), thyroid function tests (to identify
hyperthyroidism), serum electrolytes (to identifyelectrolyte imbalance) and chest X-ray (to identifypneumonia, COPD).
Management
/square6Goals of treatment
– Control of ventricular rate
– Restoration of sinus rhythm if feasible
– Prevention of embolic complications
– Correction of underlying cause.
/square6For AF of any duration with hemodynamic insta-
bility (as evidenced by hypotension, hypoxia,
pulmonary edema, angina), immediate anti-
coagulation and electrical cardioversion (DC shockwith 100 to 200 joules) is the treatment of choice. Ifsinus rhythm is not restored, an additional attemptwith 360 J is tried. If this also fails, cardioversionmay be successful after loading with intravenous
ibutilide or intravenous procainamide.
/square6For hemodynamically stable patients, treatment
depends on whether the duration of AF is less than48 hours or ≥48 hours. If AF duration is less than
48 hours, anticoagulation and cardioversion can be
attempted.
/square6If AF duration is ≥48 hours, cardioversion is risky,
because clot formation can occur in the atria, which
can be dislodged by cardioversion. For these
patients, anticoagulation and rate control (slowingof ventricular rate) should be the initial goal.Ventricular rate control is achieved by intravenousβ-blockers (esmolol, metoprolol) and/or calcium
channel blockers ( verapamil or diltiazem) . Both pro-
long the refractory period of the AV node and slow
conduction through it. Digoxin is an alternative butis not effective in preventing exercise inducedincrease in heart rate. After 3 weeks of anticoagula-tion rhythm control (i.e. conversion to sinus rhythmcan be attempted by DC shock or antiarrhythmic
drugs (amiodarone, flecainide, or ibutilide). Trans-
esophageal echo is the best way to rule out atrialclot for atrial fibrillation of ≥48 hours duration
before attempting DC shock.
/square6If there is a precipitating factor such as alcoholintoxication, fever, thyrotoxicosis, etc., it should betreated./square6Antiarrhythmic drugs are not recommended to main-tain sinus rhythm after converting to sinus rhythm,because the risks outweigh the benefits. However,amiodarone can be used in patients with heart failure,moderate-to-severe systolic dysfunction, or hyper-tension with substantial left ventricular hypertrophy.
/square6Most of the recent guidelines favor rate controlrather than rhythm control in atrial fibrillation, i.e.no need to convert the AF into sinus rhythm, onlythe ventricular rate needs to be controlled.
/square6Chronic anticoagulation is required for thesepatients to prevent clot formation. The need foranticoagulation in patients with nonvalvular AF canbe assessed by using CHA2DS2-VASc score. Long-
term oral anticoagulant therapy is recommended
for patients with rheumatic mitral stenosis, mecha-nical artificial heart valve, and for nonvalvular atrialfibrillation patients with a CHA2DS2-VASc scoreof ≥2. Warfarin or other newer oral anticoagulants
should be used to maintain INR between 2 and 3.
Points
CC ongestive heart failure 1
HH ypertension 1
AA ge (75 or greater) 2
DD iabetes 1
SS troke (prior stroke or TIA) 2
VV ascular disease (prior heart attack,
peripheral artery disease or aortic plaque) 1
AA ge 65–74 1
Sc S ex category (female) 1
/square6Patients with poor rate control despite optimal
medical therapy should be considered for AV node
ablation and pacemaker implantation (‘ablate and
pace’ strategy).
Q.Atrial flutter.
/square6Atrial flutter is an organized atrial rhythm with an
atrial rate between 250 and 350 beats per minute.
Etiology
/square6Causes of atrial flutter are same as atrial fibrillation.
Mechanism
/square6Atrial flutter is due to impulses traveling througha reentrant circuit within the right atrium and
causing repeated activation of atria. Because of
refractoriness of AV node all impulses are notconducted into ventricles. Typically, the ventricular
rate is half the atrial rate, i.e. ~150 beats/min becauseof 2:1 block in the AV node.
Clinical Features
/square6Patients usually complain of palpitations. Very fastheart rate due to 1:1 AV response may cause angina
and hemodynamic instability.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System223
3Investigations
/square6ECG shows regular sawtooth-like atrial flutter
waves (F waves) between QRS complexes.
Management
/square6Electrical cardioversion is the treatment of choicefor acute symptomatic attack.
/square6If atrial flutter is more than 1–2 days old, patientsshould be anticoagulated for 4 weeks prior tocardioversion.
/square6Recurrent attacks may be prevented by anti-arrhythmic drugs (amiodarone). In persistent atrialflutter ventricular rate control can be achieved byAV nodal blocking agents ( β-blockers and/or
calcium channel blockers).
/square6However, the treatment of choice for patients withrecurrent atrial flutter is radiofrequency catheterablation. Catheter ablation is superior to rate-controland rhythm-control strategies with antiarrhythmic
drugs.
Q.Ventricular tachycardia (VT).
/square6VT is a rhythm which originates below the bundle
of His at a rate greater than 100 beats per minute.Since it does not conduct through the normalconducting system, it is a wide-complex rhythm.
/square6It can be monomorphic (uniform QRS complexes)or polymorphic (QRS morphology varies).
/square6Sustained VT persists for 30 seconds or more.Sustained polymorphic VT is usually unstable and
often degenerates into ventricular fibrillation.
Sustained monomorphic VT can also degenerateinto ventricular fibrillation but usually stable forlong periods.
/square6Torsades de pointes (TdP) is a polymorphic VT withvarying axis. It has a characteristic morphology(“twisting around an axis”) and is associated withprolonged QT interval.
Causes/square6Since the atria and ventricles beat independently,there are clinical signs of atrioventricular dissocia-tion (cannon ‘a’ waves in JVP, and variable intensityof the first heart sound).
Investigations
/square6ECG: Shows a rapid ventricular rhythm with broad
QRS complexes. Supraventricular tachycardia withbundle branch block may resemble ventriculartachycardia on the ECG. However, if a broadcomplex tachycardia is due to SVT with either right
or left bundle branch block, then the QRS morpho-
logy should resemble a typical RBBB or LBBBpattern. Since most of the cases of broad complextachycardias are due to ventricular tachycardia,whenever there is a doubt between VT and SVTwith aberrant intraventricular conduction, VT
should be diagnosed and treated.
/square6Serum electrolytes: Calcium, magnesium, sodium,
potassium. Hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, andhypocalcemia may predispose patients to either
monomorphic VT or torsades de pointes
/square6Drug levels: For example, digoxin, toxicology screens.
/square6Serum cardiac troponin I or T levels and CK-MB:  To
evaluate for myocardial ischemia or infarction.
/square6Electrophysiologic study: It is required in patients at
high risk for sudden death as a result of significant
underlying structural heart disease.
Treatment
/square6If the patient is hemodynamically unstable (hypo-
tension, pulmonary edema, angina), emergency DCcardioversion is required.
/square6If hemodynamically stable, intravenous amiodaroneor lidocaine can be used to terminate VT. First-linetreatment consists of amiodarone (150 mg over10 minutes, followed by 1 mg/min over the next6 hours, then 0.5 mg/min over 18 hours) or
lidocaine (50–100 mg IV over 5 minutes) followed
by a lidocaine infusion (2–4 mg IV per minute). DCcardioversion is necessary if medical therapy isunsuccessful.
/square6After resuscitation from VT, the cause of VT shouldbe looked into and treated.
/square6In the absence of a transient or reversible cause,patients who have had an episode of sustained VT
typically require an ICD (implantable cardioverter
defibrillator) to prevent further attacks. Most patientswith sustained VT and a significant structural heartdisorder should also receive a beta-blocker. If anICD cannot be used, amiodarone can be used toprevent further attacks.
Q.Torsades de pointes.
/square6Torsades de pointes refers to ventricular tachycardia
(VT) characterized by polymorphic QRS complexesTABLE 3.37: Causes of ventricular tachycardia
• Ischemic heart disease
• Dilated cardiomyopathy
• Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy• MVP
• Myocarditis
• Hypokalemia or hypomagnesemia• Drugs which prolong QT interval
• Acid–base disturbance
Clinical Features
/square6Pulse rate is usually between 120 and 220 per min.
/square6Sustained VT often results in presyncope
(dizziness), syncope, hypotension and cardiac
arrest .

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3224 that change in amplitude and cycle length, giving
the appearance of oscillations around the baseline.
Causes
/square6It arises when ventricular repolarization (QTinterval) is prolonged. The causes of torsades depointes thus include causes of long QT syndromewhich are as follows.
/square6Electrolyte disturbances:  Hypokalemia, hypocalcemia
and hypomagnesemia.
/square6Drugs:  Phenothiazines, tricyclic antidepressants,
quinidine, disopyramide, sotalol, amiodarone,
macrolide antibiotics, fluoroquinolones and organo-phosphates.
/square6Congenital syndromes:  Jervell-Lange-Nielsen and
Romano-Ward syndrome.
/square6Miscellaneous:  Bradycardia, acute myocardial infarc-
tion, liquid protein diets, dystrophia myotonica,intracranial events.
/square6Torsades de pointes can be precipitated by increasedadrenergic drive (exertion or emotion), suddenarousal (e.g. being woken from sleep by an alarm)or it can occur even when asleep.
/square6In acquired long QT syndrome, QT prolongationand torsades de pointes are usually provoked bybradycardia.
Clinical Features
/square6Torsades de pointes causes palpitations andsyncope but usually terminates spontaneously.
/square6It can degenerate to ventricular fibrillation andcause sudden death.
Treatment
Acute Management
/square6Electrical cardioversion should be done for hemo-dynamically unstable (hypotension or cardiacarrest) torsades de pointes.
/square6Magnesium sulphate is the drug of choice forTorsades de pointes. Magnesium is given at 1–2 gIV initially in 30–60 seconds, which then can berepeated in 5–15 minutes. Alternatively, a conti-
nuous infusion can be started at a rate of 3–10 mg/
min. Magnesium sulphate is effective even inpatients with normal magnesium levels.
/square6Any underlying precipitating factor should be
addressed, i.e. correcting any electrolyte imbalances,
and stopping drugs causing prolonged QT interval.
/square6Temporary transvenous pacing: Based on the factthat the QT interval shortens with a faster heart rate,
pacing can be effective in terminating torsade.
Long Term Management
/square6For congenital prolonged QT interval syndrome,
β-adrenergic blocking agents and drugs which
shorten QT interval (phenytoin) are useful./square6ICDs with dual-chambered pacing capability havebecome the treatment of choice for patients withrecurrent episodes in spite of using beta blockers.
Q.Ventricular fibrillation (VF).
/square6This is an arrhythmia characterized by disorganized
electrical activity with no mechanical contractionand hence no cardiac output.
Causes
/square6VF occurs due to ischemic heart disease, cardiacfailure, electrolyte imbalances, Brugada syndrome,etc. Ventricular ectopics during the vulnerable period
of ventricular repolarization (R-on-T phenomenon)
may initiate VF.
Clinical Features
/square6The patient is pulseless and becomes rapidly
unconscious, and respiration ceases (cardiac arrest).
/square6ECG shows shapeless, rapid oscillations without
any organized complexes.
Treatment
/square6VF usually ends in death within minutes unlessprompt corrective measures are instituted. The rateof survival in out-of-hospital cardiac arrest hasincreased with expansion of community-basedemergency rescue systems, widespread use of
automatic external defibrillators (AEDs), and
increasing numbers of laypersons trained inbystander cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR).
/square6VF rarely reverses spontaneously and requires
immediate electrical defibrillation. Basic and
advanced cardiac life support is needed.
/square6If ventricular fibrillation occurs after acute myo-cardial infarction, it usually does not require any
prophylactic therapy. However, if the VF has
occurred spontaneously without any cause, suchpatients are at high risk of sudden death and requireimplantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs) toprevent further attacks.
Q.Define ectopic beats (extrasystoles; premature
beats). What are the types of ectopic beats?
Q.Supraventricular ectopics (atrial ectopics; atrial
premature beats).
Q.Ventricular premature beats (ventricular ectopics,
ventricular premature complexes, VPCs).
/square6A heart beat occurring as a result of an impulse
arising in an area other than SA node is called
ectopic beat.
/square6Types:  Ectopic beats can be classified based on the
area from which they arise: Atrial, junctional, andventricular.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System225
3Atrial Ectopics
/square6Atrial ectopic also known as atrial premature beat
(APB) or atrial premature complex (APC), is a pre-mature activation of the atria arising from a site
other than the sinus node.
Etiology
/square6Idiopathic
/square6Mitral valve prolapse (MVP)
/square6IHD
/square6Valvular heart disease (mitral stenosis)
/square6Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
/square6Smoking, alcohol and excess coffee.
Clinical Features
/square6Atrial ectopics may be asymptomatic or cause
symptoms such as a sensation of “skipping” orpalpitations.
/square6Atrial ectopics are usually benign but rarely maycause atrial fibrillation and ventricular arrhythmias.
ECG
/square6Atrial ectopic appears as a P wave that occursrelatively early before the next expected sinus Pwave, which has a different morphology from the
sinus P wave.
/square6PR interval may be shorter or longer depending on
the site of origin of the atrial ectopic.
Treatment
/square6Treat the underlying cause
/square6Asymptomatic patients do not require any treatment
/square6Symptomatic patients with frequent atrial ectopicsmay benefit from beta-blockers.
Junctional Ectopics
/square6These arise within the AV junction. They mayconduct both anterograde to the ventricles andretrograde to the atrium, or may demonstrateanterograde and/or retrograde conduction block.
Causes
/square6Idiopathic
/square6Hypokalemia
/square6Digitalis toxicity
/square6Chronic lung disease
/square6Acute myocardial infarction.
Clinical Features
/square6They can be asymptomatic or lead to symptoms
such as palpitations and missed beats.
ECG
/square6Junctional ectopics appear as premature beat with
a normal QRS complex./square6PR interval of the junctional ectopic is short. P waveis inverted in ECG leads II, II, aVF due to retrogradeactivation of atria. Sometimes P wave may notappear on ECG due to burial of the wave withinthe QRS complex or lack of retrograde atrialactivation.
Treatment
/square6Treat the underlying cause.
/square6Asymptomatic patients do not require naytreatment.
/square6Symptomatic patients may benefit from beta-blockers and calcium channel blockers.
Ventricular Ectopics
/square6Also known as ventricular premature complexes(VPC), or ventricular premature beat. These arise
from the ventricle and are one of the most common
arrhythmias seen.
/square6Two consecutive PVCs are termed a couplet .
/square6Three or more consecutive PVCs at a rate of 100
beats per minute or more are termed ventricular
tachycardia  (VT).
/square6Single PVCs may occur sporadically or as bigeminy
(every other beat is a PVC), trigeminy (every thirdbeat is a PVC), or higher order periodicities.
/square6In normal persons, PVCs are not associated with
any increase in mortality and morbidity. However,
in patients with MI, if frequent (>10 per hour) orcomplex VPCs (couplets) occur, they are associatedwith increased mortality.
Etiology
/square6Idiopathic
/square6Myocardial infarction
/square6Drug toxicity (e.g. digitalis intoxication)
/square6Electrolyte disturbances (e.g. hypokalemia)
/square6Coronary artery disease
/square6Heart failure
/square6Hypertension
/square6Valvular heart disease.
Clinical Features
/square6Can be asymptomatic
/square6Patient may complain of extra beats, missed beatsor heavy beats because it may be the prematurebeat, the post-ectopic pause or the next forceful
sinus beat that is noticed by the patient.
/square6The pulse is irregular due to premature beats. When
a premature beat occurs regularly after everynormal beat, ‘pulsus bigeminus’ occurs.
ECG
/square6Ventricular ectopics have a broad (>0.12 s) and
bizarre QRS complex, not preceded by P waves
because the impulse arises from an abnormal

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3226 (ectopic) site in the ventricle and travels through
abnormal path (does not travel through normalconducting pathway such as Purkinje fibres).
/square6Following a premature beat there is usually
a complete compensatory pause because the AV
node or ventricle is refractory to the next sinusimpulse.
/square6If the VPC comes early (‘R on T’ ventricular prema-
ture beat occurring simultaneously with the
upstroke or peak of the T wave of the previousbeat), it may induce ventricular fibrillation inpatients with heart disease, particularly in patientsfollowing myocardial infarction.
Treatment
/square6No treatment required for asymptomatic patients.
/square6Symptomatic patients are treated with beta-blockers or amiodarone.
/square6Underlying cause should be treated.
Q.Brugada syndrome.
/square6Brugada syndrome is a genetic disease that pre-
disposes patients to fatal cardiac arrhythmias such
as ventricular fibrillation and sudden cardiac death.
/square6It is common in young males (mean age 30 to
40 years) in South East Asia. It has autosomaldominant inheritance with variable expression. Insome cases it is due to mutations in cardiac sodium
channel (SCN5A) .
/square6Classic ECG changes are right bundle branch block
with coved ST segment elevation in right precordial
leads (V1-V3). These ECG changes may be present
spontaneously or provoked by the administrationof sodium channel blockers (flecainide or amioda-rone). The QT interval is normal.
/square6It can present as sudden death or ventricularfibrillation or the patient may be asymptomatic anddiagnosed based on ECG findings. There is a highrisk of sudden death, particularly in the symptomaticpatient or those with spontaneous ECG changes.
/square6The only successful treatment is an implantablecardioverter defibrillator (ICD). However, quini-dine can be used if ICD insertion is not feasible.
Q.Classify antiarrhythmic drugs with appropriate
examples.
/square6Antiarrhythmic drugs are agents that modify the
rhythm and conduction of the heart and are used
to treat cardiac arrhythmias.
/square6However, these drugs can also produce arrhythmias(proarrhythmia) and hence have to be used with
caution.
/square6They are classified based on their mechanism of
action as follows.
Classification of Antiarrhythmic Drugs
TABLE 3.38: Classification of antiarrhythmic drugs
Mechanism of action Examples
Class I These drugs reduce maximal velocity of depolariza-
tion (Vmax) by blocking Na+ channels
IA ↓Vmax and prolong action potential duration Quinidine, procainamide, disopyramide
IB ↓ Vmax and decrease action potential duration Lidocaine, phenytoin, tocainide, mexiletine
IC ↓ Vmax at normal rates in normal tissue. No change Flecainide, propafenone, moricizine
in action potential duration
Class II Beta blockers. ↓ SA nodal automaticity, ↑ AV nodal Metoprolol, atenolol, bisoprolol, carvedilol
refractoriness, and ↓ AV nodal conduction velocity and acebutalol
Class III These drugs prolong action potential duration in Bretylium, amiodarone, sotalol, ibutilide,
tissue with fast-response action potentials dofetilide
Class IV Calcium (slow) channel blocking agents: ↓ conduction Verapamil, diltiazem
velocity and ↑ refractoriness in tissue with slow-
response action potentials
Class I Drugs
/square6These drugs reduce the excitability of membrane
by reducing the rate of entry of sodium into the cell
(sodium-channel blockers). They may slow conduc-
tion, delay recovery, or reduce the spontaneousdischarge rate of myocardial cells.
/square6Class I agents have been found to increase mortalitycompared to placebo in postmyocardial infarctionpatients with ventricular ectopy and in patientstreated for atrial fibrillation. In view of this, class Idrugs should be avoided in patients with coronary
artery disease, left ventricular dysfunction, or other
forms of significant structural heart disease.
Class II Drugs
/square6These are antisympathetic drugs and prevent theeffects of catecholamines on the action potential.
Most are cardioselective beta-blockers and include
metoprolol, atenolol and acebutalol.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System227
3/square6Beta-blockers suppress AV node conduction, and
are effective in preventing attacks of junctional
tachycardia, and are useful to control ventricular
rates in supraventricular tachycardia and atrial
fibrillation. They prevent ventricular fibrillation in
myocardial infarction and congestive heart failure.
Class III Drugs
/square6These prolong the action potential and do not affect
sodium transport through the membrane. Impor-
tant drugs in this class are amiodarone and sotalol.
Sotalol is also a beta-blocker.
/square6Amiodarone is the most commonly used drug. It
can be used to treat atrial fibrillation, SVT, and
ectopic beats. Sotalol may result in acquired long
QT syndrome and torsades de pointes. Dofetilide
has been used to treat atrial fibrillation and flutter
in patients with recent myocardial infarction and
poor LV function.
Class IV Drugs
/square6The nondihydropyridine calcium antagonists
decrease conduction velocity and increase refractori-
ness in tissue with slow-response action potentials
and are particularly effective in slowing conduction
in nodal tissue.
/square6These drugs can prevent attacks of junctional
tachycardia (AVNRT and AVRT) and may help to
control ventricular rates during atrial fibrillation.
Q.Implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD)
/square6ICD is a device implantable inside the body, able
to perform cardioversion, defibrillation, and pacing
of the heart. The device is therefore capable of
correcting most life-threatening cardiac arrhyth-
mias. Life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias
(ventricular fibrillation or ventricular tachycardia)
can cause sudden death in up to 40% of patients
within 1 year of diagnosis.
/square6Modern ICDs are only a little larger than a pace-
maker and are implanted in the infraclavicular area.
The ICD recognizes ventricular tachycardia or
fibrillation and automatically delivers pacing or a
shock to the heart to cause cardioversion to sinusrhythm. The device may have leads to sense and
pace both the right atrium and ventricle, and the
lithium batteries employed are able to provide
energy for over 100 shocks each of around 30 J.
/square6The use of ICD has reduced the death rate to 2%
per year in patients with history of serious ventri-
cular arrhythmias or cardiac failure. Many trials
have shown the superiority of ICDs in preventing
sudden cardiac death compared to revasculariza-
tion, antiarrhythmics, beta-blockers, and angiotensin-
converting enzyme inhibitors.
/square6ICD discharges are painful if the patient is cons-
cious. However, ventricular tachycardia may often
be terminated by overdrive pacing of the heart,
which is painless.
/square6ICDs are now first-line therapy in the secondaryprevention of sudden death. Even selected patients
at high risk of sudden death who have never experien-
ced a life-threatening ventricular arrhythmia are
also advised to undergo ICD implantation.
/square6Following are general indications for ICD insertion.
• Spontaneous sustained VT in association with structural heart
disease.
• Nonsustained VT in patients with coronary disease, prior
myocardial infarction, LV dysfunction, and inducible VT or
sustained VT at electrophysiological study.
• Patients with dilated and particularly hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy, long QT syndrome and Brugada syndrome
who have a strong family history of sudden cardiac death.
Q.Describe the etiology, pathophysiology, clinical fea-
tures, and management of pulmonary hypertension.
Definition
/square6Pulmonary hypertension is defined as a mean
pulmonary artery pressure of  ≥25 mmHg at rest.
Etiology
Primary pulmonary hypertension (PPH)
/square6This is present without any apparent reason.
Secondary pulmonary hypertension
/square6This is secondary to many diseases, which are as
follows.
(Contd. )TABLE 3.39: Causes of secondary pulmonary HTN
Causes of pulmonary HTN Mechanism
Disorders of ventillation
• Obstructive sleep apnea They produce hypoxia and pulmonary vasoconstriction leading• Morbid obesity (Pickwickian syndrome) to pulmonary HTN• Cerebrovascular disease
Cardiac disorders
• Mitral valve disease (stenosis and regurgitation) They cause pulmonary HTN either by increased left atrial pressure
• Left ventricular failure (mitral valve disease, LVF, myxoma) or by increased blood flow• Left atrial myxoma through pulmonary circulation (Eisenmenger syndrome)• Congenital heart disease with Eisenmenger syndrome

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3228
Pathophysiology
/square6Pulmonary HTN leads to right ventricular hyper-
trophy and right heart failure. Right ventricular
failure leads to peripheral edema. Right ventriculardilatation leads tricuspid annular dilatation leadingto functional TR.
Clinical Features
Symptoms
/square6Patients usually present with exertional dyspnea(commonest symptom), chest pain, syncope andfatigue.
/square6Exertional dyspnea, fatigue and syncope are dueto the inability of the heart to increase cardiac output
because of decreased blood flow from right to leftside of the heart. Chest pain may be due to right
ventricular ischemia.
/square6Hemoptysis can occur due to rupture of distended
pulmonary vessels.
/square6In addition, there can be symptoms of underlyingdisease causing pulmonary HTN.
Signs
/square6JVP is raised with a prominent ‘a’ wave.
/square6A right ventricular (parasternal) heave is present,
and a loud P2 is heard.
/square6Other findings include a right ventricular fourth
heart sound, and an early diastolic murmur due topulmonary regurgitation ( Graham Steell murmur ).
This murmur is heard over the second and third
left intercostal spaces, close to the sternum./square6Tricuspid regurgitation may develop and indicatesright ventricular failure. If TR develops, there is apansystolic murmur and a large jugular ‘ v’ wave.
/square6Features of right ventricular failure such as ascites,
peripheral edema and hepatomegaly may bepresent.
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray:  May show right ventricular and right
atrial enlargement. Pulmonary arteries are enlargedand taper rapidly. There is peripheral pruning of
pulmonary arteries. Peripheral lung fields are
oligaemic. X-ray may also show the underlyingdisease causing pulmonary HTN.
/square6ECG:  Demonstrates right ventricular hypertrophy
(right axis deviation, dominant R wave in lead V1,
and inverted T waves in right precordial leads)and right atrial enlargement (tall peaked P wavesin lead II).
/square6Echocardiography:  Shows  right ventricular dilatation
and/ or hypertrophy, reduction in left ventricular(LV) cavity size, and tricuspid regurgitation. Echo-cardiogram may also reveal the cause of pulmonaryhypertension, such as mitral stenosis or an intra-cardiac shunt.
/square6Other investigations: Pulmonary function tests are
helpful in documenting underlying obstructiveairway disease or severe restrictive lung disease.Hypoxemia and an abnormal diffusing capacity for
carbon monoxide are common findings of pulmo-
nary hypertension. A lung perfusion scan is helpfulin evaluating thromboembolic pulmonary hyper-TABLE 3.39: Causes of secondary pulmonary HTN ( contd. )
Causes of pulmonary HTN Mechanism
Pulmonary vascular disorders
• Acute and chronic pulmonary thromboembolism They cause increased resistance to blood flow and hence
• Multiple pulmonary artery stenoses hypertension
• Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease• Parasitic infection, e.g. schistosomiasis
Diseases of the lung and parenchyma
• COPD (most common cause) They decrease the surface area of pulmonary vasculature and• Interstitial lung diseases hypoxia leading to pulmonary HTN• Other chronic lung disorders (bronchiectasis, bilateral
fibrocavity)
Musculoskeletal and neurological disorders
• Kyphoscoliosis They cause chronic hypoventilation leading to hypoxia,
• Poliomyelitis pulmonary vasoconstriction and pulmonary HTN
• Myasthenia gravis
Miscellaneous
• Appetite-suppressant drugs, e.g. dexfenfluramine They cause increased resistance to pulmonary blood flow and• Type 1 glycogen storage diseases also endothelial damage leading to pulmonary HTN• Lipid storage diseases, e.g. Gaucher’s disease• Connective tissue diseases, e.g. SLE, scleroderma, sarcoidosis• Cirrhosis of liver• Sickle cell disease• HIV infection

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System229
3tension. ANA to identify connective tissue diseases
and HIV testing should be done in unexplainedpulmonary HTN. HRCT (high resolution CT) scanof lung is useful to rule out interstitial lung disease.Sleep studies are helpful to rule out obstructivesleep apnea.
Treatment
Treatment of the underlying cause
/square6Wherever possible, underlying cause should be identi-fied and treated. For example, if pulmonary HTN isdue to mitral valve disease, it should be corrected.
General measures
/square6Patients should avoid strenuous exercise since it
increases pulmonary HTN dramatically. Digoxinand diuretics are useful if there is right heart failurecausing peripheral edema and ascites. Oxygen
supplementation helps to decrease dyspnea and
improves pulmonary hypertension.
Anticoagulant therapy (e.g. warfarin)
/square6This is indicated for patients with primary pulmo-
nary hypertension (PPH) because thrombin deposi-tion occurs in the pulmonary circulation and servesas a growth factor to promote the disease process.
Calcium channel blockers
/square6These drugs are useful for patients who have rever-
sible vasoconstriction of pulmonary vasculature(reversibility can be identified by cardiac catheteriza-tion and injecting short-acting vasodilators). Highdoses of calcium channel blockers are required (e.g.
nifedipine, 240 mg/day, or amlodipine, 20 mg/day).
Prostaglandins
/square6Epoprostenol (prostacyclin) and treprostinil (an
analogue of epoprostenol) are useful in treating
patients who are unresponsive to other therapies.Clinical trials have demonstrated improvement insymptoms, exercise tolerance, and survival withthese drugs. Epoprostenol can only be administeredintravenously and requires placement of a perma-
nent central venous catheter and infusion through
an ambulatory infusion pump system. Treprostinilcan be administered subcutaneously through asmall infusion pump.
Endothelin receptor antagonists
/square6Endothelin receptor antagonists such as ambrisentan,
bosentan, and macitentan bind to endothelin andinhibit vasoconstriction caused by endothelin.These drugs can cause increase in liver enzymes,
hence liver function should be monitored monthly
throughout the duration of use.
Phosphodiesterase 5 (PDE-5) inhibitors (tadalafil,
sildenafil, vardenafil)
/square6These drugs have vasodilator action. They dilate
pulmonary arteries and lower pulmonary vascularpressure.Lung transplantation
/square6This is considered in patients who remain sympto-
matic in spite of all the above treatments. Acceptableresults have been achieved with heart-lung,
bilateral lung, and single lung transplant.
Q.Describe the etiology, clinical features, diagnosis,
complications and management of deep veinthrombosis (venous thrombosis).
Q.Prophylaxis for deep vein thrombosis (DVT).
/square6Thrombus formation within deep veins, especially
of the lower limbs is termed deep venous throm-
bosis (DVT).
/square6The presence of thrombus within a superficial or
deep vein and the accompanying inflammatoryresponse in the vessel wall is termed venous
thrombosis  or thrombophlebitis .
Common Sites of DVT
/square6Deep venous system of lower limbs (most cases of
pulmonary embolism are due to this).
/square6Pelvic veins.
Etiology (Risk Factors)
TABLE 3.40: Risk factors for DVT
Inherited
• Factor V Leiden mutation• Prothrombin gene mutation• Protein S deficiency• Protein C deficiency• Antithrombin (AT) deficiency• Dysfibrinogenemia
Acquired
• Prolonged travel• Prolonged immobilization (due to surgery, fractures, stroke,
illness)
• Obesity• Cigarette smoking• Drugs (oral contraceptives, steroids, tamoxifen)• Pregnancy• Postmenopausal hormone replacement• Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
• Cancer
• Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (because of hypoxia
induced polycythemia)
• Congestive heart failure• Presence of a central venous catheter
• Hyperhomocysteinemia
• Myeloproliferative disorders (essential thrombocythemia,
polycythemia vera)
• Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria• Inflammatory bowel disease
• Nephrotic syndrome
• Hyperviscosity (Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia,
multiple myeloma, leukocytosis in acute leukemia, sickle
cell anemia)

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3230 Pathogenesis
/square6Virchow described three factors (Virchow triad) in
the causation of venous thrombosis. These are:1. Stasis of blood2. Abnormalities of vessel wall3. Hypercoagulable state
/square6Any one or more of the above factors may bepresent in DVT
Clinical Features
/square6DVT may be asymptomatic in 50% of cases.
/square6Classic symptoms of DVT include swelling, pain,and discoloration in the involved limb. Superficialveins are dilated. Affected limb is usually warm.
/square6Thrombosed vein may be palpable as a cord.
/square6There may be pain and tenderness along the courseof the affected vein.
/square6There may be pain in the calf on forceful dorsi-flexion of the foot (Homan’s sign).
/square6In advanced cases, there may be cyanosis and
venous gangrene in the affected limb.Diagnosis of DVT
D-dimer
/square6D-dimer  levels are elevated in DVT (more than
500 ng/mL in most patients with DVT). It is a break-down product of fibrin and is present wheneverclot formation occurs. It is more elevated in pulmo-nary embolism than DVT because the clot is biggerin pulmonary embolism.
/square6D-dimer is a useful “rule out” test. A negative D-dimertest almost rules out DVT, but a positive test has tobe further investigated by Doppler ultrasonography.
/square6The D-dimer assay is not specific to DVT. Levels canalso increase in patients with myocardial infarction,pneumonia, sepsis, cancer, the postoperative state,and second or third trimester of pregnancy.
Venous Doppler ultrasonography
/square6Loss of vein compressibility with gentle manual
pressure from the ultrasound transducer suggests
thrombosis. Loss of compressibility is due to
passive distension by thrombus.
/square6Thrombus may appear as homogeneous and lowechogenicity mass. The vein itself often appears mildly
dilated, and collateral channels may be absent.
/square6Other features of DVT are loss of augmentation of
flow on compression and loss of normal respiratoryvariation. If ultrasound is inconclusive, CT or
magnetic resonance imaging of veins may help.
Magnetic resonance (MR) (contrast-enhanced)
/square6When ultrasound is equivocal, MR venography is
an excellent imaging modality to diagnose DVT.
Ascending contrast venography
/square6This is rarely used now because of availability of
Doppler ultrasound and MR venography.
Algorithm for Diagnosing DVT
Figure 3.19 Diagnostic algorithm for DVT
TABLE 3.41: Wells clinical prediction guide for diagnosis of DVT
Clinical variable Score
• Active cancer 1
• Paralysis, paresis, or recent cast 1• Bedridden for >3 days; major surgery <12 weeks 1• Tenderness along distribution of deep veins 1• Entire leg swollen 1• Unilateral calf swelling >3 cm 1• Pitting edema• Previous DVT documented 11• Collateral superficial nonvaricose veins 1• Alternative diagnosis at least as likely as DVT –2
Score: Low probability— ≤0, moderate probabilit—1 or 2, high
probability— ≥3

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System231
3Treatment of DVT
/square6The objectives of DVT treatment are; prevention of
further clot extension, prevention of acute pulmo-nary embolism, reduction of recurrent thrombosis,
reduction of late complications such as postphle-
bitic syndrome, chronic venous insufficiency, andpulmonary hypertension.
Anticoagulant Therapy
/square6Anticoagulation is the main treatment for DVT.Parenteral anticoagulants are used initially toachieve immediate anticoagulation. Either un-fractionated heparin (UFH) or low molecular weight
heparin (LMWH) can be used for this purpose.
/square6Unfractinated heparin : Dose should be adjusted to
achieve aPTT of 2–3 times the upper limit of normal.
/square6Low molecular weight heparins (LMWH):  Do not
require any monitoring, convenient to use and arecost effective. They also have less chances of heparininduced thrombocytopenia (HIT).
/square6Fondaparinux:  This is an anti-Xa pentasaccharide.
It is administered as once-daily subcutaneousinjection to treat DVT. No laboratory monitoring isrequired.
/square6Oral anticoagulation:  With warfarin can be started
on the first day itself as it takes 5–7 days for its effectto come. During this 5–7 day period, heparin andoral agents are overlapped. After 5–7 days heparincan be discontinued and warfarin continued. Usual
starting dose of warfarin is 5–10 mg. it should
be adjusted to achieve a target INR of 2.0–3.0.Rivaroxaban, apixaban, dabigatran, edoxaban,betrixaban are newer oral anticoagulants which canbe used instead of warfarin.
/square6Anticoagulation should be continued for 3–6 months,if there is a reversible risk factor. For idiopathicDVT, anticoagulation should be given for 6–12months. For patients at risk of recurrent DVT (e.g.hypercoagulable disorders), anticoagulation should
be given indefinitely.
Inferior Vena Caval (IVC) Filters
/square6IVC filter is helpful to prevent pulmonary
embolism. It is indicated when anticoagulation iscontraindicated because of active bleeding and inrecurrent venous thrombosis despite intensiveanticoagulation.
Elastic Compression Stocking
/square6Use of an elastic compression stocking for first2 years prevents postphlebitic syndrome. It shouldbe used as soon as DVT is diagnosed. Stockingsneed not be worn when patient is in bed.
Leg Elevation
/square6Elevation of affected leg to 15 degrees reduces painand edema.Early Ambulation
/square6Once anticoagulation has been started and thepatient’s symptoms (i.e. pain, swelling) are under
control, patient is encouraged to ambulate.
Prophylaxis of Deep Vein Thrombosis
/square6DVT prophylaxis is indicated in patients at high
risk of developing DVT (Table 3.42). Such patients
are as follows.
TABLE 3.42: Indications for DVT prophylaxis
High risk surgical patients
• Fracture of pelvis or lower limb bones
• Hip and knee joint replacement• Major abdominal and gynecologic surgery
• Multiple trauma
• Acute spinal cord injury
High risk medical patients
• Acute coronary syndrome• Cardiac failure• Active cancer
• Sepsis
• ARDS• Severe infections (pneumonia)• Stroke• Paraplegia• Patients on mechanical ventilator
/square6Measures useful for DVT prophylaxis are as
follows:
– Limb physiotherapy.
– Early mobilization.
– Graduated compression stockings.
– Intermittent pneumatic compression devices to
both legs.
– Unfractionated heparin, 5000 units subcuta-
neously 12th hourly or low molecular weightheparin subcutaneously.
– All the above methods can be combined in high
risk patients.
– Oral warfarin after initial heparin therapy if the
risk factor persists for a long time.
Differential Diagnosis of DVT
/square6Ruptured Baker’s cyst.
/square6Cellulitis.
/square6Postphlebitic syndrome/venous insufficiency.
/square6Calf muscle pull or tear.
/square6Lymphatic filariasis.
Complications
/square6Pulmonary embolism.
/square6Venous gangrene.
/square6Postphlebitic syndrome (edema, venous claudica-
tion, skin pigmentation, dermatitis, and ulceration).
/square6Chronic venous insufficiency.
/square6Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3232 Q.What is pulmonary embolism?
Q.Discuss the etiology, pathophysiology, clinical
features, diagnosis, and management of acute
pulmonary embolism.
Definition
/square6Pulmonary embolism (PE) refers to exogenous or
endogenous material traveling to the lungs blocking
pulmonary artery or its branches.
/square6This leads to a potential spectrum of consequences,
including dyspnea, chest pain, hypoxemia, andsometimes death.
Types
/square6Massive pulmonary embolism.
/square6Small peripheral artery embolism.
/square6Multiple recurrent pulmonary emboli.
Etiology and Risk Factors
/square6Etiology of pulmonary thromboembolism is sameas that of DVT.
/square6Thrombus from deep veins of lower limbs is the
most common material embolizing to the lungs.
Emboli can also occur from tumor, fat (long bonefractures), amniotic fluid, and foreign materialduring IV drug abuse.
/square6The following discussion refers to pulmonaryembolism due to deep vein thrombosis.
Pathophysiology
/square6After pulmonary embolism, lung tissue is ventilatedbut not perfused—producing an intrapulmonary
dead space and impaired gas exchange. After few
hours, the non-perfused lung no longer producessurfactant leading to alveolar collapse, whichexacerbates hypoxemia.
/square6Pulmonary embolism causes a reduction in thecross-sectional area of the pulmonary arterial bedleading to elevation of pulmonary arterial pressureand dilatation of right ventricle and right atrium.
/square6A massive pulmonary embolism obstructing themain branches of pulmonary artery may causesudden hemodynamic collapse and death.
/square6Embolism into a small peripheral artery may pro-
duce pulmonary infarction leading to hemoptysis
and pleuritic chest pain. Infarction may not alwaysoccur because oxygen continues to be supplied bythe bronchial circulation and the airways.
Clinical Features
Massive Pulmonary embolism
/square6This leads to sudden hemodynamic collapse dueto acute obstruction of the right ventricular outflow.
/square6Patients present with hypotension and shock.
/square6Central chest pain may be complained of due to
cardiac ischemia due to lack of coronary blood flow./square6Syncope and sudden death may occur due to
sudden reduction in cardiac output.
/square6On examination, the patient appears pale, sweatyand tachypnoeic.
/square6Tachycardia and hypotension are usually present.
/square6JVP is raised with a prominent ‘a’ wave due to right
heart failure.
/square6There is a right ventricular heave, a gallop rhythm
and a widely split second heart sound because P2is delayed due to right ventricular failure. Tricuspid
regurgitation murmur may be present due to right
ventricular dilatation.
Small Peripheral Artery Embolism
/square6This leads to sudden onset of dyspnea, pleuriticchest pain, and hemoptysis. Chest pain and hemo-ptysis are due to pulmonary infarction.
/square6Other symptoms are palpitations, cough, anxiety,
and lightheadedness.
/square6Many pulmonary emboli occur silently without anysymptoms.
/square6On examination, the patient may be tachypnoeicwith a localized pleural rub and often coarsecrepitations over the area involved. Pleural effusioncan develop on the affected side.
Multiple Recurrent Pulmonary Emboli
/square6This leads to insidious onset breathlessness, over
weeks to months and pulmonary HTN.
/square6Patient has symptoms of pulmonary HTN such as
exertional dyspnea, weakness, exertional syncope,and occasionally angina.
/square6On examination, there are signs of pulmonary HTNsuch as right ventricular heave and loud P2.
Evidence of Deep Vein Thrombosis
/square6Erythema, warmth, pain, swelling, or tendernessmay be present in one or both legs.
/square6Pain with dorsiflexion of the foot (Homans’ sign)may also be present.
Wells Scoring System
This is used to determine the probability of pulmonaryembolism (PE).
TABLE 3.43: Wells scoring system for pulmonary embolism
Clinical variable Score
• Signs and symptoms of DVT 3.0
• Alternative diagnosis less likely than PE 3.0• Heart rate >100/min 1.5• Immobilization >3 days; surgery within 4 weeks 1.5• Prior PE or DVT 1.5• Hemoptysis 1.0• Malignancy present 1.0
Clinical probability of PE: high if score >6; intermediate if 2–6 and
low if <2

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System233
3Differential Diagnosis
Since the symptoms and signs of pulmonary embolism
are non-specific, other diagnoses with similar presen-tation should be kept in mind. These are:
/square6Acute coronary syndrome, including unstableangina and acute myocardial infarction
/square6Pneumonia
/square6Acute exacerbation of asthma or COPD
/square6Congestive heart failure
/square6Pericarditis
/square6Pneumothorax
/square6Primary pulmonary hypertension
/square6Anxiety with hyperventilation.
Diagnosis
D-dimer
/square6It is elevated (>500 ng/mL) in more than 90% of
patients with pulmonary embolism (PE). D-dimer
is a product of endogenous fibrin breakdownand indicates presence of clot in the vascularsystem.
/square6It is not specific for PE because it is also positivein myocardial infarction, sepsis, or almost any
systemic illness. However, it has high sensitivity
of 96% and a negative predictive value of 99%.
/square6If D-dimer is negative, it essentially rules out PE.If it is positive, PE must be confirmed by othertests.
ABG (Arterial Blood Gas) Analysis
/square6Usually shows hypoxemia and low arterial CO2
level, i.e. type-1 respiratory failure pattern.
ECG
/square6Sinus tachycardia; new-onset atrial fibrillation orflutter.
/square6S1-Q3-T3 pattern (S wave in lead I, Q wave in lead
III, and an inverted T wave in lead III).
/square6Right axis deviation and right ventricular strain
(T-wave inversion in leads V1 to V4).
/square6ECG is also useful to rule out other diagnoses suchas myocardial infarction.
Chest X-ray
/square6Common radiographic findings include pleuraleffusion, atelectasis, pulmonary infiltrates, and mildelevation of hemidiaphragm.
/square6Classic signs of pulmonary infarction, such asHampton’s hump (wedge shaped opacity abovethe diaphragm with base towards pleura) or
decreased vascularity (Westermark’s sign) may be
present./square6Dilatation of pulmonary artery and right ventricle.
/square6Abrupt cut-off of a vessel.
/square6Chest X-ray is also useful to rule out other diag-noses such as pneumothorax, pneumonia or ribfracture.
Doppler Ultrasound
/square6This is done to detect thrombosis of pelvic, ilio-femoral or calf veins.
Echocardiography
/square6May reveal abnormalities of right ventricular size
or function that may support the diagnosis of
pulmonary embolism. It can occasionally show theclot in the proximal pulmonary arteries.
Ventilation-perfusion Scanning (V/Q Scan)
/square6This is a very good test, but nowadays  is being
replaced by CT-angiogram. V/Q scanning may beused when CT scanning is not available or if thepatient has a contraindication to CT scanning or
intravenous contrast material.
/square6Perfusion scan is obtained by 99mTc scintigraphy
which demonstrates underperfused areas. Ventila-tion scan is obtained by inhalation of radioactivexenon gas. If there is a perfusion defect in thenormally ventilated area, it is highly suggestive of
a pulmonary embolism.
/square6However there are some limitations to the test. For
example, a similarly matched defect may be seenin emphysematous bulla. Hence, this test shouldbe interpreted in the context of the history,examination and other investigations.
CT-angiogram and MR-angiogram
/square6CT-scan with intravenous contrast (CT pulmonary
angiography) show good sensitivity and specificity
for medium-sized pulmonary emboli. Newmultislice CT machines have high sensitivities foreven very small thrombi. MR imaging  gives similar
results and is used if CT angiography is contra-indicated.
Pulmonary Angiography
/square6This has  remained the accepted “gold standard”
technique for the diagnosis of acute pulmonary
embolism. It is an extremely sensitive, specific, andsafe test. Nowadays it is done only if surgery isconsidered in acute massive embolism. The test isperformed by injecting contrast material through acatheter inserted into the main pulmonary artery.
Filling defects or obstructed vessels can be visualized.
Other Tests
/square6Troponin levels are usually elevated in pulmonary
embolism due to right ventricular damage.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3234 Algorithm for the Diagnosis of Pulmonary Embolism
Figure 3.20 Diagnostic algorithm for pulmonary embolism
Treatment
General measures
/square6High-flow oxygen (60–100%) should be given to all
patients. All patients should be admitted to intensivecare unit. Intravenous fluids and inotropic agents(dopamine and noradrenaline) should be started if
there is hypotension. Intubation and mechanical
ventilation should be considered in all patients ifthere is respiratory compromise.
Anticoagulation
/square6Anticoagulants prevent the progression of thrombus
and further emboli.
/square6Either  low-molecular-weight heparin  (LMWH) (e.g.
dalteparin, enoxaparin) or unfractionated heparincan be used for this purpose. Unfractionatedheparin is given at an initial dose of 5000–10,000
units intravenously, followed by continuous infusion
of 1000 units per hour.
/square6LMWHs have the advantage of less frequent dosing,and aPTT need not be monitored. The chances ofheparin induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) is alsoless with LMWHs.
/square6Oral anticoagulants (warfarin) are usually begunimmediately and the heparin is tapered off after
5–7 days of overlap as the oral anticoagulant
becomes effective. Oral anticoagulants are conti-nued for 6 weeks to 6 months, depending on thelikelihood of recurrence of venous thrombosis orembolism. Lifelong anticoagulation is indicated inrecurrent embolism.
/square6If the patient develops HIT, direct thrombin
inhibitors such as dabigatran, rivaroxaban and
lepirudin can be used instead of heparin. Bleedingdue to excess heparin can be corrected by injecting
protamine sulphate and due to warfarin by injectingVit K.
Thrombolytic therapy
/square6In addition to anticoagulation, thrombolytic therapy
is also indicated in patients with  massive pulmo-
nary embolism with hemodynamic compromise
such as hypotension.  Streptokinase or urokinase or
tPA (tissue plasminogen activator) can be used forthrombolysis. Thrombolysis has been shown toclear pulmonary emboli more rapidly and to confera survival benefit in massive PE.
Surgery
/square6Surgical pulmonary embolectomy may be appro-
priate in patients who have massive embolismoccluding the main or proximal branches andcannot receive thrombolytic therapy.
Vena caval filters
/square6Indications for IVC filter placement include contra-
indications to anticoagulation and recurrentembolism while on anticoagulant therapy. IVCfilters are sometimes placed in the setting of
massive PE when it is believed that any further
emboli might be lethal, particularly if thrombolytictherapy is contraindicated. Greenfield filter hasbeen most widely used. Filters can be inserted viathe jugular or femoral vein.
Prevention of Pulmonary Embolism
/square6This is same as prophylaxis for DVT.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System235
3Q.Nonthrombotic pulmonary embolism.
/square6Pulmonary embolism can also result from sub-
stances other than thrombus. These include fat, air,
amniotic fluid, and foreign bodies.
Fat Embolism
/square6Fat embolism usually occurs in the setting of
fracture of long bones and major surgery. Traumato other fat-rich tissues such as the liver or sub-cutaneous tissue can occasionally result in fatembolism.
/square6The fat particles which enter into vascular systemcause obstruction of multiple vessels. Free fattyacids released from neutral fat by lipases causediffuse vasculitis with capillary leakage fromcerebral, pulmonary, and other vascular beds.
/square6Symptoms develop 24 to 48 hours after the eventwhich include a characteristic syndrome ofdyspnea, petechiae, and mental confusion.
/square6The diagnosis is made from the clinical and radio-graphic findings in the setting of risk factors suchas surgery or trauma. Fat droplets (by oil red Ostain) may be found in bronchoalveolar lavage fluidin fat embolism. However, the diagnosis of fat
embolism remains a diagnosis of exclusion.
/square6Treatment is supportive, including oxygen and
mechanical ventilation, and the prognosis isgenerally good.
Amniotic Fluid Embolism
/square6Although uncommon, amniotic fluid embolism isone of the causes of maternal death during or afterdelivery. The delivery may be either spontaneous
or by cesarean section and usually without any
complication.
/square6Amniotic fluid may gain access to uterine venouschannels during or after delivery. It then travels to
pulmonary and general circulations. Amniotic fluid
has thromboplastic activity and leads to extensivefibrin deposition in the pulmonary vasculature andother organs. A severe consumptive coagulopathyensues, with marked hypofibrinogenemia. After theacute event, an enhanced fibrinolytic state often
develops. ARDS develops frequently.
/square6Clinical features are sudden onset dyspnea. There
may be hypotension and death can occur. Leftventricular dysfunction may occur, due to the
myocardial depressant effect of amniotic fluid.
/square6Examination of the pulmonary arterial blood may
reveal the amorphous fragments of vernix caseosa,squamous cells, or mucin.
/square6Treatment is supportive, with oxygen, mechanicalventilation, and inotropes. Administration ofheparin, antifibrinolytic agents such as α-amino-
caproic acid, and cryoprecipitate may be useful in
selected patients.Air Embolism
/square6Air embolism occurs when large amount of air gains
access into the venous system.
/square6The incidence has increased due to frequent
invasive surgical and medical procedures, frequent
use of indwelling venous and arterial catheters, andthe frequency of thoracic and other forms of trauma.
/square6Air embolism may be asymptomatic or result indeath if severe. If there is patent foramen ovale, aircan cross from right to left side and result in systemic
embolization. In the absence of a patent foramen
ovale, lungs filter most of the air, but large amountof air can still gain access to the systemic circulation.
/square6Symptoms include dyspnea, wheezing, chest pain,cough, agitation, confusion, tachycardia, hypo-tension and seizures. A “mill wheel murmur” due
to air in the right ventricle may sometimes be heard.
/square6Arterial blood gas analysis reveals hypoxemia and
hypercapnia in severe cases. Chest X-ray may showpulmonary edema or air fluid levels.
/square6Treatment includes immediate placement of thepatient in the Trendelenburg/left lateral decubitus
position and administration of 100% oxygen. If air
is present in the right side of the heart, it should beaspirated by a central venous catheter. Occasionally,hyperbaric oxygen is indicated. Anticonvulsants aregiven to control seizures.
Q.Define and classify hypertension. Describe the
etiology, pathophysiology, clinical features, diag-nosis, and management of essential hypertension.
Q.Joint national committee VII (JNC-VII)
 classification
of blood pressure.
Q.Secondary hypertension.
/square6Hypertension is defined as a systolic blood pressure
(SBP) of 140 mm Hg or more, or a diastolic bloodpressure (DBP) of 90 mm Hg or more, or taking
antihypertensive medication. Normal BP is less
than 140/90 mmHg.
/square6Hypertension is a major cause of premature athero-sclerosis leading to cerebrovascular events, ischemicheart disease and peripheral vascular disease.
/square6Hypertension is very common in the developed
world and is present in 20–30% of the adult popula-
tion. Hypertension rates are much higher in blackAfricans (40–45% of adults). The risk of mortalityor morbidity rises progressively with increasingsystolic and diastolic pressures.
/square6BP should be measured at least twice at different
times before classifying a patient as hypertensive.
Blood pressure should be measured at least twiceafter 5 minutes of rest with the patient seated, theback supported, and the arm at heart level. Thecuff should not be too small for the arm, andtobacco and caffeine should be avoided for at least
30 minutes before measuring BP.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3236 /square6When assessing the cardiovascular risk, the average
blood pressure at separate visits is more accuratethan measurements taken at a single visit.
Types of Hypertension
Primary HTN (essential HTN)
/square6Here, a single reversible  cause of hypertension
cannot be identified. Primary HTN accounts for the
majority (95%) of cases of HTN. The term “essentialhypertension” was used earlier because it wasthought that progressive increase in blood pressurewith advancing age was essential to maintain bloodflow through atherosclerotic arteries.
Secondary HTN
/square6Here, a definite reason for hypertension can be found
such as renal disease, endocrine problems, etc.
Etiology of Hypertension
Primary HTN (Essential HTN, Idiopathic HTN)
There are many risk factors for essential hypertension.
Genetic factors
/square6Blood pressure tends to run in families and children
of hypertensive parents tend to have higher bloodpressure than age-matched children of people with
normal blood pressure. Concordance of blood
pressure is greater within families than in unrelatedindividuals, greater between monozygotic thanbetween dizygotic twins. However, the exactgenetic loci and mutations are unknown.
Gender and ethnicity
/square6Before age 50, the prevalence of hypertension is lower
in women than in men, probably due to a protectiveaction of estrogen. After menopause, the prevalenceof hypertension increases rapidly in women and
exceeds that in men. African Americans have higher
prevalence of hypertension than other races.
Obesity
/square6Fat people are more prone to develop hypertension
than thin people. The underlying mechanisms by
which obesity leads to hypertension are incomple-tely understood, but there is mounting evidence foran expanded plasma volume plus sympathetic overactivity.
Alcohol intake
/square6People who consume large amount of alcohol have
higher blood pressure than those who do not drink.However, small amount of alcohol intake is actuallyassociated with lower blood pressure.
Sodium intake
/square6High sodium intake is associated with hyper-
tension. Studies of the restriction of salt intake haveshown a beneficial effect on blood pressure.
Stress
/square6Acute stress can temporarily raise blood pressure.
However, the relationship between chronic stress
and blood pressure remains to be proven.Humoral mechanisms
/square6Abnormalities in the autonomic nervous system,
and renin–angiotensin system have been also
implicated in the pathogenesis of essential HTN.
Some hypertensive patients have been defined ashaving low-renin and others as having high-renin
essential hypertension based on plasma rennin
activity. However, there is no convincing evidencethat the above systems are directly involved in the
maintenance of hypertension.
Insulin resistance
/square6Insulin resistance and/or hyperinsulinemia have
been suggested as being responsible for the
increased arterial pressure in some patients withhypertension. A syndrome called the ‘metabolic
syndrome’ has been described which consists of
hyperinsulinemia, glucose intolerance, reducedlevels of HDL cholesterol, hypertriglyceridemia and
central obesity in association with hypertension.
Secondary HTN
Pathophysiology
/square6If hypertension remains uncontrolled for a longtime, many changes take place in blood vessels and
various organs.
/square6The resistance vessels (the small arteries and
arterioles) show structural changes in the form of
increased wall thickness and reduced lumendiameter. The number of these resistance vessels
may also decrease. These changes result in an
increased peripheral vascular resistance.
/square6In large arteries, there is thickening of the media,increase in collagen and deposition of calcium.
These changes result in loss of arterial compliance,
leading to a more pronounced arterial pressurewave. Over a period of time atherosclerotic changes
develop in large arteries due to mechanical stress
and endothelial injury.
/square6Left ventricular hypertrophy develops due to
increased left ventricular load (increase in after-
load). Left ventricular failure can happen in longstanding uncontrolled HTN.
/square6Thickening and atherosclerotic changes in blood
vessels supplying various organs results in damageTABLE 3.44: Causes of secondary HTN
• Renal causes Renal artery stenosis, glomerulo-
nephritis, polycystic kidney disease,
acute and chronic renal failure
• Endocrine causes Pheochromocytoma, hypothyroidism,
hyperthyroidism, Cushing’s syndrome,
Conn’s syndrome, acromegaly, hyper-
parathyroidism, congenital adrenalhyperplasia
• Drugs Oral contraceptives, steroids, NSAIDs,
sympathomimetics (phenylephrine,
phenylpropanolamine)
• Miscellaneous Coarctation of aorta, obstructive sleep
apnea, pre-eclampsia and eclampsia

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System237
3to those organs. Changes in the renal vasculature
lead to a reduced renal perfusion, reduced glome-
rular filtration rate and, finally, a reduction in
sodium and water excretion. Changes in bloodvessels of brain may lead to stroke. Changes in
blood vessels of heart may lead to myocardial
infarction.
Clinical Manifestations
Symptoms
/square6Hypertension has been termed the “silent killer,”
because it hardly produces any symptoms. If it isundetected in this long asymptomatic phase, itdamages the heart, brain, kidneys, and bloodvessels.
/square6Headache may be a complaint in hypertension, butusually rare and episodes of headaches do notcorrelate with fluctuations in ambulatory bloodpressure.
/square6Attacks of sweating, headache, and palpitations maypoint towards the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma.
/square6Sometimes patients may experience epistaxis whenBP is very high.
/square6Breathlessness may be present due to left ventricular
hypertrophy, diastolic dysfunction, or heart failure.
/square6Angina and leg claudication may be experienced
due to atherosclerotic narrowing of coronary and
lower limb arteries.
/square6Malignant hypertension may present with severe
headache, vomiting, visual disturbances, seizures,altered sensorium, or symptoms of heart failure.
Signs
/square6BP is elevated (systolic ≥140 mmHg and diastolic
≥90 mmHg).
/square6Signs of an underlying cause should be sought,
such as renal artery bruits in renovascular hyper-
tension, or radiofemoral delay in coarctation of theaorta.
/square6Cardiac examination reveals left ventricular hyper-trophy and a loud A2.
/square6Enlarged, palpable kidneys may be found in poly-cystic kidney disease.
/square6A bruit may be heard over the abdomen in lumbararea in renal artery stenosis.
/square6Non-pitting edema, hoarse voice, and coarse skinmay be present in hypothyroidism.
/square6Cushingoid features (lemon on stick appearance)may be present in Cushing’s syndrome.
/square6Optic fundus should be examined in all patientsfor hypertensive retinopathy changes. In malignanthypertension, there is papilledema.
Complications of Hypertension
/square6Hypertension is associated with a number ofserious adverse effects.Cardiovascular Complications
/square6Coronary artery disease (angina, myocardialinfarction).
/square6Heart failure.
/square6Left ventricular hypertrophy and sudden cardiacdeath.
/square6Aortic aneurysm.
/square6Aortic dissection.
/square6Premature atherosclerosis of blood vessels.
CNS Complications
/square6Transient ischemic attacks.
/square6Stroke: Hypertension is the most common and most
important risk factor for stroke.
/square6Intracerebral hemorrhage.
/square6Subarachnoid hemorrhage.
/square6Hypertensive encephalopathy: This is characterized
by very high blood pressure, papilledema, blurringof vision, headache, altered sensorium and focal
neurological deficits.
Renal Complications
/square6Proteinuria.
/square6Chronic renal failure:  Hypertension is a risk factor
for and end-stage renal disease.
/square6Hypertensive nephrosclerosis.
/square6Hypertension can accelerate the progression of avariety of underlying renal diseases.
Ophthalmic Complications
/square6Arteriolosclerosis:  Localized or generalized narrow-
ing of vessels.
/square6Copper wiring and silver wiring of arterioles as a
result of arteriolosclerosis.
/square6Arteriovenous (AV) nicking as a result of arteriolo-sclerosis.
/square6Retinal hemorrhages.
/square6Nerve fiber layer losses.
/square6Increased vascular tortuosity.
/square6Remodeling changes due to capillary nonperfusion,such as shunt vessels and microaneurysms .
/square6Choroidal damage.
Malignant Hypertension
/square6This is characterized by very high blood pressurewith papilledema and end organ damage.
Investigations
Routine Tests
/square6Urea, creatinine and electrolytes (to assess renalfunction).
/square6Urine examination for protein and blood.
/square6Lipid profile.
/square6Blood glucose (to rule out diabetes).

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3238 /square6ECG usually shows evidence left ventricular hyper-
trophy.
/square6Chest X-ray  usually shows  cardiomegaly and rib
notching if there is coarctation of aorta.
Additional Tests (Done Only if Required)
/square6Renal artery Doppler may be indicated if reno-vascular hypertension is suspected.
/square624-hour urinary cortisol and VMA is indicatedif there is clinical suspicion of Cushing’s and
pheochromocytoma.
/square6T3, T4 and TSH, if hypo- or hyperthyroidism is
suspected.
/square6Growth hormone levels and skull X-ray if acro-
megaly is suspected.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen if polycystic kidney or other
renal problems are suspected.
/square6Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring is used to
monitor blood pressure throughout the day. For
this, an automatic BP measuring device is worn bythe patient throughout the day. It is useful toconfirm the diagnosis of hypertension in patientswith ‘white-coat’ hypertension. These devices canalso be used to monitor the response of patients to
drug treatment and, in particular, can be used to
determine the adequacy of 24-hour control withonce-daily medication.
Treatment
Non-pharmacologic Treatment
/square6Weight reduction:  BMI should be <25 kg/m2.
/square6Diet:  Low fat, low sodium diet (<6 g sodium
chloride per day). Fruit and vegetable consumptionshould be increased.
/square6Habits: Alcohol consumption should be cut down
and smoking should be stopped.
/square6Exercise:  Regular exercise, preferably aerobic type
for at least 30 minutes per day.
/square6Relaxation techniques, yoga, meditation.
Antihypertensive Agents
/square6Antihypertensive drugs should be started if blood
pressure is 150/90 mm Hg or higher in adults
60 years and older, or 140/90 mm Hg or higher inadults younger than 60 years.
/square6In patients with hypertension and diabetes, drugs
should be started if blood pressure is 140/90 mm
Hg or higher, regardless of age.
/square6Initial antihypertensive treatment should includea thiazide diuretic or calcium channel blocker or
ACE inhibitor or ARB or beta-blocker. There are
reports that beta-blockers increase the risk of stroke.Hence, other antihypertensive agents should bepreferred over beta-blockers.
/square6Initially treatment should be initiated with onedrug. This drug is increased to maximum tolerateddose gradually till BP is in the desirable range./square6If BP is not controlled within one month with asingle drug, addition of a second drug should beconsidered. Most patients will require a combina-tion of antihypertensive drugs to achieve therecommended targets.
/square6An easy way to remember the antihypertensivedrugs is the mnemonic “ABCD” (A: ACE inhibitoror angiotension receptor blocker, B: Beta-blocker,C: Calcium channel blocker, D: Diuretics).
ACE (Angiotensin Converting Enzyme) Inhibitors
/square6Examples are captopril, ramipril, enalapril,perindopril, and lisinopril.
/square6These drugs block the conversion of angiotensin Ito angiotensin II, which is a potent vasoconstrictor.They also block the degradation of bradykinin, apotent vasodilator.
Compelling Indications
/square6Diabetics with nephropathy:  ACE inhibitors slow the
progression of diabetic nephropathy and decreaseproteinuria.
/square6Ischemic heart disease:  All patients with IHD should
be put on ACE inhibitors because these drugs havebeen shown to reduce long-term mortality andmorbidity of IHD.
Contraindications
/square6Bilateral renal artery stenosis.
/square6Pre-existing renal failure.
Side Effects
/square6Hypotension following the first dose.
/square6Deterioration of renal function in those with severebilateral renovascular disease.
/square6Dry cough due to their effect on bradykinin.
/square6Angioneurotic edema.
Angiotensin II Receptor Blockers (ARBs)
/square6Examples: Losartan, candesartan, valsartan, irbesartan,
telmisartan and olmesartan.
/square6These drugs block angiotensin II receptors. Theirmechanism of action is same as ACE inhibitors but,since they do not have any effect on bradykinin,they do not cause cough. They can be used insteadof ACE inhibitors especially in those who cannottolerate ACE inhibitors because of persistent cough.
Angioneurotic edema and renal dysfunction are
also less common with these drugs than ACEinhibitors.
/square6Compelling indications, contraindications and side
effects are same as those of ACE inhibitors.
Beta-blockers
/square6Examples:  Atenolol, metoprolol, bisoprolol,
oxprenolol, nebivolol, pindolol, carvedilol, andlabetalol.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System239
3/square6These drugs act by inhibiting sympathetic and renin-
angiotensin systems. They reduce the force of cardiaccontraction, as well as resting and exercise-induced
increase in heart rate. Beta-blockers differ among
themselves in terms of cardioselectivity, intrinsicsympathomimetic activity and lipid solubility.
Some are cardioselective (e.g. metoprolol and
bisoprolol), some have intrinsic sympathomimeticactivity and cause  less bradycardia (e.g. oxprenolol
and pindolol). Some are more lipid soluble and pro-
duce CNS side effects like depression (propranolol)while some are less lipid soluble (atenolol).
Compelling Indications
Ischemic heart disease
/square6Beta-blockers have been shown to improve the
symptoms of angina and heart failure and reduce
long-term mortality and morbidity in these patients.Hence, any patient having IHD and HTN should
be put on beta-blockers if BP is uncontrolled even
after starting ACE or ARBs.
Contraindications
/square6Asthma and COPD.
/square6Peripheral vascular disease.
/square6Heart block.
/square6Diabetes (a relative contraindication because beta-blockers can mask hypoglycemia symptoms).
Side Effects
/square6Bronchospasm, bradycardia, fatigue, bad dreams,
depression (propranolol) and hallucinations.
Calcium Channel Blockers
/square6Examples:  Nifedipine, amlodepine, s-amlodepine,
felodepine.
/square6These agents reduce BP by causing arteriolar
dilatation, and some (verapamil, diltiazem) alsoreduce the force of cardiac contraction.
Side-effects
/square6Headache, pedal edema, flushing. All these side
effects are common with short acting agents such
as nifedipine. Verapamil and diltiazem may worsenheart failure.
Diuretics
/square6Examples:  Chlorthalidone, hydrochlorthiazide,
frusemide.
/square6Diuretics act by enhancing sodium excretion fromthe body.
Compelling Indications
/square6Renal failure with fluid retention.
/square6Heart failure with fluid retention.Side Effects
/square6Increased serum cholesterol, impaired glucose tole-
rance, hyperuricemia, and hypokalemia. All these
are common with higher doses of thiazide diuretics.
Alpha Blockers
/square6Examples:  Prazosin, doxazosin, terazosin, tamsu-
losin.
/square6These agents block the action of norepinephrine onalpha receptors resulting in vasodilatation and BP
reduction.
Compelling Indications
/square6Patients having urinary obstructive symptoms due
to benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH) along with
hypertension will especially benefit from thesedrugs. They control BP as well as BPH symptoms.
Side Effects
/square6Postural hypotension.
Direct vasodilators
/square6Examples:  Hydralazine, and minoxidil.
/square6These drugs relax vascular smooth muscle and
cause vasodilation thus reducing the BP. Thesedrugs are used for patients resistant to other forms
of treatment.
Side Effects
/square6Hydralazine can cause reflex tachycardia, fluid
retention and a systemic lupus erythematosus-like
syndrome. Minoxidil can cause edema and excessive
hair growth.
Centrally Acting Drugs
/square6Examples:  Reserpine, methyldopa and clonidine.
/square6These drugs stimulate alpha-2 adrenergic receptors
in the CNS lowering central sympathetic outflow.
They are used as add on therapy in hypertensivesnot responding to combinations of other drugs.Methyldopa and clonidine are especially useful inpregnant women with pre-eclampsia.
Side Effects
/square6These drugs should not be combined with beta-blockers, because both drugs inhibit sympatheticsystem and can produce bradycardia. They cancause depression. Rebound hypertension is a
problem with these agents especially clonidine. α-
Methyldopa can cause autoimmune hemolyticanemia, lupus erythematosus and liver damage.
Contraindications
/square6Depression is a contraindication to centrally actingsympatholytic agents.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3240 Treatment of Underlying Cause in Secondary Hypertension
/square6Surgery for pheochromocytoma, correction of renal
artery stenosis, treatment of any endocrine dis-order, etc.
Q.Hypertensive emergency (malignant hypertension)
and hypertensive urgency.
Hypertensive Emergency
/square6Hypertensive emergency is acute, severe elevation in
blood pressure associated with target organdamage. Patients with hypertensive emergencyusually present with a systolic BP of ≥180 mmHg
and/or diastolic BP of ≥120 mmHg, though there
is no specific threshold since individuals whodevelop an acute rise in blood pressure (even if lessthan 180/120) can develop target organ damage ifthe previous pressure was normal. Earlier termssuch as malignant hypertension and acceleratedhypertension are to be avoided.
Clinical Features
/square6Target-organ damage includes hypertensiveencephalo pathy, pre-eclampsia and eclampsia,
acute left ventricular failure with pulmonary edema,myocardial ischemia, acute aortic dissection, andrenal failure. Damage is rapidly progressive andoften fatal. The characteristic vascular lesion isfibrinoid necrosis of arterioles and small arteries,which causes the clinical manifestations of end-organ damage.
Investigations
/square6Investigations to be done include ECG, cardiac enzymes,urinalysis, serum BUN and creatinine, and CT head forpatients with neurologic symptoms or signs.
Treatment
/square6Hypertensive emergency requires ICU admissionand lowering of blood pressure by intravenousmedications./square6Sodium nitroprusside infusion is the drug of choice
for hypertensive emergencies. Clevidipine is a new,
ultra-short-acting (within 1 to 2 minutes), 3rd-
generation calcium channel blocker that reduces
peripheral resistance without affecting venous
vascular tone and cardiac filling pressures. In recent
trials, it has been shown to be more effective with
lower mortality than nitroprusside. Starting dose
is 1 to 2 mg/h, doubling the dose every 90 sec until
approaching target BP. Hence, if clevidipine is
available, it is the drug of choice and is preferred
over sodium nitroprusside. Other alternatives are
nitroglycerin or labetalol infusion. Blood pressure
should be lowered gradually over many hours to a
target of 160/100 mmHg. In the next 48 hours, BP
can be lowered to normal value. Oral drugs can be
added and parenteral therapy slowly tapered off.
Hypertensive Urgency
/square6Hypertensive urgency is acute, severe elevation in
blood pressure to ≥180/120 mmHg without evidence
of target organ damage. Thus, the main difference
between hypertensive emergency and urgency is
the presence (hypertensive emergency) or absence
(hypertensive urgency) of target organ damage.
/square6Hypertensive urgency can be managed by oral
drugs. For immediate reduction of BP in hyper-
tensive urgency, labetalol and clonidine are useful.
Q.Define cardiomyopathy. Classify cardiomyopathies.
/square6Cardiomyopathies are defined as diseases of the
myocardium associated with cardiac dysfunction.
Classification
/square6The traditional classification of cardiomyopathies
into three categories (i.e. hypertrophic, restrictive
and dilated cardiomyopathy) has many short-
comings, because, there are multiple overlaps
between the etiologies and presentations of the
three types. There can be mixed features and same
etiology can produce different types of cardiomyo-
pathy. The following classification is the latest one.
TABLE 3.45: Classification of cardiomyopathies
Type of cardiomyopathy Examples
Primary-genetic • Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
• Arrhythmogenic right ventricular  cardiomyopathy/dysplasia
Primary-mixed • Dilated cardiomyopathy
(i.e. genetic and acquired)
Primary-acquired • Myocarditis (inflammatory cardiomyopathy)
Secondary • Amyloidosis
• Sarcoidosis
• Storage diseases (Gaucher disease, Hurler disease, Hunter disease, hemochromatosis, glycogen
storage disease, Niemann-Pick disease)
• Endomyocardial fibrosis
• Endocrine (diabetes, hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism, hyperparathyroidism, pheochro mocytoma,
acromegaly)
• Nutritional deficiencies (Beriberi; pellagra; scurvy; selenium; carnitine; kwashiorkor)
• Autoimmune diseases (SLE, dermatomyositis, rheumatoid arthritis, scleroderma, polyarteritis nodosa)
• Neuromuscular diseases (Friedreich’s ataxia, muscular dystrophy, neurofibromatosis, tuberous sclerosis)• Toxic/drugs (doxorubicin, daunorubicin, cyclophosphamide, radiation, heavy metals; chemical agents)
• Postpartum

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System241
3Q.Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (hypertrophic
obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM); idiopathic
hypertrophic subaortic stenosis (IHSS)).
/square6Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is characterized byasymmetrical ventricular hypertrophy mainlyaffecting interventricular (asymmetric septalhypertrophy), but in some cases the hypertrophyis localized to mid ventricle or to the apex. The LVis usually more involved than the RV.
/square6There is dynamic obstruction to LV outflow duringsystole because the outflow tract is narrowedbetween the bulging septum and the anterior mitralvalve leaflet. Smaller end diastolic volume increases
the obstruction (sympathetic stimulation, digoxin,
post-extrasystolic beat) and increased end diastolicvolume decreases the obstruction (Fig. 3.21).
Etiology
/square6It is a familial disease (autosomal dominant withvariable penetrance).
Clinical Features
Symptoms
/square6Patients may be asymptomatic.
/square6Family history may be present.
/square6Dyspnea and chest pain.
/square6Syncope occurs usually after exercise, whendiastolic filling diminishes and outflow obstructionincreases.
/square6Arrhythmias (atrial fibrillation due to elevated LApressure, ventricular arrhythmias).
/square6Sudden death often in athletes after extraordinary
exertion.
Signs
/square6Pulsus bisferiens
/square6Prominent a wave in JVP due to reduced RV
compliance.
/square6Triple apical impulse (due to the prominent atrialfilling wave and early and late systolic impulses).
/square6Loud S4/square6Loud systolic murmur along the left sternal borderthat increases with upright posture or Valsalva’smaneuver and decreases with squatting due todynamic outflow obstruction.
/square6Pansystolic murmur may be present due toassociated mitral regurgitation.
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray is usually normal.
/square6ECG shows left ventricular hypertrophy andexaggerated septal Q waves.
/square6Echocardiogram shows asymmetric LVH, a smalland hypercontractile LV. Interventricular septumis thickened. Doppler ultrasound reveals dynamicobstruction in the LV outflow tract and usually
mitral regurgitation.
/square6Myocardial perfusion imaging may suggest septal
ischemia in the presence of normal coronaryarteries.
/square6Cardiac MRI confirms the hypertrophy.
Natural History
/square6It is variable.
/square6Malignant arrhythmias and death can happen in
some patients.
/square6Some patients may progress to dilated cardiomyo-
pathy.
Treatment
/square6Beta-blockers slow the heart rate and hence increasediastolic filling time. This increases end-diastolic
volume which decreases outflow obstruction. Beta-
blockers also reduce dyspnea, angina, and arrhyth-mias.
/square6Calcium channel blockers (especially verapamil) arealso effective in symptomatic patients.
/square6Diuretics can be used cautiously to reduce high
left ventricular diastolic pressure and pulmonary
congestion.
/square6Treatment of arrhythmias (amiodarone, ICD
implantation).
Figure 3.21 Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (right), left (normal)

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3242 /square6Nonsurgical septal ablation by injection of alcohol
into septal branches of the left coronary artery inselected patients.
/square6Surgical resection of the outflow myocardial septum(myotomy–myomectomy) in patients with severe
symptoms.
Q.Dilated Cardiomyopathy (congestive cardiomyo-
pathy).
/square6Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is characterized by
dilation and impaired contraction of one or bothventricles.
/square6LV dilation and systolic dysfunction are essential
for the diagnosis of dilated cardiomyopathy.
Causes of Dilated Cardiomyopathy
It can be familial or acquired. Some important causesof dilated cardiomyopathy are given below.
/square6Idiopathic
/square6Alcoholic
/square6Myocarditis
/square6Postpartum
/square6Nutritional (thiamine and selenium deficiency)
/square6Drugs  (doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide)
/square6Endocrinopathies (thyrotoxicosis, hypothyroidism)
/square6Genetic diseases (hemochromatosis, glycogen
storage diseases).
Clinical Features
/square6Clinical features are due to left and right heart failure.
/square6In most patients, symptoms of heart failure developgradually.
/square6Symptoms are dyspnea, fatigue, peripheral edema.
/square6Sudden death can occur due to arrhythmias.
/square6Physical examination reveals signs of left heartfailure such as basal lung crepitations, cardio-
megaly, S
3 gallop rhythm and sometimes murmur
of functional mitral regurgitation. Signs of rightheart failure are elevated JVP, peripheral edema,ascites, and sometimes functional tricuspid regurgi-tation murmur. In severe cases, Cheyne-Stokesbreathing, pulsus alternans, pallor, and cyanosis
may be present.
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray:  It shows cardiomegaly, evidence for
left and/or right heart failure, and pleural effusions.
/square6ECG:  Sinus tachycardia, left bundle branch block
and ventricular or atrial arrhythmias.
/square6Echocardiogram:  It shows ventricular dilatation,
global LV and RV systolic dysfunction. It can alsoexclude other diagnoses.
Treatment
/square6Standard therapy for heart failure (ACE inhibitor,
beta-blockers, diuretics, and digoxin)./square6Sodium restriction and avoidance of excessive
physical activity.
/square6Anticoagulation to prevent thromboembolic epi-sodes.
/square6Prevention and treatment of arrhythmias (anti-arrhythmics, implantable cardioverter-defiberillator(ICD)).
/square6Treatment of underlying cause if any.
/square6Cardiac transplantation in severe cases not respond-ing to above treatment.
Q.Restrictive cardiomyopathy (obliterative cardio-
myopathy).
/square6Restrictive cardiomyopathy is characterized by
impaired diastolic filling with normal systolic
function.
/square6Right side of the heart is affected more commonlythan left side.
Causes
/square6Amyloidosis (most common cause)
/square6Endomyocardial fibrosis
/square6Hemochromatosis
/square6Carcinoid syndrome
/square6Connective tissue diseases (e.g. scleroderma)
/square6Chemotherapy or radiation
/square6Hypereosinophilic syndrome
/square6Post open-heart surgery.
Clinical Features
/square6It can present at any age and is more common inwomen than men.
/square6Symptoms are due to both pulmonary and systemiccongestion and include dyspnea, peripheral edema,palpitations, fatigue, weakness, and exercise intole-rance.
/square6Pulse is either normal or of low volume with tachy-cardia.
/square6JVP is elevated with prominently descent. Aninspiratory increase in venous pressure may be seen(Kussmaul sign).
/square6Congestive hepatomegaly, ascites, and peripheraledema may be present.
/square6The first and second heart sounds are usuallynormal. A third heart sound (S3 gallop) is frequently
present because of the abrupt cessation of the rapidventricular filling.
/square6Murmurs of functional mitral and tricuspid regurgi-tation may be present.
Investigations
/square6ECG may show non-specific ST-T changes, lowvoltage QRS complexes and conduction distur-
bances.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System243
3/square6Echocardiogram shows ventricular hypertrophy.
Low voltage complexes in ECG but ventricularhypertrophy in ECHO is highly suggestive ofrestrictive cardiomyopathy.
/square6Cardiac MRI can show ventricular wall thickeningand a distinctive pattern in amyloidosis.
Treatment
/square6There is no specific treatment.
/square6Diuretics to relieve pulmonary and systemic venouscongestion.
/square6Digoxin may precipitate arrhythmias and shouldbe used with caution.
/square6Beta-blockers and calcium channel blockers helpslow heart rates and improve filling.
/square6Excision of fibrotic endocardium (in endomyo-cardial fibrosis).
/square6Underlying cause should be treated.
/square6Cardiac transplantation should be performed in
patients with intractable heart failure.
Q.Define myocarditis. Discuss the etiology, clinical
features, investigations, and management of acute
myocarditis.
/square6Myocarditis  is an inflammation of the myocardium,
the middle layer of the heart wall leading to cardiacdysfunction, heart failure and sudden death. It canbe acute, subacute, or chronic, and there may be either
focal or diffuse involvement of the myocardium.
Etiology/square6Inappropriate tachycardia.
/square6There may be preceding febrile illness or respiratory
tract infection.
/square6Heart blocks can occur if the conduction system getsinvolved.
/square6If the epicardium is involved, there may be pleuritic
chest pain and pericardial effusion.
Investigations
/square6There may be leucocytosis and raised ESR.
/square6CK-MB and troponins are elevated.
/square6Chest X-ray shows cardiomegaly. Pulmonary
edema may be present.
/square6ECG may show nonspecific ST–T changes, conduc-tion blocks, and ventricular ectopics.
/square6Echocardiography can assess the ventricularfunction and can exclude other diseases.
/square6Gallium-67 scintigraphy may reveal increasedcardiac uptake in myocarditis. MRI with gadoliniumenhancement reveals areas of injury throughout themyocardium.
/square6Endomyocardial biopsy can confirm the diagnosis,but is rarely done.
Complications
/square6Arrhythmias
/square6Heart blocks
/square6Congestive heart failure
/square6Chronic myocarditis
/square6Dilated cardiomyopathy.
Treatment
/square6Cardiac failure should be treated as per standardguidelines with ACE inhibitors, beta-blockers,digoxin and diuretics.
/square6Patients with fulminant myocarditis requireaggressive short-term support including an intra-aortic balloon pump or an LV assist device.
/square6Immunosuppressive agents (steroids, azathioprine)
may help myocarditis of autoimmune etiology
(SLE, sarcoidosis).
/square6Patients with severe myocarditis, without anyimprovement with above therapies may be eventual
candidates for cardiac transplantation.
Q.What is aortic aneurysm? What are the types of
aortic aneurysms?
/square6Aortic aneurysm is a permanent localized dilatation
of the aorta having a diameter of at least 1.5 timesthe normal diameter of that given aortic segment.
Types
/square6Based on the morphology, aortic aneurysm can be,
/square6Fusiform:  Here the aneurysm is of uniform shape,
with symmetrical dilatation that involves the fullTABLE 3.46: Etiology of myocarditis
Infections
•Viral: Coxackie, influenza, HIV, dengue, parvovirus B-19,
hepatitis-C, COVID-19
•Bacterial:  Acute rheumatic fever, diptheria, tuberculosis,
salmonella, brucellosis
•Protozoal:  Chagas’ disease, leishmaniasis
•Spirochetal:  Syphilis, leptospirosis, Lyme disease
•Rickettsial:  Scrub typhus, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, Q
fever
•Fungal:  Candidiasis, histoplasmosis, coccidiomycosis
•Helminthic:  Trichinosis, schistosomiasis
Systemic disorders: Scleroderma, sarcoidosis, SLE, Wegener’s
granulomatosis, giant cell myocarditis.
Toxins and poisons: Alcohol, arsenic, aluminium phosphide,
insect bites (bee, wasp, spider, scorpion), snake bites.
Drugs:  Anthracyclines, cyclophosphamide, antibiotics,
diuretics, lithium.
Clinical Features
/square6Myocarditis usually presents as acute congestive
heart failure (CCF).
/square6Signs and symptoms of CCF cuch as dyspnea,
orhopnea, raised JVP, peripheral edema, hypo-
tension, S3 and S4 may be present.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3244 circumference of the aortic wall. This is the most
common type.
/square6Saccular:  Here, the dilatation is more localized and
appears as an outpouching of only a portion of the
aortic wall.
/square6Pseudoaneurysm or false aneurysm refers to dilatation
of only the outer layers of the vessel wall, such asoccurs with a contained rupture of the aortic wall.
It is not actually an aneurysm.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investiga-
tions, complications and management of aortic
aneurysm.
/square6Aortic aneurysm can occur in any part of aorta, butcommonly involves abdominal aorta. Thoracicaorta is less common than abdominal aorta
aneurysm. Abdominal aortic aneurysm is four to
five times more common in men than in women.
/square6The infrarenal aorta is the most common site to getaffected because atherosclerosis is common there.
/square6Thoracic aorta aneurysm can occur in the ascendingaorta, arch of aorta, or descending aorta.
EtiologyThoracic Aorta Aneurysm
/square6Pain in the chest or back.
/square6Symptoms due to compression or distortion ofadjacent structures or vessels by ascending and archaneurysms. These include:
– Hoarseness of voice due to compression of left
vagus or left recurrent laryngeal nerve
– Diaphragmatic paralysis due to compression of
the phrenic nerve
– Wheezing, cough, hemoptysis, dyspnea, or
pneumonitis due to compression of the tracheo-bronchial tree
– Dysphagia due to compression of esophagus
– Superior vena cava syndrome due to com-
pression of SVC.
/square6Tracheal tug is descent of trachea with everyheartbeat. It is seen in arch of aorta aneurysm dueto pulsatile pressure on the left bronchus.
/square6Ascending aorta aneurysms can present with heartfailure due to aortic regurgitation from aortic rootdilatation and myocardial infarction due tocompression of a coronary artery.
Investigations
/square6X-ray of chest may show mediastinal widening inthoracic aorta aneurysm. X-ray abdomen may showcalcified outline of aortic aneurysm.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen.
/square6Echocardiogram
/square6CT or MR angiography.
/square6Conventional angiography.
Complications
/square6Rupture.
/square6DIC with hemorrhagic and thrombotic complica-tions.
Treatment
/square6Risk factor reduction (stop smoking, control hyper-tension).
/square6Beta-blockers reduce the rate of expansion andchances of rupture by reducing aortic pressure andthe abrupt rise in pressure during systole.
/square6Asymptomatic—size >5.5 cm—surgical repair. Lessthan this—serial monitoring with ultrasound.
/square6Symptomatic aneurysms—surgical repair irrespec-tive of size.
/square6Percutaneous placement of an expandable endo-vascular stent graft inside the aneurysm is anothernew technique.
/square6Ruptured aneurysm—emergency surgery.
Q.What is aortic dissection? Discuss the etiology,
clinical features, investigations, and management
of aortic dissection.TABLE 3.47: Etiology of aortic aneurysm
• Atherosclerosis (most common cause)
• Aging• Smoking• Bicuspid aortic valve and aortic coarctation• Inflammatory/infectious disorders (giant cell arteritis, syphilis,
mycotic aneurysm)
• Hypertension• Genetic predisposition• Marfan syndrome• Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
Clinical Features
/square6Most patients are asymptomatic and are discovered
incidentally on a routine physical examination orimaging study.
/square6Systemic thromboembolism due to thrombus
formation within the aneurysm.
Abdominal Aorta Aneurysm
/square6Pain in the hypogastrium or lower back. Pain is
steady gnawing type and may last for hours to days.
/square6Aneurysm expansion or impending rupture maybe heralded by new or worsening pain, often of
sudden onset.
/square6Physical examination may reveal a pulsatile mass
at or above the umbilicus.
/square6An arterial bruit may be heard over the abdomen ifthere is atherosclerotic narrowing.
/square6When the aneurysm ruptures, patient presents with
abdominal pain, hypotension and a pulsatile
abdominal mass.

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System245
3/square6Aortic dissection is a life-threatening condition
where the blood penetrates into the media througha tear in the intima, cleaving it into two layerslongitudinally and producing a blood-filled falselumen within the aortic wall.
/square6This false lumen propagates distally (or sometimesretrograde) to a variable distance along the aortafrom the site of intimal tear.
Etiology
/square6Systemic hypertension (commonest cause)
/square6Cystic medial necrosis
/square6Pre-existing aortic aneurysm
/square6Vasculitis (Takayasu arteritis, giant cell arteritis,syphilis)
/square6Marfan’s syndrome
/square6Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
/square6Bicuspid aortic valve
/square6Coarctation of aorta
/square6Third trimester of pregnancy
/square6Trauma
/square6High-intensity weight lifting or other strenuousexercise
/square6Cardiac catheterization.
Classification
Daily or Stanford Classification
/square6Type A:  Dissection involving the ascending aorta,
regardless of the site of the primary tear.
/square6Type B:  Dissection of the descending aorta.
DeBakey Classification
/square6Type 1:  Dissection of the ascending and descending
thoracic aorta
/square6Type 2:  Dissection of the ascending aorta
/square6Type 3:  Dissection of the descending aorta
Figure 3.22 Types of aortic dissection.Clinical Features
/square6Sudden onset severe pain in the chest, in the neck
or throat, interscapular, in the lower back, orabdominal depending on the location of the aortic
dissection. Pain is described as “tearing,” “sharp,”
or “stabbing.”
/square6There may be asymmetry of pulses.
/square6Hypertension is present in most patients. Rarelyhypotension may be present.
/square6A dissection involving the ascending aorta can
produce the following:
– Acute aortic regurgitation—due to proximal
aortic dissection propagating into a sinus ofValsalva with resultant aortic valve insufficiency,
leading to early diastolic murmur, hypotension,
or heart failure.
– Acute myocardial ischemia or MI due to coro-
nary occlusion.
– Cardiac tamponade and sudden death due to
rupture of the aorta into the pericardial space.
– Neurologic deficits, including stroke or decreased
consciousness due to carotid artery occlusion
– Horner syndrome due to compression of the
superior cervical sympathetic ganglion.
– Vocal cord paralysis and hoarseness due to
compression of the left recurrent laryngealnerve.
/square6A dissection that involves the descending aorta canlead to splanchnic ischemia, renal failure, lowerlimb ischemia, or focal neurologic deficits due tospinal artery involvement and spinal cord ischemia.
Investigations
/square6ECG: It shows nonspecific changes. Can rule out
myocardial infarction.
/square6Chest X-ray:  May show widening of the aorta and
mediastinum.
/square6Echocardiography:  It has limited utility for evaluation
of the thoracic aortic dissection. Useful for proximaldissections. It is most useful for the assessment ofcardiac complications of dissection, including aorticinsufficiency, pericardial effusion/tamponade, andheart failure.
/square6Aortography:  Less commonly used now due to the
availability of noninvasive imaging methods. It canidentify the site of dissection, the relationshipbetween the dissection and the major branches of
the aorta, and the communication site between the
true and false lumen.
/square6CT angiography with three-dimensional (3D) recon-struction:  It is rapidly becoming the diagnostic test
of choice  to identify aortic dissection.
/square6MRI:  It is as accurate as CT and is useful in patients
who have contraindications to the use of intra-venous (IV) contrast agents (such as renal failure
or allergy).

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3246 /square6Smooth muscle myosin heavy-chain assay:  Increased
levels in the first 24 hours are 90% sensitive and97% specific for aortic dissection. Levels are highestin the first 3 hours
Treatment
/square6Aortic dissection is a life-threatening emergency.
/square6Admit the patient in ICU
/square6Emergency treatment:  The goal of initial treatment
is to halt any further progression of the aortic
dissection and to reduce the risk of rupture. Bloodpressure and the force of ventricular contractionshould be reduced (systolic blood pressure to 100to 120 mm Hg). Intravenous labetalol, which actsas an α-blocker and a β-blocker, is particularly use-
ful in aortic dissection for controlling hypertension
and contractile force. Intravenous nitroprussideshould be added to if BP is not controlled withlabetalol. If β-blockers are contraindicated, calcium–
channel blockers (diltiazem) may be useful.
/square6After initial medical therapy, further treatmentdepends on the type of dissection.
/square6If the dissection involves the ascending aorta,
surgical repair is indicated to minimize the risk of
life-threatening complications.
/square6If the dissection is confined to the descending aorta,medical therapy is as good as surgical therapy.
However, if there is complication such as end-organ
ischemia, surgery is indicated.
/square6Surgical therapy involves reconstruction of theaorta. Endovascular stent-grafting has been tried
as an alternative to surgery in dissections involving
descending aorta.
Q.What is pericarditis? How do you classify peri-
carditis?
/square6Pericarditis is inflammation of the pericardium.
/square6The pericardium is a protective covering for the
heart. It has two layers, the outer parietal layer, and
inner visceral layer. Between these two layers thereis a space called pericardial sac which contains15–50 mL of pericardial fluid. This fluid is an ultra-filtrate of plasma produced by visceral layer.
/square6The pericardium lubricates the surface of the heart,prevents deformation and dislocation of the heartand acts as a barrier to the spread of infection.However, the absence of pericardium does notproduce any obvious clinical disease.
/square6Pericarditis can be classified as acute (<6 weeks), sub-acute (6 weeks to 6 months) and chronic (>6 months).
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investiga-
tions, and management of acute pericarditis.
/square6This refers to acute inflammation (<6 weeks) of the
pericardium. Acute pericarditis has many causesand in some cases, the cause is unknown.Etiology of Pericarditis
/square6Idiopathic
/square6Infectious conditions : Viral (coxsackievirus, mumps,
varicella, rubella, HIV), bacterial (tuberculosis,Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, Pneumococcus,Legionella, syphilis ), fungal (histoplasmosis,
coccidioidomycosis, candida), and parasitic.
/square6Inflammatory conditions : Rheumatoid arthritis, SLE,
scleroderma, and rheumatic fever.
/square6Metabolic disorders : Uremia, hypothyroidism, and
hypercholesterolemia.
/square6Cardiovascular disorders:  Acute MI, post-myocardial
infarction (Dressler’s syndrome), aortic dissection,cardiovascular procedures.
/square6Miscellaneous causes:  Neoplasms (primary or secon-
dary), drugs (doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide),irradiation, and trauma.
Clinical Features
/square6Sharp retrosternal and left precordial pain some-times referred to back and left shoulder. Pain isexacerbated by movement, respiration and lyingdown. It is typically relieved by sitting forward. The
main differential diagnoses are angina and pleurisy.
/square6The classical clinical sign is a triphasic pericardial
friction rub corresponding to atrial systole, ventri-cular systole, and ventricular diastole. It may also
be heard as a biphasic ‘to and fro’ rub correspond-
ing to systole and diastole. It is high-pitched,scratching, and grating and heard best when firmpressure with the diaphragm of the stethoscope isapplied to the chest wall at the left lower sternalborder at the end of expiration with the patient
leaning forward.
/square6There is usually fever when infection is present.
Features of pericardial effusion may also be present.
Investigations
/square6Total leukocyte count and ESR may be elevated dueto infection.
/square6ECG shows concave-upwards (saddle shaped) STelevation in multiple leads, which is characteristicof pericarditis. This has to be differentiated frommyocardial infarction where ST elevation is convex
upwards. PR segment is depressed. Low voltage
QRS complexes and electrical alternans (varyingaxis) may be seen if there is pericardial effusion.
/square6Cardiac enzymes (CK-MB and troponins) are usually
normal unless there is associated myocarditis.
/square6Chest X-ray may show widening of cardiac shadow
if there is pericardial effusion.
/square6Echocardiogram can show pericardial effusionclearly and help detect other cardiac abnormalities.
/square6Pericardiocentesis:  If pericardial effusion is present,
it should be removed and analyzed for red blood
cells (RBCs), WBCs, total protein level, LDH level,

/square6Diseases of Cardiovascular System247
3and adenosine deaminase activity. Gram’s stain,
AFB stain, culture (ordinary and Loewensteinmedia) and cytology should also be done.
/square6CT and MRI scan of the heart should be done if thecause is not clear from the above studies.
Management
/square6If a cause is found, it should be treated (e.g. tuber-culosis, uremia).
/square6Pericardial inflammation can be decreased byNSAIDs (high-dose aspirin or indomethacin oribuprofen). Steroids (prednisone, 20 to 60 mg/day)can be used in resistant situations. These anti-
inflammatory drugs should be given until the
patient is afebrile and asymptomatic for 1 week,followed by a gradual taper over the next fewweeks.
/square6Some patients may have recurrent pericarditis. Forrecurrent pericarditis, treatment with colchicine, orpericardiectomy should be considered.
Q.Constrictive pericarditis.
/square6Here the pericardium becomes thick, fibrous and
calcified, which interferes with relaxation of theheart during diastole leading to many hemo-dynamic consequences.
/square6Constrictive pericarditis should be distinguishedfrom restrictive cardiomyopathy because theformer is treatable, whereas most cases of the latter
are not.
Etiology
/square6Tuberculosis.
/square6Hemopericardium.
/square6Mediastinal irradiation.
/square6Neoplastic disease.
/square6Bacterial infection.
/square6Rheumatic heart disease.
/square6Rheumatoid arthritis and SLE.
/square6Open-heart surgery.
Clinical Features
/square6Many clinical features are similar to cardiac tampo-nade.
/square6Ascites, dependent edema, hepatomegaly, and
raised JVP develop due to reduced ventricularfilling and systemic venous congestion.
/square6Kussmaul’s sign and pulsus paradoxus may bepositive.
/square6Pulmonary venous congestion produces dyspnea,cough, and PND.
/square6Reduced ventricular filling leads to reduced cardiacoutput, which causes fatigue, hypotension, and
reflex tachycardia./square6A ‘pericardial knock’ may be heard in early diastole
at the lower left sternal border due to rapid ventri-cular filling.
/square6Atrial fibrillation may develop in some cases due
to atrial dilatation.
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray:  Shows a relatively small heart. There
may be pericardial calcification.
/square6ECG:  Shows low-voltage QRS complexes with
generalized T wave flattening or inversion.
/square6Echocardiography  shows thickened calcified peri-
cardium and small ventricular cavities with normalwall thickness.
/square6CT and MRI  are useful  to assess pericardial anatomy
and thickness.
Treatment
/square6Pericardial resection is the only definitive treatment
of constrictive pericarditis. This should be carried
out early before severe constriction, myocardial
atrophy and liver damage develops.
/square6In cases of tuberculous constriction, antituberculoustherapy should also be given.
/square6Treatment of any other underlying cause.
Q.Tuberculous pericarditis.
/square6Tuberculous pericarditis is invariably secondary to
tuberculosis elsewhere in the body. It may occurvia extension of infection from the lung or tracheo-bronchial tree, adjacent lymph nodes, spine, or via
hematogenous spread.
Clinical Features
/square6Low grade fever, weight loss, and night sweats.
/square6Symptoms and signs of pericarditis usually
insidious onset.
/square6There may be signs and symptoms of pulmonary
tuberculosis such as cough, hemoptysis, etc.
/square6In late stages, patients may present with findings
of constrictive pericarditis.
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray:  It shows cardiomegaly and pleural
effusions. Pericardial calcification may be seen inlate stages. Evidence of concurrent pulmonary
tuberculosis may be present.
/square6ECG:  Low voltage QRS complexes, inverted T
waves and electrical alternans may be present.Echocardiogram:  Can confirm the presence of
pericardial effusion, tamponade and pericardial
thickening.
/square6Pericardiocentesis:  Fluid is exudative in nature with
low sugar and elevated ADA. Fluid should be sent
for culure of tubercle bacilli and PCR.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
3248 /square6Pericardial biopsy:  May show the presence of
granulomas and tubercle bacilli.
/square6Mantoux test:  Most patients will have positive skin
test. A negative test suggests low probability of
pericardial tuberculosis.
Treatment
/square6Antituberculous therapy for 6 to 9 months. 4 drugs
should be given for initial 2 months (isoniazid,rifampicin, pyrazinamide, ethambutol) followed by2 drugs (isoniazid and rifampicin) for 4 to 7 months.
/square6Steroids along with antituberculous drugs reducemortality, the need for subsequent pericardio-centesis and the chances of constrictive pericarditis.
/square6Therapeutic aspiration may be needed to relieve
symptomatic effusion or tamponade.
/square6If constrictive pericarditis develops, pericardiec-
tomy may be needed.
Q.Pericardial effusion and cardiac tamponade.
/square6Accumulation of excessive fluid in the pericardial
space is called pericardial effusion.
/square6When large amount of fluid collects in this space,
ventricular filling is compromised leading toembarrassment of the circulation. This is known as
cardiac tamponade. Tamponade is a medical
emergency, which can lead to pulmonary edema,shock, and death.
/square6The fluid is usually an exudate but blood (hemo-pericardium), lymph (chylopericardium) and
serosanguineous fluid (TB, malignancy) can also
accumulate in the space.
Etiology
/square6It is same as acute pericarditis.
Clinical Features
/square6Pericardial effusion may present with symptomssimilar to acute pericarditis.
/square6Heart sounds are faint and distant (muffled).
/square6Apex beat is obscured or palpable medial to the leftborder of cardiac dullness.
/square6Pericardial rub may be heard due to pericarditis inthe early stages, but this becomes quieter as fluidaccumulates and separates the layers of the peri-cardium./square6The base of the left lung may be compressed bypericardial effusion, producing an area of dullnessto percussion below the angle of the left scapula(Ewart’s sign).
/square6If there is cardiac tamponade following additionalsymptoms and signs may be present:
– Dyspnea and orhopnea
– Hypotension
– Raised JVP with sharp rise and x  descent
(Friedreich’s sign)
– Kussmaul’s sign (rise in JVP during inspiration)
– Pulsus paradoxus
– Reduced cardiac output.
Investigations
/square6Echocardiography:  This is the most useful investiga-
tion for demonstrating the effusion and looking for
evidence of tamponade.
/square6ECG:  It shows  low-voltage QRS complexes.
/square6Chest X-ray:  It shows large globular or pear shaped
heart with sharp outlines (water bottle appearance).
/square6CT or MRI:  It is superior to echocardiogram and is
especially useful in  detecting loculated pericardial
effusions and pericardial thickening.
/square6Pericardiocentesis:  Emergency pericardiocentesis  is
indicated for cardiac tamponade under echocardio-
graphic guidance. Pericardiocentesis is also indicated
when a tuberculous, malignant or purulent effusionis suspected.
/square6Pericardial biopsy:  May be needed if tuberculosis
is suspected and pericardiocentesis is not diag-
nostic.
Treatment
/square6Underlying cause should be identified and treated.
/square6Pericardial effusion without tamponade usuallyresolves spontaneously with the treatment of
underlying cause. Pericardiocentesis is indicated to
relieve the pressure if there is tamponade. A flexibledrainage catheter may be left in the pericardialspace for several days to avoid early reaccumula-tion.
/square6Recurrent effusions (commonly due to malignancy)may require pericardial fenestration, i.e. creationof a window in the pericardium to allow the slowrelease of fluid into the surrounding tissues.

4
249Q.Define the terms nausea, vomiting, retching,
regurgitation, rumination and indigestion.
/square6Nausea  is the subjective feeling of need to vomit. It
precedes vomiting and may happen alone, withretching or vomiting.
/square6Vomiting  (or emesis ) is the forceful ejection of upper
gastrointestinal contents through the mouthresulting from contractions of gut and thoraco-abdominal muscles.
/square6Retching  is voluntary muscle activity of the
abdomen and thorax without discharge of gastriccontents through the mouth.
/square6Eructation (belching) is the expulsion of swallowed
gastric air.
/square6Regurgitation  is effortless return of gastric or
esophageal contents into the mouth without nausea.It occurs without abdominal, thoracic, or gastro-
intestinal muscle contractions.
/square6Rumination  (merycism) is effortless but purposeful
regurgitation of food from the stomach into themouth, where it is re-chewed and re-swallowed.Gastrointestinal System
/square6Indigestion  is a nonspecific term that encompasses
a variety of upper abdominal complaints includingnausea, vomiting, heartburn, regurgitation, and
dyspepsia (upper abdominal discomfort or pain).
Q.Discuss the causes and mechanism of vomiting. How
do you approach and manage a case of vomiting?
/square6Vomiting  (or emesis ) is the forceful ejection of upper
gastrointestinal contents through the mouthresulting from contractions of gut and thoraco-abdominal wall musculature.
/square6Vomiting can be projectile or non-projectile. In
projectile vomiting, vomiting is not preceded by
nausea, whereas in non-projectile vomiting, thereis preceding nausea. Projectile vomiting is seen inCNS diseases which increase intracranial pressuresuch brain tumor, meningitis, and intracranialbleed.
/square6Most common causes of nausea and vomiting areacute gastroenteritis, systemic febrile illnesses andmedications.
TABLE 4.1: Causes of vomiting
Causes Examples
Gastrointestinal diseases Gastritis, cholecystitis, appendicitis, gastroenteritis, intestinal obstruction, peptic ulcer,
pancreatitis, peritonitis
Drugs and toxins Digoxin, levodopa, opiates, anticancer drugs, alcohol excess
Acute infections Hepatitis, influenza, malaria, urinary tract infection
CNS diseases Raised intracranial pressure, meningitis, migraine
Reflex In intense pain (myocardial infarction, ureteric stone)
Psychogenic Unpleasant taste or smell, psychogenic stress, seeing fearful scenes
Labyrinthine disorders Motion sickness, space sickness, viral labyrinthitis, acoustic tumors, and Ménière’s disease
Metabolic causes Uremia, diabetic ketoacidosis, hypercalcaemia, Addison’s disease
PregnancyPostoperative

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
4250 Mechanism of Vomiting
/square6Vomiting is coordinated by the brainstem and is
effected by neuromuscular responses in the gut,pharynx, and thoracoabdominal wall. There are
three phases of vomiting; nausea, retching and
actual act of vomiting.
/square6There is no single vomiting center as believed
earlier. There are many nuclei in the lateral reticular
formation of the medulla which are stimulated bythe chemoreceptor trigger zones (CTZs) in the floorof the fourth ventricle, and also by vagal afferentsfrom the gut. Many causes of vomiting act throughstimulation of CTZs or vagal afferents. Several
other brainstem nuclei integrate the responses of
the gastrointestinal, respiratory, pharyngeal, andabdominal muscles during the act of vomiting.
/square6During vomiting, thoracic and abdominal muscles
contract, producing high intrathoracic and intra-
abdominal pressures which expel the gastric contents.The gastric cardia herniates through the diaphragm,there is intense salivation and the larynx movesupward to promote oral propulsion of the vomitus.There is reversal of peristaltic waves which assist
in the oral expulsion of small-intestinal contents.
Approach to a Case of Vomiting
History
/square6Duration : Acute vomiting refers to vomiting of few
hours or few days. Causes of acute vomiting includeobstruction, ischemic, toxic, metabolic, infectious,
neurological and postoperative reasons. Chronic
vomiting refers to vomiting lasting more than1 month. Causes of chronic vomiting include partialintestinal obstruction, motility disorder, chronicneurological conditions (such as chronic meningitis,brain tumor), pregnancy or functional reasons.
/square6Time of onset : Early morning vomiting seen in raised
intracranial tension, pregnancy, and uremia.
Vomiting 1 hour after eating suggests gastric outlet
obstruction or gastroparesis. Vomiting few hoursafter eating suggests gastric or intestinal obstruc-tion.
/square6Content of the vomitus:  If bilious then gastric outlet
obstruction can be ruled out since bile fromduodenum cannot come back to stomach if there isgastric outlet obstruction. Undigested food suggests
achalasia or stricture. If hematemesis suspect upper
GI bleed with its causes. If fecal matter is presentsuspect distal bowel obstruction.
/square6Associated symptoms : Chronic headache associated
with vomiting is seen in intracranial lesion andmigraine. Vomiting without preceding nausea(projectile vomiting) is typical of central nervoussystem pathology. Vertigo suggests a labyrinthine
or vestibular problem. Associated diarrhea suggests
gastroenteritis. Fever suggests an infection. Severecolicky abdominal pain suggests biliary, ureteric or
intestinal obstruction. History of missed period ina woman of child bearing age suggests pregnancy.
/square6Past medical and surgical history:  The past medical
history will reveal the presence of any GI diseaseor previous surgeries. History of past abdominalsurgery may suggest recurrence of the previousdisease or intestinal obstruction due to peritonealadhesions.
Physical Examination
/square6Assessment of the patient’s hydration status and
vital signs. Tachycardia and hypotension may be
present if there is hypovolemia. Fever can bepresent in infections.
/square6Abdomen should be examined for any abnormalitysuch as distension (seen in intestinal obstruction,peritonitis), tenderness, guarding (seen in abdominalinfections), bowel sounds (increased in intestinal
obstruction and decreased in peritonitis and para-
lytic ileus).
/square6Other systems should be examined for anyabnormality.
/square6Red flags:  The following findings are of particular
concern and require immediate evaluation andtreatment:
– Signs of hypovolemia (immediate hydration
required).
– Headache, stiff neck, or mental status change
(suggest CNS infection).
– Peritoneal signs (suggest peritonitis).– Distended, tympanitic abdomen (suggest acute
abdomen, intestinal obstruction, etc).
Investigations
/square6CBC : If Hb and hematocrit are high, it indicates
dehydration. Leukocytosis is seen in infections.
/square6Serum electrolytes : To rule out hypochloremia,
hypokalemia, etc.
/square6Urea, creatinine : Renal failure can cause vomiting
due to uremia. On the other hand vomiting itselfcan cause renal failure, if there is dehydration.
/square6Urine pregnancy test: In women of childbearing age
to rule out pregnancy.
/square6Serum amylase, lipase : Elevated in pancreatitis which
can present with vomiting and abdominal pain.
/square6Liver function tests : To rule out hepatitis. Acute
hepatitis can cause nausea and vomiting.
/square6Erect abdomen X-ray : If any intra-abdominal patho-
logy suspected. Dilated bowel loops with multipleair fluid level seen in peritonitis and intestinalobstruction.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen : To rule out any intra-abdominal
pathology.
/square6Upper GI endoscopy : If peptic ulcer or gastric outlet
obstruction is suspected or if hematemesis is present.

/square6Gastrointestinal System251
4/square6CT abdomen : If the cause of vomiting is not clear
from above investigations.
/square6Other tests as indicated.
Complications of Vomiting
/square6Aspiration:  Vomiting in a patient with altered mental
status, low or depressed level of consciousness, or
persistent vomiting can lead aspiration of vomitus
to the lungs and cause asphyxia or aspiration pneu-monia.
/square6Mallory-Weiss syndrome:  Due to severe and repetitive
retching and vomiting a partial tear of the mucosa
and sub-mucosa in the stomach and gastroesophagealjunction can occur and lead to hematemesis.
/square6Boerhaave’s syndrome:  This is a full thickness tear of
all the layers of the esophagus, commonly in the
lower part of the esophagus due to repetitive, boutsof retching and vomiting. It is a medical emergency.
/square6Hypovolemia:  Recurrent vomiting can cause dehydra-
tion and hypovolemia due to loss of water content.
/square6Electrolyte imbalance:  Hypokalemia occurs due to
hypovolemia which stimulates renin angiotensinaldosterone system (RAAS) leading to sodium
absorption and potassium excretion in the urine.
/square6Hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis:  This occurs due to
loss of hydrogen ions and chloride which arepresent in the gastric juice in the vomitus.
Treatment of Vomiting
/square6Underlying cause should be treated.
/square6In severe persistent vomiting, patient should bekept nil by mouth and IV fluids administered.
/square6Antiemetics can be used for symptomatic controlof vomiting. Examples: Domperidone 10 mg TID,metoclopramide 10 mg TID, ondansetron 4 mg TID.Metoclopramide and ondansetron can be givenparenterally and are useful in persistent vomiting.
Q.Causes of loss of appetite./square6Diarrhea is defined as abnormal increase in stool
liquidity, frequency, and quantity. Typically a stoolweight >200 g/d or frequency more than 3 timesper day is considered to indicate diarrhea.
/square6Depending on the duration, diarrhea may beclassified as acute if <2 weeks, persistent if 2 to
4 weeks, and chronic if >4 weeks in duration.
/square6Diarrhea should be differentiated from pseudo-
diarrhea, and fecal incontinence. Pseudodiarrheais frequent passage of small volumes of stool. It isseen in irritable bowel syndrome and anorectaldisorders such as proctitis. Fecal incontinence is
involuntary discharge of fecal matter and is seen
in neuromuscular disorders and structuralanorectal problems.
Causes of Acute Diarrhea
TABLE 4.2: Causes of loss of appetite
•Infections: Viral fever, tuberculosis or any other infection
•Gastrointestinal diseases: Peptic ulcer, pancreatitis
•Liver diseases: Hepatitis, cirrhosis
•Renal diseases: Renal failure
•Endocrine causes: Hypothyroidism, Addison’s disease,
hyperparathyroidism
•Malignancies: Carcinoma stomach, pancreas or any other
malignancy, leukemias, lymphomas
•Psychiatric disorders: Depression, anorexia nervosa
Q.Define diarrhea, pseudodiarrhea and fecal
incontinence.
Q.What are the causes of acute diarrhea? How do
you evaluate and manage a case of acute diarrhea?Pathophysiology of Diarrhea
/square6Diarrhea is the reversal of the normal net absorptive
status of water and electrolyte absorption tosecretion. Such a derangement can be the result ofeither an osmotic force that acts in the lumen todrive water into the gut (osmotic diarrhea) or the
result of an active secretory state induced in the
enterocytes (secretory diarrhea).TABLE 4.3: Causes of acute diarrhea
Bacterial
Preformed enterotoxin production•Staphylococcus aureus
•Bacillus cereus
•Clostridium perfringens
Enterotoxin production• Enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC)
•Vibrio cholerae
Cytotoxin production• Enterohemorrhagic E. coli  O157:H5
•Vibrio parahaemolyticus
•Clostridium difficile
Mucosal invasion• Shigella• Salmonella•Campylobacter jejuni
• Enteroinvasive E. coli  (EIEC)
•Yersinia enterocolitica
• Chlamydia•Neisseria gonorrhoeae
•Listeria monocytogenes
Viral
• Noroviruses• Rotavirus• Cytomegalovirus
Protozoal
•Giardia lamblia
• Cryptosporidium• Cyclospora•Entamoeba histolytica

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
4252 /square6Example of osmotic diarrhea is lactulose-induced
diarrhea. In secretory diarrhea, the epithelial cells’ion transport processes are turned into a state ofactive secretion. Example of secretory diarrhea isbacterial infection of the intestine. Pathogens caninduce secretory diarrhea through multiple
mechanisms such as production of enterotoxins or
cytotoxins, release of cytokines, etc.
Evaluation of a Patient with Acute Diarrhea
History
/square6Residence.
/square6Occupational exposure.
/square6Recent and remote travel (suspect diseases endemicin the area of travel).
/square6Duration of diarrhea (whether acute or chronic,because the causes are different).
/square6Frequency and quantity of stools (to assess theseverity of diarrhea).
/square6Appearance of stools:  Rice water stool is seen in cholera,
pea soup appearance in enteric fever, brown coloredin amebiasis, red currant jelly stools in shigella.
/square6Presence of blood and/or mucus (suggests invasive
infection. Fresh blood and mucus is seen in large
intestinal diarrhea).
/square6Any associated vomiting (suggests food poisoningor gastroenteritis).
/square6History of pain abdomen (suggests invasiveinfection).
/square6Urine output (to assess dehydration).
/square6History of fever (suggests infection with invasive
organisms).
/square6Food history can give clue about food poisoning
and possible pathogen.
/square6Recent antibiotic use (may suggest antibiotic-
induced diarrhea due to Clostridium difficile ).
/square6History of immunocompromised state (suspect
diarrhea due to unusual organisms such as Crypto-sporidia, Isospora belli,  etc)./square6History of animal exposure:  Exposure to young dogs
or cats is associated with Campylobacter organisms.Exposure to turtles is associated with Salmonellaorganisms.
Examination
/square6Look for any signs of dehydration. Assess pulse,BP, postural hypotension, skin turgor, dryness ofmucous membranes.
/square6Assess conscious level as patient can be in alteredsensorium due to electrolyte imbalance.
/square6Examine the abdomen for any distension, tender-ness and bowel sounds.
Investigations in Acute Diarrhea
/square6Most cases of acute diarrhea improve spontaneouslywith supportive treatment and do not requireinvestiga tions. However, acute diarrhea should be
investigated if it is severe with dehydration, associa-
ted with bloody stools, fever, lasts more than 2 days
without improvement, new community outbreaks,severe abdominal pain and in immunocompro-mised patients.
Complete Blood Count CBC)
/square6Hemoconcentration and leukocytosis is commonlyseen. High leukocyte count suggests infectiousdiarrhea.
Urea/Creatinine, Serum Electrolytes
/square6Urea and creatinine may be elevated due to prerenal
azotemia. Electrolyte disturbances such as hypo-
natremia and hypokalemia occur in severe diarrhea.
Stool Analysis
/square6Stool should be sent for bacterial and viral cultures,microscopy for ova and parasites, immunoassays
for bacterial toxins ( C. difficile ), viral antigens
(rotavirus), and protozoal antigens (Giardia, E.
histolytica ). Pathogens can also be identified by
detecting their DNA sequences.
TABLE 4.4: Assessment of dehydration
Feature Mild dehydration Moderate dehydration Severe dehydration
General appearance Well Restless Lethargic
Oral mucosa Moist Dry Very dry
Skin Normal Cool Cool
Skin turgor Normal Reduced Markedly reduced
Capillary refilling Normal Slow Very slow
Eyes Normal Sunken Markedly sunken
Pulse rate Normal Tachycardia Markedly increased
JVP Normal Collapsed Collapsed
BP Normal Postural drop or reduced Hypotension/shock
Respiration Normal Normal Increased
Urine output Normal Reduced Markedly reduced
Urine specific gravity <1.020 >1.020 >1.035
Blood urea Normal Normal or high High

/square6Gastrointestinal System253
4Ultrasound Abdomen
/square6Useful if there is severe abdominal pain or
abdominal distension or any mass is felt.
GI Scopy
/square6If stool analysis does not reveal the cause ofdiarrhea, then flexible sigmoidoscopy with biopsies
and upper endoscopy with duodenal aspirates and
biopsies may be indicated.
/square6Colonoscopy may be indicated to identify anygrowth, or to exclude inflammatory bowel disease.
CT Scan Abdomen
/square6It is useful in the evaluation of ischemic colitis,
diverticulitis, or partial bowel obstruction.
Treatment
Fluid and Electrolyte Replacement
/square6This is very important in acute diarrhea since de-
hydration is the major cause of death. If the patientis able to take orally, oral fluid replacement (in the
form of ORS or any other fluid) can be given in mild
to moderate dehydration. Intravenous rehydrationis required if the patient is not able to take orally,in severe dehydration, in infants, and elderly.
Antimotility Agents
/square6Agents like loperamide, diphenoxylate/atropinecombination decrease the frequency and quantity ofdiarrhea. They can be used in diarrhea without fever
and without blood in stools. These agents should
be avoided in infective diarrhea (febrile dysentery),which may be exacerbated or prolonged by them.
Antisecretory Agents
/square6Example is racecadotril.
/square6Inhibits secretion of water and electrolytes into theintestinal lumen.
/square6It acts by inhibition of the enzyme neutral endo-peptidase (also known as enkephalinase), a cellmembrane peptidase enzyme found on theepithelium of the small intestine.
/square6Dose is 100 mg TID.
/square6It is useful in acute watery diarrhea.
/square6It is contraindicated in renal failure, pregnancy andbreastfeeding.
Antispasmodics
/square6Such as dicyclomine, hyoscine, etc. can be used inpatients with crampy abdominal pain.
Antibiotics
/square6Moderately to severely ill patients with febriledysentery may be empirically treated with aquinolone, such as ciprofloxacin (500 mg bid for3 to 5 d)./square6Empirical treatment with metronidazole can alsobe given for suspected giardiasis or amebiasis(400 mg TID for 5–7 d).
/square6Antibiotic therapy may be modified when specific
pathogen is identified.
/square6Antibiotics should also be given to patients who
are immunocompromised, have mechanical heartvalves or recent vascular grafts, or are elderly even
if the organism is not identified.
Q.Traveler’s diarrhea
/square6Traveler’s diarrhea refers to diarrhea occurring in
persons traveling from resource-rich to resource-poor regions of the world. It is common amongtravelers to developing countries.
/square6Food and water contaminated with fecal matter arethe main sources of infection. Bacteria such asenterotoxigenic Escherichia coli , enteroaggregative
E. coli , Campylobacter, Salmonella, and Shigella are
common causes of traveler’s diarrhea.
/square6Most cases are benign and self-limited, but occasio-nally can be severe enough to cause dehydrationand other complications.
Causes
TABLE 4.5: Causes of traveler’s diarrhea
Bacteria
• Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli
•Campylobacter jejuni
• Salmonella
• Shigella•Vibrio parahaemolyticus
•Vibrio cholerae
•Yersinia enterocolitica
Viruses
• Rotavirus
• Norwalk virus
Parasites
•Giardia lamblia
•Entamoeba histolytica
/square6These organisms are often transmitted by food and
water.
/square6More than 90% cases are due to bacteria; the mostcommon being enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli
(ETEC).
Clinical Features
/square6Most cases occur within first 2 weeks of travel.
/square6Abdominal cramps followed by sudden onset,
watery diarrhea, lasting 2–5  days.
/square6Malaise, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, and fever.
/square6Diffuse tenderness over abdomen.
/square6Additional specific features may be present depend-
ing on the organism.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
4254 Treatment
/square6Fluid replacement:  Most cases are self-limited and
resolve on their own within three to five days oftreatment with fluid replacement only. Oral fluid
replacement is enough in most cases. Broth, fruit
juice, or similar fluids may be used. ORS isespecially useful in severe diarrhea.
/square6Antibiotics:  Shorten the disease duration to about
one day. Antibiotics are indicated in patients withsevere diarrhea associated with fever, blood, pus,or mucus in the stool. Ciprofloxacin or norfloxacinmay be used. Bismuth subsalicylate can also beused.
/square6Antimotility agents:  Antimotility agents such as
loperamide (Imodium) or diphenoxylate (Lomotil)can be used to reduce severity of diarrhea.
However, caution should be exercised in using
these agents in bloody diarrhea.
Prevention
/square6Improving food and drink selection:  Avoid raw food
items such as chutney, salads, buttermilk, andcurds. Use only boiled or bottled water. Avoid freshfruit juices with ice.
/square6Prophylactic antibiotics:  Not routinely necessary.
Quinolones or doxycycline 100 mg/day for a fewweeks. Bismuth subsalicylate 60 mL four times aday is an alternative. Rifaximin may prove to be
the preferred antibiotic because it is not absorbed
and is well tolerated.
/square6Probiotics:  Such as Lactobacillus and Saccharomyces
boulardii  have been shown to decrease the incidence
of diarrhea in travelers.
Q.Enumerate the indications for stool cultures and
blood cultures in patients with acute diarrhea.
Indications for Stool Cultures in Acute Diarrhea
/square6Fever
/square6Blood in stools
/square6Leukocytes in stool
/square6Pain resembling that associated with appendicitis
(Yersinia )
/square6Diarrheal illness associated with partially cooked
hamburger (cytotoxigenic E. coli  O157:H7)
/square6Prolonged diarrhea (more than 4 to 7 days)
/square6Immunocompromised host
/square6For epidemiologic purposes, such as cases involv-
ing food handlers.
Indications for Blood Cultures in Acute Diarrhea
/square6Fever
/square6Pain abdomen
/square6Patients with sepsis, shock
/square6Immunocompromised patients.Q.Enumerate the parasites causing diarrhea.
/square6Amebiasis
/square6Giardiasis
/square6Trichuriasis
/square6Strongyloidiasis
/square6Balantidiasis
/square6Coccidioses
/square6Schistosomiasis
/square6Capillariasis
Q.Define chronic diarrhea. What are the causes of
chronic diarrhea? How do you investigate and
manage a case of chronic diarrhea?
/square6Chronic diarrhea is defined as diarrhea lasting formore than 4 weeks.
TABLE 4.6: Causes of chronic diarrhea
Secretory diarrhea
• Hormonally mediated: VIPoma, carcinoid, medullary
carcinoma of thyroid (calcitonin), Zollinger-Ellison syndrome
(gastrin)
• Villous adenoma
Inflammatory conditions
• Inflammatory bowel disease (ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s
disease)
• Radiation enteritis
Malabsorption syndromes: Celiac sprue, tropical sprue,
Whipple’s disease, eosinophilic gastroenteritis, small bowel
resection (short bowel syndrome), chronic pancreatitis, lactose
intolerance
Chronic infections
• Giardiasis• Chronic amebiasis• Intestinal tuberculosis• HIV related infections by Mycobacterium avium  complex,
microsporida, cryptosporidium, Isospora belli
Motility disorders
• Blind loop with bacterial overgrowth• Diabetes mellitus• Hyperthyroidism• Irritable bowel syndrome
Malignancy: Lymphoma of intestine, adenocarcinoma colon
Medications:  Laxatives, angiotensin receptor blockers
Investigations in Chronic Diarrhea
/square6In contrast to acute diarrhea,  most cases of chronic
diarrhea are noninfectious.
/square6All the tests described for acute diarrhea arerequired for chronic diarrhea.
/square624-hour stool fat estimation, testing for presence oflaxatives, and estimation of stool osmolality (normal
osmotic gap in secretory diarrhea, increased inosmotic diarrhea) should be done.
/square6Intestinal aspirates and quantitative cultures to ruleout small bowel bacterial overgrowth.

/square6Gastrointestinal System255
4/square6If suggested by history or other findings, hormonal
excesses should be ruled out by appropriate tests(serum gastrin, VIP, calcitonin, thyroid functiontests, etc.).
/square6Low fecal pH suggests carbohydrate malabsorp-tion; lactose malabsorption can be confirmed bylactose breath testing or by a therapeutic trialwith lactose exclusion and observation of the effectof lactose challenge.
/square6Pancreatic disease should be excluded by secretin-cholecystokinin stimulation test, or by assay of fecalchymotrypsin activity or a bentiromide test.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen to rule out pancreatitis, malig-nancy, and pancreatitis.
/square6Colonoscopy to rule out ileocecal TB, ca colon,inflammatory bowel disease, etc.
/square6CT abdomen if malignancy or pancreatitis orabdominal TB is suspected.
Treatment of Chronic Diarrhea
/square6Treatment of chronic diarrhea depends on thespecific etiology. For example, elimination of lactose
containing foods in lactase deficiency or gluten in
celiac sprue, use of steroids or anti-inflammatory
agents in inflammatory bowel diseases, etc.
Q.Define constipation. Enumerate the causes of
constipation. How do you investigate and treat a
case of constipation?
/square6Constipation may be defined as infrequent stools(less than 3 times in a week), hard stools, excessivestraining, or a sense of incomplete evacuation./square6Risk factors for constipation include female sex, olderage, inactivity, low caloric intake, low fiber diet, andtaking a large number of medications.
 The incidence
of constipation is three times higher in women.
Approach to a Case of Constipation
History
/square6Confirm what exactly the patient means and whetherthere is really constipation. A constipated patientmay be otherwise totally asymptomatic or maycomplain of one or more of the following: Straining,lumpy or hard stools, sensation of anorectal obstruc-
tion, sensation of incomplete defecation, manual
maneuvering required to defecate, abdominalbloating, pain on defecation, and rectal bleeding.
/square6Ask about the frequency of stools, consistency
(lumpy/hard), excessive straining, or prolonged
defecation time.
/square6Presence of blood in the stool and weight loss shouldbe taken seriously as it can indicate carcinoma
colon. Similarly presence of vomiting, inability to
pass flatus and pain abdomen indicates intestinalobstruction.
/square6Ask about the symptoms of any underlying disease
(see the causes above).
/square6Ask about food habits, activity, and drug intake.
Examination
/square6Do a complete physical examination and rectal
examination.
/square6Look for any hernias which can cause constipationor the result of chronic constipation.
/square6Look for any mass in the abdomen.
/square6Look for any evidence of endocrine (hypothyroidism)or neurological abnormalities.
Investigations
/square6Based on the history and examination findingsinvestigations are ordered as follows.
Blood tests
/square6Serum calcium, blood sugar, thyroid and para-
thyroid function tests, etc. if clinically indicated.
Stool examination
/square6Look for occult blood (presence of blood may
suggest ca colon)
Sigmoidoscopy, barium enema, colonoscopy
/square6These are indicated to rule out local anorectal
abnormalities. Colonoscopy is especially importantin patients above 40 years with history of weight loss,rectal bleeding, or anemia to rule out colonic cancer.
Colon transit time
/square6This is measured by performing an abdominal radio-
graph 120 hours after ingestion of radio-opaque
markers. Retention of >20% of the marker indicatesprolonged transit.TABLE 4.7: Causes of constipation in adults
Common causes Inadequate fiber or fluid intake, seden-
tary lifestyle, irregular bowel habits
GI diseases Intestinal obstruction, colonic neoplasm,
colonic stricture, anal fissure, painful
hemorrhoids, anal sphincter spasm,pelvic floor dysfunction, descending
perineum syndrome, rectal mucosal
prolapse, rectocele, Hirschsprung’sdisease, Chaga’s disease, irritable
bowel syndrome
Endocrinopathies Hypothyroidism, hyperparathyroidism,
hypercalcemia, diabetes mellitus
Psychiatric disorders Depression, eating disorders
Neurologic disease Parkinsonism, multiple sclerosis, spinal
cord injury, paraplegia, autonomic
neuropathy
Myopathic diseases Systemic sclerosis, myotonic dystrophy
Metabolic Hypokalemia, hypercalcemia, uremia,
porphyria
Drugs Calcium channel blockers, anti-
depressants, opioids, anticholinergics,
clonidine, calcium and iron supplements

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
4256 Balloon expulsion testing, anal manometry, and
defecograph
/square6These tests can be used to assess pelvic floor dys-function and anorectal disorders.
Treatment
/square6General measures: Increase fluid intake, high fiber
diet and physical activity.
/square6Bulk laxatives:  These include psyllium (ispaghulla),
methylcellulose, and calcium polycarbophil. They
exert their laxative effect by absorbing water andincreasing fecal mass. They are well tolerated. Theymay be used alone or in combination with dietarychanges. Side effects are impaction above strictures,gas and bloating.
/square6Emollients (stool softeners):  Include docusate sodium
and liquid paraffin. Docusate sodium acts bylowering the surface tension of stool, thereby
allowing water to easily enter the stool. Liquid
paraffin works by lubricating the stool. They aregenerally inferior to bulk laxatives, but more usefulin patients with anal fissures and hemorrhoidswhich cause painful defecation. They are gene-rally well tolerated. Liquid paraffin can cause
depletion of fat soluble vitamins if used for long
time.
/square6Osmotic laxatives:  Include magnesium sulfate,
lactulose, polyethylene glycol, sorbitol, and
glycerine. These agents are poorly absorbed andact as hyperosmolar solutions which retain waterin the intestinal lumen. Magnesium sulfate cancause hypermagnesemia in patients with renalfailure. Other agents can cause flatulence and
abdominal bloating.
/square6Stimulant laxatives:  These include castor oil,
bisacodyl and senna. They increase intestinal
motility and secretion of water into the bowel. They
can cause electrolyte imbalance such as hypo-kalemia.
/square6Prokinetic agents:  Metoclopramide and mosapride.
They increase intestinal motility.
/square6Enemas: Enemas act within 5–15 min and are given
rectally. These include tap water enema, soap water
enema and sodium phosphate enema, etc. Rarelyif stools are impacted, digital evacuaton has to bedone.
/square6New agents:  Newer therapies for constipation
include prucalopride, a prokinetic agent that stimu-lates colonic motility and decreases transit time, andthe osmotic agents lubiprostone and linaclotide,which stimulate intestinal fluid secretion by acting
on the intestinal mucosa. Lubiprostone and linaclo-
tide are useful in chronic idiopathic constipation and
constipation caused by irritable bowel syndrome.Naloxegol and methylnaltrexone are useful inopioid induced constipation.Q.Enumerate the causes of occult blood in the stool.
/square6Occult bleeding refers to positive fecal occult blood
test without visible fecal blood either to the patient
or physician.
TABLE 4.8: Causes of occult blood in the stool
Upper GI lesions
• Esophagitis• Peptic ulcer disease• Gastritis/erosions• Duodenitis/erosions• Angiodysplasia• Esophageal or gastric varices• Gastric cancer• Gastric or duodenal polyps
Lower GI lesions
• Colon polyps• Colon cancer• Angiodysplasia• Colonic ulcers• Hemorrhoids• Anal fissure
Worm infestation
• Hookworm
Drugs
• Aspirin or other NSAIDs
TABLE 4.9: Causes of weight loss
Involuntary weight loss
• Endocrine disorders (hyperthyroidism, pheochromocytoma,
adrenal insufficiency)
• Uncontrolled diabetes mellitus
• Malignancy• Chronic infections (tuberculosis, HIV, subacute bacterial
endocarditis)
• GI disorders (malabsorption syndromes, chronic pancreatitis,
IBD, parasitic infestation)
• COPD
• Chronic renal failure
• Psychiatric disorders (depression, mania, anorexia nervosa,
schizophrenia)
• Chronic alcoholism• Drugs (opiates, amphetamines, digoxin, metformin, NSAIDs,
anticancer drugs)
Voluntary weight loss
• Treatment of obesity
• Anorexic drugs—amphetamines and derivatives• Distance runners, models, ballet dancers, gymnasts
• Marked increase in physical activity
• Prolonged fasting
Q.Aphthous ulcers.
/square6These are painful oral ulcers which are localized,
shallow, round to oval, with a grayish base.Q.Enumerate the causes of weight loss.

/square6Gastrointestinal System257
4/square6Aphthous ulcers are common in childhood and
adolescence and become less frequent in adulthood.They usually heal within 10 to 14 days withoutscarring.
Etiology
/square6Exact cause of aphthous ulcers is not well known.Alterations in local cell mediated immunity mayplay a role in the causation.
/square6A genetic basis exists for some recurrent aphthousulcerations. This is shown by a positive familyhistory in about one-third of patients with recurrentaphthous ulcerations.
/square6Recurrent aphthous ulcers are seen in stress,infections, food allergy, HIV infection, celiac sprue,gluten sensitive enteropathies, inflammatory boweldiseases, Behcet’s disease and vitamin and mineral
deficiencies (B vitamins, iron, folic acid, and zinc).
Drugs like methotrexate may induce oral ulcers.
Treatment
/square6Local corticosteroid application (triamcinolone geland hydrocortisone pellets) and other topicalanalgesics are adequate. These are applied to theulcer two to four times daily until the ulcer ishealed.
/square6Chlorhexidine gluconate mouth rinses reducethe severity and pain of ulceration but not thefrequency.
/square6Oral corticosteroids are indicated for severe disease.
/square6Colchicine, dapsone, pentoxifylline, interferonalpha, and levamisole are beneficial in severe
recurrent aphthous ulcers.
/square6Thalidomide is useful for severe recurrent aphthous
ulcers especially in patients with HIV infection.
Q.What is hiatus hernia? Discuss the causes, clinical
features, diagnosis and management of hiatus
hernia.
Q.S/N. Sliding hiatus herniaQ.S/N. Paraesophageal or rolling hernia.
/square6Hiatus hernia is herniation of a part of the stomach
into the thoracic cavity through the esophageal hiatus
of the diaphragm. There are two types: (1) Sliding
hiatus hernia and (2) para-esophageal or rolling hernia.
Sliding Hiatus Hernia
/square6Here , the gastroesophageal junction and fundus of
the stomach slide upward through the hiatus and
lie above the diaphragm.
Etiology
/square6Incidence increases with increasing age.
/square6Weakening of the anchors of the gastroesophagealjunction to the diaphragm and longitudinalcontraction of the esophagus.
/square6Increased intra-abdominal pressure (ascites,pregnancy, obesity).
/square6Trauma.
/square6Congenital malformation.
Clinical Features
/square6It does not produce symptoms on its own; symptomsoccur because of associated gastroesophageal reflux.
/square6Symptoms are epigastric or substernal pain, post-prandial fullness, nausea, and retching.
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray:  May show retrocardiac air fluid level
or intrathoracic stomach.
/square6Barium swallow will demonstrate the presence ofgastroesopahgeal junction in the thorax.
/square6Endoscopy.
Management
/square6Asymptomatic sliding hiatus hernia does notrequire any treatment.
/square6Symptomatic large hiatus hernia requires eithermedical or surgical treatment. Surgical treatment
Figure 4.1 Hiatus hernia


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
4258 involves repair of the diaphragmatic defect, and
fixing the stomach in the abdominal cavity(fundoplication) combined with an anti-refluxprocedure.
Paraesophageal or Rolling Hernia
/square6Here, the gastroesophageal junction remains fixedin its normal location but a small part of the fundusof the stomach rolls up through the hiatus alongside
the esophagus.
Etiology
/square6Idiopathic
/square6Postsurgical (e.g. after antireflux procedures,
esophagomyotomy, or partial gastrectomy).
Clinical Features
/square6Clinical features are same as sliding hiatus hernia.
/square6Complications are common in this variety andinclude dysphagia, gastritis, ulceration, volvulusand strangulation. Respiratory complications canoccur due to compression of the lung by theherniated viscera.
Investigations
/square6Same as sliding hiatus hernia.
Treatment
/square6Involves, reduction of the herniated stomach into
the abdomen, herniotomy, herniorraphy combined
with an antireflux procedure and gastropexy(attachment of the stomach sub-diaphragmaticallyto prevent reherniation)
Q.What is gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)?
Describe the etiology, pathophysiology, clinical fea-tures, investigations, complications and treatment
of reflux esophagitis.
/square6Gastroesophageal reflux is the movement of gastriccontents into the esophagus. It occurs in everyone,multiple times every day./square6It becomes pathological, when the antireflux mecha-nisms fail sufficiently to allow gastric contents tomake prolonged contact with the lower esophagealmucosa causing damage (GERD). Reflux esopha-gitis is the commonest form of GERD, most oftenrecognized by recurrent heartburn.
Etiology of GERD
/square6Pregnancy, obesity, ascites and weightlifting act by
increasing intra-abdominal pressure.
/square6Fat, chocolate, smoking, coffee, large fatty meals
or alcohol ingestion reduce lower esophagealsphincter tone.
/square6Drugs:  Calcium-channel blockers, nitrates reduce
sphincter tone.
/square6Systemic sclerosis reduces sphincter tone andesophageal motility.
/square6After treatment for achalasia (reflux increases).
/square6Sliding hiatus hernia predisposes to reflux becausethe gastroesophageal junction lies above the
diaphragm and hence the sphincter effect of
diaphragm is lost.
Pathophysiology
/square6Esophagus is a 25 cm conduit whose upper third isskeletal muscle and lower two-thirds are smoothmuscle. There is a sphincter in the lower esophagus(LES) formed by the lower 4 cm of esophagealsmooth muscle. It relaxes after swallowing to allowfood to enter the stomach and closes after swallow-
ing, thereby preventing reflux. Sphincter tone can
increase in response to rises in intra-abdominal andintragastric pressures. Reflux is also preventedby contraction of the crural diaphragm whichsurrounds lower end of esophagus and exerts a‘pinchcock-like’ action at the LES.
/square6When these mechanisms fail, abnormal acid reflux
occurs and damages the lower end of esophagus.
Damage to esophagus produces mild esophagitis(mild erythema) and erosive esophagitis (mucosaldamage, bleeding, superficial linear ulcers, and
Figure 4.2 Pathology in GERD

/square6Gastrointestinal System259
4exudates). Erosive esophagitis may heal by intes-
tinal metaplasia (Barrett’s esophagus), which is arisk factor for adenocarcinoma.
Clinical Features
/square6Regurgitation of sour material into the mouth andheartburn are the main features of GERD. Anginalike pain can occur in some patients. Heartburn isdue to contact of refluxed material with the
sensitized or ulcerated esophageal mucosa. The
correlation between heartburn and esophagitis ispoor. Patients with severe esophagitis may havemild pain and patients with mild esophagitis mayhave severe pain. The burning is aggravated bybending, stooping or lying down and on drinking
hot liquids or alcohol. It is usually be relieved by
antacids.
/square6Reflux into the pharynx, larynx, and tracheobronchialtree can cause chronic cough, bronchoconstriction,
pharyngitis, laryngitis, bronchitis, or pneumonia.
/square6Dysphagia may develop due to stricture of lower
end of esophagus or development of adeno-carcinoma in Barrett’s esophagus.
/square6Mucosal erosions may produce bleeding, hema-temesis and anemia./square6Bernstein test  can tell whether the symptoms are due
to acid reflux. This test is done by perfusing acid(0.1 N HCl, pH 1.1) or saline (control) through acatheter positioned in mid-esophagus. If symptomsdevelop during acid, but not saline perfusion, thetest is considered positive for GERD.
/square6Resting and stress ECG  to rule out angina.
Complications of GERD
/square6Esophagitis.
/square6Peptic stricture.
/square6Barrett esophagus.
/square6Carcinoma of esophagus.
/square6Aspiration pneumonia.
/square6Iron deficiency anemia due to chronic blood loss
from esophageal ulcers.
Treatment
General Measures
/square6Weight reduction if overweight, head end elevation
of the bed at night, reduction in alcohol consumption
and cessation of smoking help all patients with GERD.
Medical Management
/square6This is the preferred treatment . The goal of treatment
is to relieve symptoms and prevent complications.Most patients obtain symptom relief with thefollowing treatment, but symptoms usually returnwhen treatment is stopped and long-term therapyis then required.
/square6Antacids:  Antacids neutralize the acid in the stomach
and immediately relieve heartburn.  Most  antacid
preparations contain combination of magnesiumsulphate and aluminium hydroxide. Magnesium
sulphate tends to cause diarrhea while aluminium
hydroxide causes constipation. Combining both ofthem will have neutral effect on bowel movements.Antacids are available in both liquid and tabletforms. These preparations can be taken as and whenrequired (10 mL 3 to 6 times daily). Alginate-
containing antacids  form a gel or ‘foam raft’ on top
of gastric contents and thereby reduce reflux.
/square6H2-receptor antagonists (e.g. ranitidine, famotidine
and nizatadine) are used for acid suppression
along with antacids. They should be given for
6–8 weeks.
/square6Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) (e.g. omeprazole,
rabeprazole, lansoprazole, pantoprazole, esome-
prazole): They inhibit gastric hydrogen/potassium-
ATPase and reduce gastric acid secretion by 90%.These are more effective than H2 blockers and arepreferred over them. 8 weeks of therapy can healerosive esophagitis in up to 90% of patients. Patientswith severe symptoms need prolonged treatment,
often for years. Rebound increased acid secretion
is a problem with these agents.TABLE 4.10: Differentiating GERD from angina
GERD Angina
• Burning pain • Gripping or crushing pain
• Pain produced by bending, • Pain produced by exercise
stooping or lying down
• Pain relieved by antacids • Pain relieved by rest and
nitrates
• Radiates to retrosternal area • Pain radiates into neck,
and not to shoulders and arms shoulders and both arms
• No dyspnea, sweating and • Accompanied by dyspnea,
tachycardia tachycardia and sweating
Investigations
/square6A history of recurrent heartburn and response to
antacids or acid-suppressant medication isadequate to diagnose GERD. Investigations arereserved for patients with alarm symptoms such
as dysphagia, weight loss, or gastrointestinal
bleeding.
/square6Endoscopy  is used to confirm damage to esophagus
or to rule out other alternate pathology.
/square6Barium swallow  followed by X-rays in the head-
down position can detect movement of barium fromstomach to esophagus suggesting reflux.
/square624-hour esophageal pH monitoring  is the gold standard
test for identifying reflux. This is done by fixing asmall pH probe in the esophagus, 5 cm above theLES, and recording all episodes of acid reflux (dropin pH <4) over a 24-hour period. Total number and
duration of each reflux event yield a total eso-
phageal acid contact time.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
4260 /square6Prokinetic agents (metoclopramide, mosapride,
cintapride and domperidone): They increase loweresophageal sphincter tone and speed gastricemptying. They are only occasionally helpful.Cisapride increases QT interval and predisposes tocardiac arrhythmias. It has been withdrawn from
market. Acotiamide is a novel prokinetic agent
which acts by increasing acetylcholine release fromenteric neurons through acetylcholinesterase(AChE) inhibition.
Surgery
/square6Antireflux surgery can be considered for patientswith severe reflux symptoms confirmed by pHmonitoring and with esophagitis on esophago-
scopy. But even these patients respond to medical
therapy which should be reinforced. Surgery canalso be an alternative for patients who require long-term, high-dose PPIs.
/square6In antireflux surgery, the gastric fundus is wrappedaround the esophagus (modified Nissen fundo-plication), which increases lower esophagealsphincter pressure and prevents reflux. Laproscopicfundoplication is another procedure for GERD.
/square6Complications of GERD-like stricture requirerepeated dilatations or surgical resection.
Q.Barrett’s esophagus.
/square6This is metaplasia of esophageal squamous epithe-
lium to columnar epithelium.
/square6It is a complication of long standing severe refluxesophagitis and is a risk factor for developingesophageal adenocarcinoma. Barrett’s epitheliumprogresses through a dysplastic stage beforedeveloping into adenocarcinoma.
/square6Metaplastic columnar epithelium develops becauseit is more resistant to acid-pepsin damage thansquamous epithelium.
/square6It is more common in men and older age groups.
/square6Endoscopically, Barrett’s epithelium may be seenas a continuous sheet, a finger-like projection intothe esophagus or as islands of columnar mucosa.
/square6An indocarmine spray down the endoscope candetect intestinal metaplasia and possibly dysplasia.Biopsies should be obtained from all four quadrantsof the Barrett’s segment.
Treatment
/square6Regular endoscopy can detect dysplasia beforedevelopment of adenocarcinoma. Hence, endoscopicsurveillance every 2 to 3 years, with four-quadrant
biopsies of Barrett’s segment is recommended.
/square6If high-grade dysplasia is found on biopsy,
esophagectomy of the involved segment is advisedbefore it turns into adenocarcinoma. Photodynamic
laser or thermocoagulative mucosal ablation andendoscopic mucosal resection are being evaluated
as alternatives.
/square6There is no evidence that treatment with PPIs orantireflux surgery leads to Barrett’s regression.
Q.Define dysphagia. What are the causes of dys-
phagia? How do you approach a case a dysphagia?
/square6Dysphagia means difficulty in swallowing.
/square6Odynophagia is pain while swallowing.
/square6Swallowing is a process governed by the swallow-
ing center in the medulla, and in the mid-esophagusand distal esophagus by a largely autonomousperistaltic reflex coordinated by the enteric nervoussystem.
TABLE 4.11: Etiology of dysphagia
Causes in the esophagus
• Congenital stenosis of esophagus• Tracheoesophageal fistula• Congenital web• Strictures• Carcinoma esophagus• Diverticulum
• Esophagitis (reflux, candida)
• Achalasia cardia• Plummer-Vinson syndrome• Scleroderma
Causes outside the esophagus
• Thyroid swelling• Secondaries in the neck• Mediastinal mass, lymphadenopathy, or abscess• Aortic aneurysm• Left atrial enlargement• Osteophytes in cervical spine
Painful diseases of mouth and pharynx
• Stomatitis
• Tonsillitis
• Pharyngitis• Retropharyngeal abscesses• Diphtheria
Motility disorders
• Achalasia cardia• Scleroderma• Diffuse esophageal spasm• Hypertensive lower esophageal sphincter
Neuromuscular disorders
• Bulbar paralysis• Pseudobulbar palsy
• Myasthenia gravis
• Multiple sclerosis• Parkinson disease• Rabies
Functional
• Functional dysphagia

/square6Gastrointestinal System261
4Approach to a Case of Dysphagia
History
/square6The type of food causing dysphagia gives useful
information. Dysphagia only for solids impliesmechanical dysphagia with partial obstruction.Dysphagia for both solids and liquids occurs inneuromuscular and severe obstructive lesions.
/square6History of difficulty in initiating swallowing suggestsoropharyngeal dysphagia. History of food “sticking”after swallowing indicates esophageal dysphagia.
/square6The duration and course of dysphagia are alsohelpful in diagnosis. Transient dysphagia is usuallydue to an inflammatory process. Sudden onsetdysphagia occurs due to obstructive foreign bodies.
Progressive dysphagia may be due to carcinoma
esophagus or scleroderma or achalasia. Intermittentdysphagia is seen in esophageal spasm.
/square6Dysphagia with nasal regurgitation is seen inpharyngeal paralysis.
/square6History of regurgitation of old food and halitosis
suggests Zenker’s diverticulum.
/square6Tracheobronchial aspiration with dysphagia is seen
in tracheoesophageal fistula.
/square6Weight loss and progressive dysphagia in elderlyis highly suggestive of carcinoma. When hoarsenessprecedes dysphagia, the primary lesion is usually
in the larynx. When hoarseness appears after
dysphagia, it suggests involvement of the recurrentlaryngeal nerve by extension of esophagealcarcinoma. Sometimes hoarseness may be due tolaryngitis secondary to gastroesophageal reflux.
/square6Chest pain with dysphagia occurs in diffuse eso-phageal spasm and related motor disorders.
/square6A prolonged history of heartburn precedingdysphagia indicates peptic stricture.
/square6If odynophagia is present, it suggests esophagitis.
Physical Examination
/square6Pallor is present in Plummer-Vinson syndrome dueto iron deficiency.
/square6Neck should be examined for thyromegaly,lymphadenopathy or any other abnormality.
/square6Mouth and pharynx should be examined for any
local pathology.
/square6Skin should be examined for evidence of sclero-
derma.
/square6Neurological examination should be done lookingfor evidence of bulbar or pseudobulbar palsy.
/square6Abdomen should be examined for any distension,mass.
/square6Cancer spread to lymph nodes and liver may beevident.
/square6Respiratory system examination may revealcomplications of dysphagia such as aspirationpneumonia.Investigations
/square6Hemoglobin and peripheral smear to check for
anemia (iron deficiency causes anemia andPlummer-Vinson syndrome).
/square6Barium swallow detects tumors as filling defectsand strictures as rat tail appearance. Corkscrewappearance is seen in achalasia.
/square6Endoscopy and biopsy of any lesions.
/square6Esophageal motility studies.
/square6Chest X-ray to rule out mediastinal mass orbronchogenic ca.
/square6CT scan of neck and chest to rule out any mass lesions.
Q.Plummer-Vinson syndrome (Paterson-Kelly syndrome).
/square6The combination of esophageal webs, dysphagia,
and iron-deficiency anemia is called Plummer-Vinson syndrome.
/square6It is usually seen in middle-aged women.
/square6Esophageal webs are thin, diaphragm-like mem-branes of squamous mucosa. They are usually seenin the upper esophagus and may be multiple.
/square6Most cases are asymptomatic. Solid food dysphagiamay occur. Dysphagia is intermittent and not pro-gressive.
/square6Investigations include barium esophagogram andendoscopy.
/square6Treatment involves passage of a large (>16-mm-diameter) bougie dilator to disrupt the lesion.Repeated dilations are required in many patients.Underlying iron deficiency should be treated.
Q.Define hiccups (singultus). What are the causes of
hiccups? Add a note on its treatment.
Definition
/square6A hiccup is an involuntary, intermittent contraction
of the diaphragm and the inspiratory intercostal
TABLE 4.12: Causes of hiccups
CNS diseases
• Neoplasms, infections, cerebrovascular accident, trauma.
Toxic and  metabolic problems
• Alcohol intoxication, uremia, diabetic ketoacidosis,
hyponatremia.
Irritation of the vagus or phrenic nerve
• Sudden temperature changes (hot then cold liquids, hot then
cold shower)
• Foreign body in ear
• RS: Pneumonia, empyema
• CVS: Myocardial infarction, pericarditis, aneurysm, reflux
esophagitis
• Abdomen: Subphrenic abscess, hepatitis, pancreatitis, chole-
cystitis, gastric or pancreatic malignancy, sudden gastric
distension (carbonated beverages, air swallowing, overeating).
Surgical
• General anesthesia, postoperative
Psychogenic
•Excitement, stress, laughing
Idiopathic
•Unknown cause

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
4262 muscles that results in a sudden inspiration and
ends with abrupt closure of the glottis.
/square6Hiccups have no known physiological function.They are usually benign and self-limiting.
However, occasionally they may be a sign of serious
underlying illness.
Investigations
/square6Most cases of hiccups are benign and require noinvestigations.
/square6Persistent hiccups (lasting >48 hr) require detailed
neurologic examination, serum creatinine, liver
function tests, and a chest X-ray.
/square6If the cause is still not clear, CT of the head, chest,and abdomen, echocardiography, bronchoscopy,
and upper GI scopy may help. Chest fluoroscopy
helps in studying diaphragmatic movement anddiagnosing unilateral hiccups.
Treatment
/square6Idiopathic hiccups can often be terminated bysimple measures such as stimulation of naso-pharynx, pressure on eyeballs, breath holding,Valsalva’s maneuver, sneezing, or rebreathing into
a bag, stimulation of the vagus by carotid massage.
/square6If there is gastric distention, it should be relieved
by belching or insertion of a nasogastric tube.
/square6Drugs:  Many drugs can help to control hiccups.
– Chlorpromazine, 25–50 mg orally or intra-
muscularly.
– Baclofen 10 mg TID.
– Other useful drugs are metoclopramide, dom-
peridone, phenytoin, diazepam, and gabapentin.
Q.Define dyspepsia. What are the causes of dys-
pepsia? How do you investigate and manage a case
of dyspepsia?
/square6Dyspepsia is pain or discomfort in the upperabdomen especially in the epigastrium. Patient maydescribe it as abdominal fullness, early satiety,burning, bloating, belching, nausea, retching, or
vomiting.
/square6Dyspepsia may be functional dyspepsia (without
any identifiable cause) or secondary dyspepsia(with an identifiable cause).
/square6Functional dyspepsia accounts for the majority ofcases.
Causes of Dyspepsia
/square6Food related : Overeating, eating high-fat foods,
drinking too much alcohol or coffee.
/square6GI tract problems:  Gastritis, peptic ulcer, GERD,
gastric cancer, gastroparesis (in diabetes mellitus),infections ( Helicobacter pylori , giardia, strongy-
loides)./square6Pancreatic diseases : Pancreatitis, pancreatic carci-
noma.
/square6Biliary tract disease: Cholelithiasis.
/square6Other conditions: Diabetes, renal insufficiency,
myocardial ischemia, hiatus hernia and pregnancy.
/square6Drugs:  NSAIDs, metformin, corticosteroids, erythro-
mycin.
/square6Functional dyspepsia (also known as nonulcer dyspepsia):
No identifiable cause.
Differential Diagnosis
Peptic Ulcer Disease
/square6Discomfort occurs predominantly in the epi-
gastrium, but can also occur in the right or leftupper quadrants.
/square6Pain is usually burning type or hunger-like inquality. It can be vague or cramping.
/square6Gastric ulcer pain is aggravated by food whileduodenal ulcer symptoms occur 2 to 5 hours aftermeals or on an empty stomach. Symptomsalso occur at night, between 11 pm and 2 am,when the circadian stimulation of acid secretion ismaximal.
/square6Antacids, H2 blockers and proton pump inhibitorsrelieve the pain.
Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease
/square6Most common symptoms of GERD are heartburn
and regurgitation.
/square6Symptoms are aggravated by stooping or lying flat
and relieved by antacids.
Gastric Malignancy
/square6Usually occurs in patients over 50 years of age.
/square6Other features include progressive dysphagia,weight loss, hematemesis, anemia, persistent vomit-ing and abdominal mass.
Biliary Tract Disease
/square6Dull aching pain in the epigastrium or right upperquadrant. Pain may radiate to the back or scapula.
Pancreatitis
/square6Pain is mainly in the epigastric region, severe anddull aching. It often radiates to back and associated
with nausea and vomiting. It increases on lying
down and decreases by bending forward.
Irritable Bowel Syndrome
/square6Chronic abdominal pain and altered bowel habitsis characteristic of IBS.
Drug-induced Dyspepsia
/square6Dyspeptic symptoms appear after the intake ofoffending drugs.

/square6Gastrointestinal System263
4Investigations
/square6If the patient is less than 50 years, he is likely to be
having functional dyspepsia hence empiric therapywith H2 blockers (ranitidine, famotidine) or proton
pump inhibitors (omeprazole, pantoprazole) may
be tried.
/square6However, if the history or examination is pointingtowards any specific cause listed above, investiga-
tions should be done to rule out the same.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen and CT abdomen is helpful
to rule out pancreatic or biliary tract disease.
/square6Esophageal pH monitoring may help if gastro-esophageal reflux is suspected.
/square6Noninvasive tests for H. pylori  (IgG serology, fecal
antigen test, or urea breath test) help in ruling out
H. pylori  infection.
/square6Upper GI scopy should be done in patients above
50 years with persistent dyspepsia and in all
patients with “alarm” features such as weight loss,
dysphagia, recurrent vomiting, evidence of bleeding,or anemia to rule out carcinoma stomach.
Treatment
/square6If any underlying cause is found, it should betreated.
/square6For functional dyspepsia, 2 to 4 weeks of therapywith H2 blockers (ranitidine, famotidine) or protonpump inhibitors (omeprazole, pantoprazole) maybe tried.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of functional dyspepsia (non-
ulcer dyspepsia; idiopathic dyspepsia).
/square6Non-ulcer dyspepsia is defined as chronic dys-
pepsia (pain or upper abdominal discomfort) in the
absence of organic disease.
Etiology
Exact etiology is unknown. However, followingfactors have been implicated.
/square6Abnormal gastric motor function (delayed gastricemptying, reduced gastric compliance)
/square6Visceral hypersensitivity
/square6Helicobacter pylori  infection
/square6Psychosocial factors (anxiety, somatization, neuro-
ticism, and depression)
Clinical Features
/square6Patients are usually young (<40 years) and women
are affected twice as commonly as men.
/square6Patients care of postprandial fullness, early satiety,and epigastric pain. Any one or more of thesesymptoms may be present.
/square6Morning symptoms are characteristic and pain or
nausea may occur on waking./square6Symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome such as
pellet-like stools and feeling of incomplete evacua-tion after defecation may be present.
/square6Examination is usually normal except for epigastric
tenderness. There is no weight loss. Patients often
appear anxious.
/square6A drug history (NSAIDs) should be taken anddepressive illness should be ruled out.
Rome IV criteria for functional dyspepsia
/square6Functional dyspepsia is defined by the presence of
one or more of the following symptoms in the
absence of structural disease using imaging orendoscopy.
• Epigastric pain or burning
• Early satiety• Postprandial fullness
Investigations
/square6All organic causes should be ruled out by appro-
priate tests.
/square6Alarming features which merit thorough investiga-
tions include dysphagia, anemia, weight loss,
anorexia, dysphagia and hematemesis or melena.
/square6In women, pregnancy should be ruled out by urinepregnancy test and ultrasound.
/square6Upper GI scopy to rule out peptic ulcer, malignancyand hiatus hernia.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen if required to rule out gall-stone disease and other mass lesions.
/square6Tests to rule out H. pylori  infection.
Management
/square6Explain the nature of illness and reassure.
/square6Address any underlying psychological stress.
/square6Avoid cigarette smoking and alcohol abuse. Reduce
intake of fatty foods.
/square6The first-line treatment is with a proton pumpinhibitor or H2 receptor antagonist for at least4 weeks. Then, if symptoms persist, treatment withtricyclic antidepressants, or prokinetic agents are
tried. Prokinetic agents include itopride, metoclo-
pramide (10 mg 8-hourly) and domperidone (10 mg8-hourly). Acotiamide is a new upper gastro-intestinal motility modulator useful in functionaldyspepsia.
/square6H. pylori  should be eradicated if the tests are
positive.
Q.Describe briefly esophageal motility disorders.
Q.Achalasia.
Esophageal motility disorders include:
/square6Achalasia
/square6Diffuse esophageal spasm
/square6Nutcracker esophagus

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
4264 /square6Hypertensive lower esophageal sphincter
/square6Scleroderma (systemic sclerosis)
Achalasia (Esophageal Aperistalsis; Megaesophagus)
/square6Achalasia (a Greek term which means “does not
relax”) is neurogenic esophageal motility disordercharacterized by impaired esophageal peristalsis
and a lack of lower esophageal sphincter (LES)
relaxation during swallowing.
Etiology
/square6There is loss of inhibitory neurons in the distalesophagus leading to impaired relaxation of smoothmuscle.
/square6Primary idiopathic achalasia accounts for most ofthe patients.
/square6Secondary achalasia occurs due to malignantinfiltration of the esophagus, lymphoma, Chagas’
disease, eosinophilic gastroenteritis, and neuro-
degenerative disorders.
Clinical Features
/square6Achalasia occurs at any age but usually beginsbetween ages 20 and 60.
/square6Dysphagia, chest pain, and regurgitation are the
main symptoms. Dysphagia is if insidious onset and
gradually progressive over months to years.Dysphagia occurs with both liquids and solids.Aspiration may occur due to regurgitation ofretained food and saliva in the esophagus. Weightloss is also common.
Investigations
/square6Esophageal manometry  is the preferred investigation
of choice. It shows elevated resting esophageal
pressure and failure of LES to relax on swallowing.Cholecystokinin (CCK), which causes relaxation ofLES in normal people, causes contraction of the LESin achalasia. This happens because of loss ofinhibitory neurons.
/square6Barium swallow shows proximal esophageal dilation
and beaklike narrowing of terminal esophagus.
/square6Chest X-ray  may show absence of the gastric air
bubble. An air-fluid level in the mediastinum in the
upright position represents retained food in the
esophagus.
/square6Fluoroscopy  shows loss of peristalsis in the lower
two-thirds of the esophagus.
/square6Endoscopy  is helpful to exclude other causes of
dysphagia, particularly gastric carcinoma.
Treatment
/square6Balloon dilatation and laproscopic Heller’s myotomyof the LES.
/square6Endoscopic myotomy is also an effective proce-dure./square6Nitrates and calcium channel blockers provideshort-term benefit. Nitroglycerin, 0.3 to 0.6 mg, orisosorbide dinitrate, 2.5 to 5 mg sublingually or 10to 20 mg orally is used before meals. The calciumchannel blocker nifedipine, 10 to 20 mg orally orsublingually before meals, is also effective.
/square6Endoscopic injection of botulinum toxin into LEScan provide temporary relief. Botulinum toxinrelaxes LES by blocking cholinergic excitatorynerves in the sphincter.
Diffuse Esophageal Spasm
/square6Diffuse esophageal spasm is characterized by non-
peristaltic contractions of long duration. This
happens due to dysfunction of inhibitory nerves.There is patchy degeneration of nerve cell processesin the esophagus.
Clinical Features
/square6Diffuse esophageal spasm presents with chestpain and dysphagia. Chest pain is retrosternal andmay radiate to both arms, and the sides of the
jaw mimicking the pain of myocardial ischemia.
However, presence of dysphagia should helpdistinguish the pain from myocardial ischemia.
Investigations
/square6Barium swallow shows uncoordinated simulta-neous contractions that produce the appearance of“corkscrew” esophagus.
/square6Esophageal manometry shows increased luminalpressure.
Treatment
/square6Smooth muscle relaxants such as sublingual nitro-glycerin (0.3 to 0.6 mg) or longer-acting agents suchas isosorbide dinitrate (10 to 30 mg orally beforemeals) and nifedipine (10 to 20 mg orally before
meals) are helpful.
Nutcracker Esophagus
/square6This refers to hypertensive esophageal peristaltic
contractions. Hypertensive peristaltic contractionsmay be due to cholinergic or myogenic hyper-activity.
/square6Patients present with chest pain, dysphagia, or both.Chest pain usually occurs at rest but may bebrought on by swallowing. Dysphagia for solidsand liquids may occur.
/square6Investigations and treatment is same as diffuseesophageal spasm.
Hypertensive Lower Esophageal Sphincter
/square6This refers to spastic contraction of LES and failure
to relax. This leads to dysphagia. Investigations and
treatment are same as  diffuse esophageal spasm.

/square6Gastrointestinal System265
4Scleroderma
/square6Esophageal involvement is present in up to 90% of
patients with scleroderma. Scleroderma primarilyinvolves the smooth muscle layer of the gut wall,
resulting in atrophy and sclerosis of the distal two-
thirds of the esophagus. This produces aperistalsisor low amplitude contractions, and low or absentlower esophageal sphincter pressure.
/square6The proximal esophagus (striated muscle) is sparedand exhibits normal motility.
/square6Patients commonly present with dysphagia.
Treatment
/square6Prokinetic drugs such as metoclopramide andmosapride increase esophageal sphincter pressure,
improve peristalsis, and enhance gastric emptying.
/square6Erythromycin is also beneficial in scleroderma. It acts
as a motilin agonist which increases gastric contrac-tions and lowers esophageal sphincter pressure.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of peptic ulcer disease.
/square6Peptic ulcer is a break in the gastric or duodenal
mucosa that penetrates through the muscularismucosae.
/square6Peptic ulcer arises when there is decrease inmucosal defensive factors or increase in ulcerogenicfactors such as acid and pepsin.
/square6Peptic ulcers occur more commonly in duodenumthan stomach but can also occur in the jejunum after
anastomosis to stomach and ileum adjacent to
Meckel’s diverticulum.
/square6They are more common in men than women.
/square6Duodenal ulcers occur commonly between 30 and55 years of age, whereas gastric ulcers occurcommonly between 55 and 70 years of age.
Etiology/square6Most duodenal ulcer patients have increased acidsecretion, whereas acid secretion is normal or evendecreased in patients with gastric ulcer. Hence,increased acid may play an important role in thecausation of duodenal ulcer and impaired mucosaldefense may play an important role in the causation
of gastric ulcer.
/square6NSAIDs inhibit the synthesis of protective prosta-
glandins which play an important role in the mucosaldefense, and lead to ulcer formation.
/square6H. pylori  infection is associated with increased gastric
acid secretion and decreased duodenal mucosalbicarbonate secretion. This leads to duodenal ulcer.H. pylori  infection causes chronic inflammation of
gastric mucosa which overwhelms the gastric
mucosal defense mechanisms and leads to gastriculcer formation.
Clinical Features
/square6Epigastric pain (dyspepsia) is the most commonsymptom of peptic ulcer. However, some patientsmay have silent ulcers which come to attention dueto bleeding or perforation. Pain is well localized,
felt in the epigastrium and not severe. It is usually
burning type but can also be gnawing, dull, aching,or “hunger-like.”
/square6Pain occurs in episodes (periodicity), lasting 1–3 weeks
every time, 3–4 times a year. In between, patient is
free of pain.
/square6The typical pain pattern in duodenal ulcer occurs2 to 3 hours after a meal and is frequently relieved
by antacids or food, whereas gastric ulcer pain is
worsened by intake of food. Pain that awakes thepatient from sleep (between midnight and 3 am) isthe most discriminating symptom, and is seen intwo-thirds of duodenal ulcer patients and one-thirdof gastric ulcer patients.
/square6Nausea and weight loss are common in gastriculcer, whereas weight gain may be present induodenal ulcer patients because pain relief fromfood makes them eat more frequently.
/square6Epigastric pain which becomes constant, andradiates to the back may indicate ulcer penetrationinto pancreas.
/square6Sudden onset of severe, generalized abdominal painmay indicate ulcer perforation with consequentperitonitis.
/square6Pain worsening with meals, nausea, and vomitingof undigested food suggest gastric outlet obstruc-tion.
/square6Tarry stools or coffee ground vomitus indicate
bleeding from ulcer.
/square6Physical examination is often normal in uncompli-
cated peptic ulcer except mild epigastric tenderness.Sometimes pallor may be present due to chronic
blood loss from ulcer. In peptic ulcer perforation
board like rigidity of abdominal wall is found.TABLE 4.13: Etiology of peptic ulcer
•H. pylori  infection (produces mucosal damage)
• NSAIDs and aspirin• Gastrinoma (Zollinger-Ellison syndrome)• Malignancy (gastric, lymphoma)• Vascular insufficiency including crack cocaine use (produces
mucosal ischemia and damage)
• Radiation therapy (mucosal damage)• Carcinoid syndrome• Crohn’s disease• Stress (acute illness, burns, head injury)• Smoking and alcohol intake• Idiopathic
Pathophysiology
/square6Most cases of peptic ulcer are due to Helicobacter
pylori  infection and use of nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs).

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
4266
Investigations
Blood tests
/square6Anemia may be present due to acute or chronic
blood loss from the ulcer. Increased WBC count andincreased amylase and lipase suggests ulcer pene-
tration into the pancreas. Serum gastrin levels may
be high in patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.
Upper GI scopy
/square6This is the procedure of choice for the diagnosis of
duodenal and gastric ulcers. Biopsy can also be takenduring endoscopy. Duodenal ulcers are virtually
never malignant and do not require biopsy.
Barium swallow
/square6Can be used for screening patients with uncompli-
cated dyspepsia. However, it is less commonly usednow because of wide availability of endoscopy.
Tests for H. pylori
/square6Mucosal biopsies can be obtained during endoscopy
for rapid urease test and for histologic examination.Noninvasive tests for H. pylori include stool antigen
test and urea breath test.
Complications of Peptic Ulcer
/square6Hemorrhage.
/square6Perforation.
/square6Penetration into adjacent structures.
/square6Gastric outlet obstruction due to scarring.
Differential Diagnosis
/square6Peptic ulcer disease must be distinguished fromother causes of epigastric distress (dyspepsia).
Treatment
/square6The goal of treatment is to provide relief of symp-toms (pain or dyspepsia), promote ulcer healing,and ultimately prevent ulcer recurrence andcomplications.
General Measures
/square6Avoid smoking and spicy food.
/square6Cut down or quit alcohol intake.
/square6Avoid aspirin and NSAIDsAcid Neutralizing/Inhibitory Drugs
Proton pump (H+, K+-ATPase) inhibitors
/square6Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) are the most potentacid inhibitory agents available and are the drugof choice to treat peptic ulcer. They covalently bind
and irreversibly inhibit H
+, K+-ATPase which is the
final pathway in acid secretion. These are given for4 to 6 weeks.
/square6Examples are omeprazole, esomeprazole, lanso-
prazole, rabeprazole, and pantoprazole.
H2 receptor blockers
/square6These agents decrease acid secretion. Examples are
ranitidine, famotidine, and nizatidine. All areequally effective. They are less commonly used nowbecause of availability of PPIs.
/square6These agents are given for 4 to 6 weeks.
Antacids
/square6They relieve the pain by neutralizing the acid. They
are mainly used for symptomatic relief of epigastric
pain.
/square6Commonly used antacids are mixtures of aluminum
hydroxide and magnesium hydroxide. Aluminumhydroxide can produce constipation and phosphate
depletion; magnesium hydroxide may cause loose
stools. Combining both will neutralize the side effectsof each other.
/square6Dose is 15–30 ml 4 to 6 times per day.
/square6Calcium carbonate and sodium bicarbonate areother potent antacids.
Mucosal Protective Agents
Sucralfate
/square6Sucralfate is a complex sucrose salt which becomes
a viscous paste within the stomach and duodenum
in acidic pH. Thus it forms a coating on ulcers andhelps in healing. It does not act in alkaline pH.Hence, giving it along with other acid suppressingagents may render it ineffective.
Bismuth-containing preparations
/square6These agents coat the ulcer, prevent further pepsin/
acid-induced damage and stimulate prostaglandins,
bicarbonate, and mucus secretion.TABLE 4.14: Differences between gastric and duodenal ulcer
Factors Gastric ulcer Duodenal ulcer
Age 55–70 years 30–55 years
Sex Equal in both sexes More in malesAcid secretion Normal or decreased Increased
Course of the illness Less remittent More remittent
Episodes of pain Immediately after food Occur 1 to 3 hours after a mealAntacids Inconsistent relief of pain Prompt relief of pain
Food Provokes the pain Relieves the pain
Night pains Rare Common
Effect on weight Weight loss Weight gain

/square6Gastrointestinal System267
4/square6Colloidal bismuth subcitrate (CBS) and bismuth sub-
salicylate (BSS) are the most widely used prepara-tions. These compounds are commonly used as oneof the agents in an anti H. pylori  regimen.
Prostaglandin analogues
/square6These agents enhance mucosal defense and repair.
They also enhance mucous bicarbonate secretionand stimulate mucosal blood flow. Example is
prostaglandin E
1 derivative misoprostal.
/square6Misoprostol is contraindicated in pregnant women
because it can cause uterine bleeding and contrac-tions.
H. pylori Eradication
/square6H. pylori  should be eradicated in patients with docu-
mented peptic ulcer disease. H. pylori  eradication
prevents the recurrence of peptic ulcer and alsohelps in remission of gastric MALT lymphoma. Theagents used with the greatest frequency includeamoxicillin, metronidazole, tetracycline, clarithro-mycin, and bismuth compounds. Combination
therapy should be used to eradicate H. pylori .
Treatment should be given for 10–14 days.
Surgical Treatment
/square6Less commonly used now because of the availa-bility of effective medical therapy.
/square6Partial gastrectomy with Bilroth I anastomosis for
gastric ulcer.
/square6Options for duodenal ulcer are truncal vagotomy
plus pyloroplasty, selective vagotomy plus pyloro-plasty, and highly selective vagotomy.
/square6Emergency surgery is indicated in penetrating orperforating peptic ulcers.
Q.Stress ulcers.
/square6Stress ulceration is defined as ulceration of the upper
gastrointestinal (GI) tract (esophagus, stomach,duodenum) that occurs due to hospitalization.
/square6They are usually shallow but deeper lesions cancause massive hemorrhage and/or perforation.
/square6Stress ulcers are the most common cause of gastro-intestinal (GI) bleeding in intensive care unit (ICU)patients.Pathogenesis
/square6Erosions begin to develop within hours of majortrauma or serious illness. They are thought to resultfrom derangements in the balance between gastric
acid production and mucosal protective mecha-
nisms. Hypersecretion of acid due to excessivegastrin stimulation of parietal cells is seen inpatients with head trauma.
/square6In critically ill patients, increased concentrations ofrefluxed bile salts or the presence of uremic toxinscan denude the glycoprotein mucous barrier andlead to ulcer formation.
/square6Ischemia in shock, sepsis, and trauma can lead toimpaired perfusion of the gut and lead to ulcerformation.
Clinical Features
/square6The most common presentation of stress ulcers isthe onset of acute upper GI bleed like hematemesisor melena in a patient with an acute critical illness.
/square6Hypotension may occur due to severe bleeding and
there may be drop in hemoglobin concentration
requiring blood transfusions.
Evaluation
/square6Gastric lavage can identify the presence of blood
in the upper GI tract.
/square6Upper GI scopy will show the ulcers.
Treatment
/square6H2 blockers (ranitidine, famotidine, nizatidine).
/square6Proton pump inhibitors (omeprazole, pantoprazole,
esomeprazole).
/square6Sucralfate.
/square6Prostaglandin analogs (misoprostol).
/square6Bleeding ulcers require endoscopic therapies(epinephrine injection, electrocauterization, orclipping of the bleeding vessels).
Prevention of Stress Ulcers
/square6Antacids.
/square6H2 blockers (ranitidine, famotidine, nizatidine).
/square6Sucralfate.
/square6Proton pump inhibitors (omeprazole, pantoprazole,
esomeprazole).
/square6Prostaglandin analogs (misoprostol).
/square6Early enteral nutrition.
Q.Role of Helicobacter pylori  in peptic ulcer.
Q.Tests to detect Helicobacter pylori .
Q.Helicobacter pylori  eradication regimens.
/square6H. pylori  is a spiral-shaped, flagellated, gram-
negative, urease-producing bacterium. It lives in themucus layer of stomach. Some bacterial cells are
found adherent to the mucosal cells.TABLE 4.15: Risk factors for development of stress ulcers
• Shock
• Sepsis• Liver failure• Renal failure• Multiple trauma• Head or spinal trauma (Cushing’s ulcer)• Burns (Curling’s ulcer)• Organ transplant recipients• Prior history of peptic ulcer disease or upper GI bleeding• Mechanical ventilation

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
4268 /square6It has several acid resistance mechanisms of which
the most important is production of urease enzymewhich hydrolyses urea to produce bufferingammonia.
Figure 4.3 H. pylori
Epidemiology
/square6Helicobacter pylori  is the most common chronic
bacterial infection in humans.
/square6Prevalence of H. pylori  is more in developing coun-
tries and low socioeconomic groups. Prevalence is
high in the older population—presumably acquiredin their childhood when hygiene was less good thantoday.
/square6Humans are the only important reservoir of H.
pylori.  Colonization is common in childhood
institutions suggesting direct person-to-personspread.
/square6It spreads by fecal-oral or oral-oral route.
Pathogenesis
/square6H. pylori  does not invade the mucosa. Instead, it
damages the mucosa by disrupting the mucouslayer, liberating enzymes and toxins, and adheringto the gastric epithelium. Urease is an importantenzyme secreted by it. Urease converts urea intoammonia, thus alkalinizing the surrounding acidic
medium so that H. pylori  can survive, but simulta-
neously produces ammonia-induced mucosaldamage.
/square6H. pylori produces toxins, Vac A (vacuolating toxin)
and Cag A (cytotoxic associated protein) as well as
urease and adherence factors. H. pylori  infection
produces superficial gastritis characterized byinflammatory cell infiltration of the mucosa. Theseinflammatory cells release cytokines which damagethe mucosa.
/square6Effects of H. pylori  infection depend on the location
within the stomach. The antral predominantinfection results in increased gastrin production,probably via local impairment of somatostatin
release. Increased gastrin stimulates increased acid
production leading to duodenal ulcer formation.Body predominant infection leads to diffusegastritis, gastric atrophy and decreased acidproduction. Patients with body-predominantinfection are predisposed to gastric ulcer and gastric
adenocarcinoma. Some patients have mixed
infection of both antrum and body with varyingclinical effects. The mucosa appears red endo-scopically, and histologically there is epithelial celldamage./square6H. pylori  colonization increases the lifetime risk of
peptic ulcer disease, gastric cancer, and B cell non-Hodgkin’s gastric lymphoma. Smoking increasesulcer and cancer risk in H. pylori  positive indivi-
duals.
Diseases Caused by H. pylori
/square6Gastroesophageal reflux disease and dyspepsia
/square6Gastritis
/square6Peptic ulcer disease
/square6Gastric adenocarcinoma
/square6MALT (mucosal-associated lymphoid tissue)lymphoma
Tests to Detect H. pylori  Infection
Non-invasive Tests
/square6Urea breath test (UBT): This is a quick and simple
test which can be used as a screening test. The ureais labeled with isotope 
13C (Carbon-13). The patient
drinks a solution of this labeled urea and then blowsinto a tube. If H. pylori  urease is present, the urea is
hydrolyzed and labeled carbon dioxide is detected
in breath samples. The test is very sensitive (97%)
and specific (96%). The breath test is also used todemonstrate eradication of the organism followingtreatment.
/square6H. pylori  fecal antigen test:  H. pylori  antigen can be
detected in the stool by immunoassay. This is lessaccurate than urea breath test but useful in children.Can be used to detect post-treatment eradication.
/square6Serological tests: Detect IgG antibodies by enzyme-
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) or immunoblot.These tests may be positive even after eradicationtherapy and therefore are not useful for confirmingeradication or the presence of a current infection.These are especially useful for epidemiological
studies.
Invasive Tests
/square6These tests require endoscopy.
/square6Biopsy urease test: Gastric biopsies are added to a
urea solution containing phenol red. If H. pylori are
present, the urease enzyme splits the urea to release
ammonia which raises the pH of the solution and
causes a rapid colour change.
/square6Culture: Biopsies specimens can be cultured and
antibiotic sensitivity ascertained.
/square6Histology:  Biopsy specimens can be stained (Giemsa)
and looked for the presence of H. pylori .
Treatment
/square6There are many triple drug regimens for eradication
of H. pylori  infection. These are as follows.
/square6Omeprazole, amoxicillin, and clarithromycin (OAC).
/square6Bismuth subsalicylate, metronidazole, and tetra-
cycline (BMT).

/square6Gastrointestinal System269
4/square6Lansoprazole, amoxicillin, and clarithromycin
(LAC).
/square6These triple drug combinations come as kits andare given for 10 to 14 days.
Q.Define hematemesis. What are the causes of hema-
temesis? How do you investigate and manage acase of hematemesis?
Q.Causes of upper gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding.
Q.Causes of lower GI bleeding.
Q.Describe the approach to a case of acute GI
bleeding. How do you differentiate between upper
and lower GI bleeding based on clinical features?
/square6Hematemesis  is vomiting of blood which may be
obviously red or have an appearance similar to“coffee-grounds”. Usually the source of bleedingin hematemesis is GI tract above the ligament ofTreitz. Ligament of Treitz corresponds to the
junction of duodenum and jejunum.
/square6Lower GI bleeding is described as bleeding that
occurs below the level of ligament of Treitz.
/square6Hematochezia refers to presence of fresh blood instool.
/square6Melena refers to passage of black, tarry, and foul
smelling stool.
Figure 4.4 Ligament of Treitz
Clinical Presentation
History
/square6Vomiting of red blood or coffee ground vomitus.
Red blood indicates fresh bleeding and coffeeground indicates bleeding sometime back. Other
causes of red colored vomitus are food coloring,
colored gelatin or drinks, red candy, beets, andtomato skins.
/square6Patient may give history of melena. Melena refersto black, tarry, foul smelling stool. It indicatesbleeding in upper GI tract. Other causes of blackcolored stool are bismuth or iron preparations,
spinach, blueberries, black grapes, and licorice./square6Guaiac test can be performed if there is doubt
whether red color is due to blood or some other sub-stance. It will be positive in the presence of blood.
/square6History of syncopal attack (due to hypotension)may be present if there is massive bleeding.
/square6NSAID use or previous history of peptic ulcer ordyspepsia suggests peptic ulcer.
/square6History of heavy alcohol ingestion or retchingbefore hematemesis suggests a Mallory-Weiss tear.
/square6History of chronic liver disease with portal hyper-tension suggests esophageal varices as the cause ofhematemesis.
/square6History of dysphagia and weight loss prior to hema-temesis suggests esophageal or gastric malignancy.
/square6History of constipation or pain while passing stool
suggests hemorrhoids or anal fissure as the cause
of blood in stool.
Examination Findings
/square6Heart rate and blood pressure can give an idea ofamount of bleed. Significant bleeding leads totachycardia and postural hypotension. A systolicblood pressure less than 100 mm Hg suggestssevere bleeding. Pallor may be present.
/square6Patient may present in a state of shock withhypotension, cold peripheries, excessive sweating,in severe bleeding.
/square6Signs of liver disease such as jaundice, and ascitesmay be present.TABLE 4.16: Etiology of GI bleeding
Etiology of upper GI bleeding (hematemesis)
• Peptic ulcers (responsible for the majority of cases)• Esophageal varices due to portal HTN• Portal hypertensive gastropathy• Mallory-Weiss tears• Vascular anomalies (hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia)• Ca esophagus• Ca stomach• Erosive gastritis (due to NSAIDs, alcohol, or severe medical
or surgical illness)
• Erosive esophagitis (due to GERD)• Aortoenteric fistulas• Post-surgical (anastomosis)• Systemic causes; hemophilia, thrombocytopenia
Etiology of lower GI bleeding
• Dysentery (bacillary, amebic)• Lower GI malignancy (Ca colon, Ca rectum)• Inflammatory bowel disease (Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis)• Hemorrhoids• Diverticulitis• Necrotizing enterocolitis• Mesenteric vascular disease• Angiodysplasia• Radiation-induced telangiectasia• Radiation enteritis• Polyp• Post-biopsy or polypectomy

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
4270 TABLE 4.17: Differences between upper and lower GI bleeding
Upper GI bleeding Lower GI bleeding
Site of bleed Above ligament of Treitz Below ligament of Treitz
Common causes Peptic ulcer, esophageal varices, erosive Diverticulosis, hemorrhoids, carcinoma colon,
gastritis, carcinoma stomach, Mallory-Weiss inflammatory bowel disease
tear
Presentation Vomiting of blood (fresh blood or coffee Fresh blood in stool
ground) melena
Bowel sounds Increased Normal
Nasogastric aspiration Shows blood Clear
Investigation of choice Upper GI endoscopy Lower GI endoscopy
BUN/creatinine ratio Increased Normal
Proton pump inhibitors Useful in treatment No benefit
Investigations
Complete Blood Count with Differential Count
/square6Hb, PCV are important to know the amount of
bleed. Hemoglobin does not fall immediately afterbleeding because hemodilution takes some time (upto 72 h). MCV (mean corpuscular volume) may be
low due to development of iron deficiency anemia
due to recurrent blood loss.
Coagulation Profile
/square6Bleeding time, clotting time, and prothrombin time.Sometimes, a bleeding diathesis may be the causeof hematemesis or it may exacerbate bleeding due
to other causes.
Blood Grouping and Crossmatching
/square6This is required because patient may require blood
transfusion in case of massive hematemesis.
Liver Function Tests and Renal Function Tests
/square6To rule out liver disease and renal failure. Renal
failure (prerenal azotemia) can occur in case of
massive hema temesis and hypotension. Pre-existing
renal failure can cause uremic gastropathy andcause hematemesis.
Endoscopy
/square6Upper GI  endoscopy is the investigation of choice in
hematemesis. It is diagnostic as well as therapeutic.
/square6Colonoscopy is useful to identify the causes of
lower GI bleed.
/square6Endoscopy can identify the source of bleeding,determine the risk of re-bleeding and render endo-scopic therapy.
Ultrasound Abdomen
To identify liver disease such as cirrhosis and any GImalignancy.
Angiography
If bleeding persists and endoscopy fails to identify ableeding site.Management of Hematemesis
Initial Stabilization
/square6In patients with significant bleeding, two intra-venous lines should be inserted. Blood should besent for grouping and cross-matching for 2 to 4 unitsor more of packed red blood cells.
/square6Aggressive fluid replacement with normal salineor Ringer lactate should be started till blood isavailable. In mild to moderate bleeding fluidreplacement is enough and blood transfusion is not
required.
/square6A nasogastric tube (Ryle’s tube) should be placed
in all patients with hematemesis. The aspiration ofred blood or “coffee grounds” confirms an upper
gastrointestinal source of bleeding. Periodic aspira-
tion of the nasogastric tube can identify ongoingbleeding or rebleeding.
/square6In actively bleeding patients, platelets are trans-
fused if the platelet count is below 50,000/mcL.
Uremic patients (who have platelet dysfunction)with active bleeding are given three doses ofdesmopressin (DDAVP), 0.3 μg/kg intravenously,
at 12-hour intervals. Fresh frozen plasma is givenif prothrombin time is prolonged and INR
(international normalized ratio) is >1.5.
Pharmacological Measures to Control Bleeding
Octreotide or vasopressin infusion
/square6Continuous intravenous infusion of octreotide (100
μg IV bolus, followed by 100 μg/h) reduces
splanchnic blood flow and bleeding pendingendoscopy. Octreotide is especially useful for
variceal bleed, but can also be used for upper GI
bleeding of any cause. Vasopressin can also be usedbut not as effective as octreotide.
Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs)
/square6Intravenous proton pump inhibitors (omeprazole,
lansoprazole, or pantoprazole) reduce bleeding in
patients with peptic ulcer. They can be used in
bleeding due to other causes. PPIs also reduce therecurrence of bleeding after endoscopic therapy.

/square6Gastrointestinal System271
4Endoscopic Therapy
/square6Urgent endoscopy is done in patients with active
bleeding not responding to conservative measures.Otherwise, it can be done once the patient is hemo-
dynamically stable, usually within 24 hours after
admission.
/square6Hemostasis can be achieved in actively bleedinglesions with endoscopic therapies such as cautery,
injection, or ligation. Actively bleeding varices can
be treated with sclerosant injection or rubber bandligation of the bleeding varix. Actively bleedingulcers, angiomas, or Mallory-Weiss tears can becontrolled with either injection of epinephrine,cauterization, or application of an endoclip.
/square6Colonoscopy should be done in lower GI bleed andappropriate endoscopic therapy should be done tostop bleding (application of clips, epinephrineinjection, or laser photocoagulation).
Intra-arterial Embolization or Vasopressin
/square6Angiographic treatment is used rarely in patients with
persistent bleeding even after endoscopic therapy.
Transvenous Intrahepatic Portosystemic Shunts (TIPS)
/square6Placing a stent from the hepatic vein to the portal
vein through the liver reduces portal venous pressureand helps in control of acute variceal bleeding. It isused when endoscopic modalities have failed.
Surgery
Surgery is indicated in:
/square6Severe, life-threatening hemorrhage from pepticulcer not responsive to other measures.
/square6Coexisting reason for surgery (e.g. perforation,obstruction, malignancy)
/square6Aortoenteric fistula.
Q.Octreotide.
/square6Octreotide is a long acting analogue of somato-
statin. Its pharmacological actions are similar tosomatostatin which is a natural hormone.
Pharmacokinetics
/square6Octreotide acts on somatostatin receptors. It isadministered through a subcutaneous or intra-venous route. It is absorbed quickly and completelyafter subcutaneous and intravenous injection.
Pharmacological Actions
/square6Inhibits secretion of many hormones, such as gastrin,cholecystokinin, glucagon, growth hormone,insulin, secretin, pancreatic polypeptide, TSH, andvasoactive intestinal peptide.
/square6Reduces intestinal and pancreatic secretion.
/square6Reduces gastrointestinal motility and inhibits
contraction of the gallbladder./square6Causes vasoconstriction.
/square6Reduces portal vein pressure.
Uses of Octreotide
/square6Treatment of growth hormone producing tumors
(acromegaly and gigantism), when surgery iscontraindicated.
/square6Treatment of diarrhea and flushing episodesassociated with carcinoid syndrome.
/square6Treatment of diarrhea in people with vasoactiveintestinal peptide secreting tumors (VIPomas).
/square6Treatment of mild cases of glucagonoma whensurgery is not an option.
/square6Bleeding esophageal varices (given as intravenousinfusion, acts by reducing portal venous pressure).
/square6Radiolabeled octreotide is used in nuclear medicineimaging to noninvasively image neuroendocrine andother tumors expressing somatostatin receptors.
/square6Radiolabeled octreotide can also be used in the
treatment of unresectable neuroendocrine tumors
expressing somatostatin receptors.
/square6Hypoglycemia: Octreotide is also used in the treat-
ment of refractory hypoglycemia in neonates and
sulphonylurea-induced hypoglycemia in adults.
Adverse Effects
/square6Gastrointestinal side effects are common and
include diarrhea, nausea, abdominal discomfort,gallbladder abnormalities, such as cholelithiasisand microlithiasis.
/square6Bradycardia, conduction abnormalities, andarrhythmias.
/square6Hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia occur due toalteration in glucose metabolism.
/square6Hypothyroidism.
/square6Skin itching.
/square6Pain at the injection site.
/square6Headache and dizziness.
/square6Rare side effects include acute anaphylactic reac-tions, pancreatitis and hepatitis.
Q.Discuss the etiology, classification, clinical features,
investigations and management of malabsorption
syndrome.
Q.What are the disorders causing malabsorption?
How do you approach a case of suspected mal-
absorption?
/square6Malabsorption refers to impaired absorption ofnutrients.
/square6Malabsorption occurs mainly due to diseases of
small intestine since this is the major site of
absorption of nutrients.
/square6Fat is the most difficult to absorb and hence most mal-absorption syndromes have steatorrhea. A stool test
for fat is the best screening test for malabsorption.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
4272 /square6There are three stages of nutrient absorption:
Luminal, mucosal, and postabsorptive.
– The luminal phase involves mechanical mixing
and digestive enzymes.
– The mucosal phase requires a properly function-
ing mucosal membrane for absorption.
– The postabsorptive phase becomes facilitated by
an intact blood supply and lymphatic system.
/square6Malabsorption can occur due to problems in any ofthese three phases.Steatorrhea
/square6Steatorrhea is due to fat malabsorption.
/square6The hallmark of steatorrhea is the passage of pale,bulky, and foul smelling stools, which float on top
of the toilet water and are difficult to flush. Also,
patients find floating oil droplets in the toiletfollowing defecation.
Weight Loss and Fatigue
/square6Weight loss is due to protein energy malnutritionfrom malabsorption. Fatigue is due to weight lossplus coexisting anemia.
Flatulence and Abdominal Distention
/square6Bacterial fermentation of unabsorbed food sub-stances releases gases, such as hydrogen and
methane, causing flatulence.
/square6Flatulence often causes uncomfortable abdominal
distention and cramps.
Edema
/square6Protein malabsorption causes hypoalbuminemiawhich causes peripheral edema.
/square6With severe protein depletion, ascites maydevelop.
Anemia
/square6Anemia develops due to iron deficiency (microcytic
anemia), folic acid or vitamin B12 deficiency (macro-
cytic anemia). Iron deficiency is common in celiacdisease. Vitamin B
12 deficiency is common in Crohn’s
disease with ileal involvement or ileocecal TB.
Bleeding Disorders
/square6Bleeding tendency is due to vitamin K malabsorp-tion and decreased production of Vit K dependentclotting factors. Ecchymosis is usually seen but
patient can also have melena and hematuria.
Bone Pain and Pathologic Fractures
/square6This is due to vitamin D deficiency causing osteo-
penia or osteomalacia.
/square6Malabsorption of calcium can lead to secondaryhyperparathyroidism.
Neurologic Manifestations
/square6Electrolyte disturbances, such as hypocalcemia andhypomagnesemia, can lead to tetany, manifestingas the Trousseau’s sign and the Chvostek sign.
/square6Vitamin malabsorption can cause generalizedmotor weakness (pantothenic acid, vitamin D) or
peripheral neuropathy (thiamine, Vit B
12), a sense
of loss for vibration and position (Vit B12), night
blindness (vitamin A), and seizures (biotin).TABLE 4.18: Causes of malabsorption
Disorders of luminal phase
•Enzyme deficiency:  Chronic pancreatitis, cystic fibrosis.
•Enzyme inactivation: Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.
•Diminished bile salt synthesis:  Parenchymal liver diseases.
•Impaired bile secretion:  Bile duct obstruction, chronic
cholestasis.
•Increased bile salt loss:  Ileal disease or resection.
•Reduced luminal availability of specific nutrients: Intrinsic factor
deficiency in pernicious anemia causing Vit B12 deficiency.
•Bacterial consumption of nutrients:  Bacterial overgrowth
causing vitamin B12 deficiency.
Disorders of mucosal phase
•Defects in brush border hydrolysis : Sucrase-isomaltase
deficiency, lactase deficiency.
•Defects in mucosal absorption (villous atrophy):  Celiac sprue,
tropical sprue, lymphoma, Whipple’s disease, radiation
enteritis, AIDS, giardiasis, Crohn’s disease.
Disorders of postabsorptive, processing phase
•Defects in enterocyte processing: Abetalipoproteinemia.
•Defects in lymphatic transport:  Intestinal lymphangiectasia,
intestinal tuberculosis.
Systemic diseases causing malabsorption
• Thyrotoxicosis (rapid transit through gut)
• Hypothyroidism (impaired intestinal motility, bacterial
overgrowth)
• Diabetes mellitus (impaired intestinal motility, bacterial
overgrowth)
• Scleroderma (impaired intestinal motility, bacterial
overgrowth)
Drugs causing malabsorption
• Antibiotics (vitamin B12 and vitamin K deficiency)
• Methotrexate (folic acid antagonist, causes inhibition of crypt
cell division)
• Cholestyramine (binds bile salts)• Laxatives (rapid transit through gut)
• Liquid paraffin causes fat soluble vitamin deficiency
Clinical Features
Diarrhea
/square6Diarrhea is the most common complaint. It is due
to the osmotic load received by the intestine becauseof unabsorbed carbohydrates and solutes.
/square6Bacterial action producing hydroxy fatty acids from
undigested fat also can increase fluid secretion from
the intestine, further worsening the diarrhea.

/square6Gastrointestinal System273
4Investigations
Imaging Studies
/square6Endoscopy:  Upper GI scopy is helpful to visualize
stomach, duodenum and upper jejunum. A
cobblestone appearance of the duodenal mucosa is
seen in Crohn’s disease. Reduced duodenal foldsand scalloping of the mucosa may be seen in celiacdisease. Small bowel biopsy can also be takenduring endoscopy.
/square6CT and ultrasound abdomen:  May be helpful in the
diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis and other abnor-malities in the abdomen.
/square6Barium studies:  An upper gastrointestinal series with
small bowel follow-through or enteroclysis (adouble contrast study performed by passing a tubeinto the proximal small bowel and injecting bariumand methylcellulose) can provide information aboutthe gross morphology of the small intestine. For
example, small bowel diverticula and mucosal
abnormalities can be identified.
/square6Wireless capsule endoscopy: Wireless capsule endo-
scopy allows for visualization of the entire small
bowel. Because of the risk of retention, it should be
avoided in patients with suspected small bowelstrictures.
Tests for Fat Absorption
/square6Fecal fat estimation: Increase in stool fat excretionis known as steatorrhea. A 72-hour fecal fat estima-tion can detect steatorrhea. More than 6 g/day offat in stool is pathologic.
/square6Sudan III stain: Sudan stain on a spot stoolsample can detect more than 90% of patients withsteatorrhea./square6Measurement of fat soluble vitamin levels in theblood (A, D, E, K); prothrombin time.
/square6Near infrared reflectance analysis (NIRA):  This may
become the procedure of choice in future. NIRA
can simultaneously measure fecal fat, nitrogen, and
carbohydrates in a single sample.
/square614C-triolein breath test:  The test involves measure-
ment of breath CO2 after ingestion of the radiolabeled
triglyceride triolein, and provides a measure of fat
absorption.
Tests for Carbohydrate Absorption
/square6Oral glucose tolerance test: There will be failure of
blood glucose levels to rise after glucose loading.
/square6D-xylose test:  Patient ingests 25 g of D-xylose, and
urine is tested for the presence of D-xylose.
Excretion of lesser amounts of D-xylose suggestsabnormal absorption (as in celiac sprue).
/square6Lactose tolerance test:  After ingestion of 50 g lactose,
blood glucose levels are monitored. Insufficient
increase in blood glucose plus the development ofsymptoms is diagnostic of lactose intolerance.Another test is measurement of breath hydrogenafter lactose ingestion. An increase in breathhydrogen is diagnostic.
/square6Breath tests:  Breath tests using hydrogen, 14CO2, or
13CO2 can be used to diagnose specific forms of
carbohydrate malabsorption (e.g. lactose, fructose,sucrose isomaltase and others). All of these breath
tests rely on bacterial fermentation of nonabsorbed
carbohydrate and therefore concurrent antibioticadministration often alters the results.
Tests for Protein Absorption
/square6Serum albumin will be low.
/square6Intravenous radioactive chromium is used to label
circulating albumin. In case of protein losing
enteropathy radioactivity appears in stools.
/square6Measurement of nitrogen in the stool will be morethan 2.5 gm.
/square6Excretion of alpha-1 antitrypsin in the stool(normally it is absent in the stool).
Tests for Absorption of other Substances
/square6Complete blood count (anemia), serum iron, ferritin,folate, vitamin B
12 level, Schilling test (for Vit B12
malabsorption), serum calcium, sodium, potassium,β-carotene, and prothrombin time should be obtained
in all patients with suspected malabsorption.
Tests for Bacterial Overgrowth
/square6The gold standard for diagnosis of bacterial over-
growth is the direct quantitative measurement of
bacterial counts from aspirated intestinal fluid.
However, this is invasive and hence the followingtests are used more commonly.TABLE 4.19: Summary of features of specific nutrient mal-
absorption
Carbohydrates:  Watery diarrhea, flatulence, acidic stool pH,
milk intolerance.
Protein:  Edema, muscle atrophy, amenorrhea.
Fat: Pale, bulky, foul smelling stool which floats on water and
difficult to flush. Diarrhea without flatulence. Weight loss.
Vitamins
• Vitamin A : Follicular hyperkeratosis, night blindness.
•Vitamin B12: Anemia, neuropathy, subacute combined
degeneration of the spinal cord.
• Vitamin B1, B2: Cheilosis, painless glossitis, acrodermatitis,
angular stomatitis.
•Folic acid: Megaloblastic anemia.
• Vitamin D: Tetany, pathologic fractures due to osteomalacia,
muscular irritability.
•Vitamin K:  Bleeding tendency.
Minerals and electrolytes
• Iron:  Anemia, glossitis, pica.
•Calcium:  Tetany, pathologic fractures due to osteomalacia,
muscular irritability.
•Zinc:  Anorexia, weakness, tingling, impaired taste.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
4274 /square6Hydrogen breath test:  This is used to detect bacterial
overgrowth in the intestine. Oral lactulose orglucose is metabolized by bacteria with theproduction of hydrogen. An early rise in the breathhydrogen indicates bacterial overgrowth in thesmall intestine.
/square614C-glycocholic acid breath test:  It is rarely done now
and has been replaced by the hydrogen breath test.Patient is given radiolabelled bile acid (14C-glycocholic acid) orally. Bacteria in the intestine
deconjugate the bile acid, releasing [14C]-glycine,
which is metabolized and appears in the breath as14CO
2.
Serologic Tests
/square6IgA endomysial antibody and IgA anti-tTG antibodyboth are found in celiac disease. IgG or IgA anti-gliadin antibodies are also present in celiac sprue.
Intestinal Mucosal Biopsy and Histopathology
/square6Villous atrophy is seen in celiac disease, and tropicalsprue.
Treatment
/square6Treat the underlying cause.
/square6Avoid milk and milk products in lactose intole-rance.
/square6Gluten-free diet in celiac disease.
/square6Pancreatic enzyme supplements in pancreaticinsufficiency.
/square6Reduction of long chain fatty acids and low fat dietin fat malabsorption.
/square6Antibiotics are the therapy for bacterial overgrowth.
/square6Corticosteroids, anti-inflammatory agents such asmesalamine, are used to treat inflammatory boweldisease such as Crohn’s disease.
/square6Replacement of specific nutrients which aredeficient such as folic acid, iron and Vit B
12, Vit D,
etc.
/square6Caloric and protein replacement.
Q.Schilling test.
/square6This test is performed to determine the cause for
vitamin B12 malabsorption. Vitamin B12 is absorbed
in the terminal ileum.
/square6Causes of vitamin B12 malabsorption are intrinsic
factor defficiency, atrophic gastritis, small intestinalbacterial overgrowth, exocrine pancreatic insuffi-ciency, and ileal disease.
/square6Schilling test is performed by administering 1 μg
of radiolabelled Vit B12 orally, followed by an
intramuscular injection of 1000 microgram of
Vit B12 one hour later to saturate Vit B12 binding
sites so that absorbed radiolabelled B12 is excretedin the urine./square6A 24-hour urine is then collected for determinationof the percent excretion of the oral dose. Normallyat least 10% of the radiolabeled vitamin B
12 is
excreted in the urine. In patients with perniciousanemia or impaired absorption, less than 10% ofthe radiolabeled vitamin B
12 is excreted.
/square6Next, the above step is repeated after the additionof intrinsic factor. If this second urine collection isnormal, it proves intrinsic factor deficiency orpernicious anemia.
/square6If urinary excretion of Vit B12 is still less than 10%
after adding intrinsic factor, then the test is repeatedafter a course of antibiotics. Small intestinal bacterialovergrowth is suggested if an abnormal test is
normalized after a course of antibiotics. If the absorp-
tion is abnormal even after addition of intrinsicfactor and exclusion of bacterial overgrowth, itsuggests terminal ileal disease. The Schilling testcan also be abnormal in pancreatic insufficiency andceliac disease. Normalization after pancreatic
enzyme substitution or a gluten-free diet is useful
for diagnosis of these causes of malabsorption.
/square6The Schilling test can also be used to determine thefunctional integrity of the ileal mucosa after
treatment of ileal Crohn’s disease.
/square6Many labs have stopped doing the Schilling test,
due to lack of production of radiolabeled Vit B12
test substances. Also, the treatment remains same
(i.e. injection of Vit B12), even if the exact cause was
identified. Moreover, upper GI scopy can detectmany causes of Vit B
12 deficiency. Hence, Schilling
test it is not being performed now.
Q.Celiac sprue (celiac disease, gluten-sensitive
enteropathy).
Q.Dermatitis herpetiformis.
/square6Celiac disease is an inflammatory condition of the
small intestine precipitated by the ingestion ofwheat, rye, and barley in individuals with geneticpredispositions.
/square6It occurs throughout the world but common inNorthern Europe. There is increased incidence ofceliac disease within families but the exact mode ofinheritance is unknown.
Etiology
/square6Inflammatory damage to the intestinal mucosa isdue to gluten protein of wheat. Gluten is also
present in barley, rye and oats. The toxic component
in gluten is gliadin.
/square6Over 90% of patients will have HLA-DQ2. However,
environmental factors also play an important role.
Pathogenesis
/square6Glutens are partially digested in the intestinal
lumen to release gliadin and other peptides.

/square6Gastrointestinal System275
4/square6Gliadin is rich in glutamine. Some of the glutamines
in gliadin are deamidated by the enzyme tissue
transglutaminase (tTG), generating negatively
charged glutamic acid residues.
/square6These altered gliadin peptides are recognized by
local intestinal T cells as foreign, thereby stimulat-
ing an immune response. B cells are also activated
and produce various antibodies such as antigliadin,
antiendomysial, and anti-tissue transglutaminase
(tTG) antibodies.
/square6This immune response causes damage to intestinal
mucosa resulting in mal-digestion and malabsorp-
tion of nutrients.
Pathology
/square6The mucosa of the jejunum is predominantly
affected, and the damage decreases towards the
ileum.
/square6There is absence of villi, making the mucosal surface
flat. Histological examination shows crypt hyper-
plasia with chronic inflammatory cells in the lamina
propria and subtotal villous atrophy. In the lamina
propria there is an increase in lymphocytes and
plasma cells.
Figure 4.5 Normal and abnormal villi
Clinical Features
/square6Celiac disease can present at any age but usually in
infancy after weaning on to gluten-containing
foods. It has a female preponderance.
/square6Many patients present with anemia or osteoporosis
without gastrointestinal symptoms. These indivi-
duals usually have proximal intestinal disease that
impairs iron, folate, and calcium absorption.
/square6Patients with significant mucosal involvement
present with diarrhea, abdominal distension and
bloating after eating, weight loss or growth retarda-
tion, and features of vitamin and mineral defi-
ciencies. Absorption of all nutrients, electrolytes,
fat-soluble vitamins, calcium, magnesium, iron,
folate, and zinc, is affected. Diarrhea is due to
decreased surface area for water and electrolyte
absorption and the osmotic effect of unabsorbed
luminal nutrients.
/square6There is an increased incidence of other auto-
immune diseases, like thyroid disease, type-1
diabetes, primary biliary cirrhosis and Sjögren’s
syndrome./square6Extraintestinal manifestations of celiac disease
include rash (dermatitis herpetiformis), neurologic
disorders (myopathy, epilepsy), psychiatric dis-
orders (depression, paranoia), and reproductive
disorders (infertility, spontaneous abortion).
Investigations
/square6Duodenal/jejunal biopsy: It shows characteristic
changes of celiac sprue.
/square6Serologic markers:  Useful in supporting the diagnosis.
An IgA anti-tissue transglutaminase antibody (IgA
TTG), detected by ELISA is the best first test for
suspected celiac sprue. Antigliadin IgA and IgG
antibodies are sensitive but not specific. Antiendo-
mysial IgA antibodies are highly sensitive and
specific for celiac disease.
/square6Tests for malabsorption of proteins, carbohydrate, fat and
vitamins:  All patients with celiac disease should be
screened for vitamin and mineral deficiencies and
have bone densitometry.
Treatment
/square6Treatment consists of a lifelong gluten-free diet.
Wheat, rye, and barley should be excluded from
the diet.
/square6A lactose-free diet is also recommended until symp-
toms improve because of secondary lactase deficiency.
/square6Any deficient vitamins and minerals should be
replaced. Women of childbearing age should be
given folic acid supplements.
/square690% of patients on gluten-free diet experience
symptomatic improvement within 2 weeks. A small
percentage of patients do not improve on a strict
gluten-free diet (refractory sprue). Such patients
may have atrophic mucosa. Lymphoma should be
ruled out in refractory sprue. Steroids may be of
help in refractory sprue if there is persistent
inflammation.
Complications
/square6Intestinal lymphoma.
/square6Ulcerative jejunitis.
Dermatitis Herpetiformis
/square6Dermatitis herpetiformis is the most common skin
disorder associated with celiac disease. The pre-
sence of dermatitis herpetiformis is pathognomonic
of celiac sprue.
/square6It is characterized by an itchy papular vesicular
eruption on the skin. These blisters rupture due to
scratching, dry up, and leave an area of pigmenta-
tion and scarring.
/square6The diagnosis can be confirmed by the demonstra-
tion of granular IgA deposition in the skin in an
area not affected by blistering.
/square6Treatment includes dapsone in addition to gluten
free diet.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
4276 Q.Tropical sprue.
/square6Tropical sprue is a chronic diarrheal disease,
possibly of infectious origin, that involves the small
intestine and is characterized by malabsorption of
nutrients, especially folic acid and vitamin B12.
/square6It was called tropical sprue because it is commonin residents or visitors of a tropical area. Tropical
sprue is endemic in most of Asia, some Caribbean
islands, Puerto Rico and parts of South America.In India, it is mainly seen in south India. Epidemicsof tropical sprue occur, lasting up to 2 years in theseareas.
Etiology
/square6Etiology is unknown, but is likely to be due toan infectious agent because it responds to anti-biotics.
/square6Some of the implicated bacteria include E. coli ,
Klebsiella and Enterobacter.
Clinical Features
/square6Patients present with diarrhea, anorexia, abdominaldistension and weight loss which can be acute orinsidious in onset.
/square6Steatorrhea is common. Nutritional deficiencies,
especially of folate and vitamin B12 develop after
several months to years. Patient may also haveglossitis, stomatitis, and peripheral edema.
Investigations
/square6Endoscopy and mucosal biopsy:  Endoscopy shows
flattening of duodenal folds and “scalloping.”
The jejunal mucosal biopsy show partial villousatrophy which is usually less severe than celiacdisease. Changes are seen in whole of smallintestine.
/square6Other causes of diarrhea must be excluded particu-larly Giardia, which can mimick tropical sprue.
Treatment
Broad-spectrum antibiotics and folic acid can cure the
condition, especially if the patient leaves the tropicalarea and does not return. Antibiotic treatment involves
tetracycline 1 g daily for up to 6 months. Doxycycline
can be used instead of tetracycline.
Q.Whipple’s disease.
/square6Whipple’s disease is a chronic multisystem disease
caused by the gram-positive bacteria Tropheryma
whippelii . Tropheryma whippelii has high infectivity
but low virulence.
/square6Although the first descriptions of the disorderdescribed a malabsorption syndrome with smallintestinal involvement, the disease also affects thejoints, CNS, and CVS.Clinical Features
The disease is common in middle-aged men and affectsmultiple systems. Onset is insidious and featuresinclude diarrhea, steatorrhea, abdominal pain, weight
loss, migratory large-joint arthropathy, fever,
dementia and ophthalmologic symptoms. It is a majorcause of culture negative endocarditis.
Investigations
Biopsies from the small intestine and other involvedorgans show presence of PAS-positive (periodic acid-
Schiff) macrophages containing the characteristic
small bacilli.
Treatment
Ceftriaxone or penicillin initially followed by tri-methoprim/sulfamethoxazole for minimum 1 year.Combination of doxycycline and hydroxychloroquine
can be used in patients with sulpha allergy.
Q.Protein-losing enteropathy.
Protein-losing enteropathy is not a specific disease but
refers to many disorders characterized by excessprotein loss into the gastrointestinal tract.
TABLE 4.20: Causes of protein-losing enteropathy
Gastrointestinal mucosal diseases causing protein loss into GIT
• Ulcerative colitis
• Gastrointestinal carcinomas• Peptic ulcer• Amyloidosis• Celiac sprue• Whipple’s disease
• Ménétrier’s disease (hypertrophic gastropathy)
Lymphatic dysfunction
• Intestinal tuberculosis• Obstruction (enlarged mesenteric nodes or lymphoma)• Lymphangiectasia
Cardiac disorders
• Heart failure
• Chronic pericarditis
Clinical Features
/square6There is peripheral edema, low serum albumin and
globulin levels in the absence of renal and hepaticdisease.
/square6Both albumin and globulin are low in protein losingenteropathy. If only albumin is low with normalglobulin, search for renal and/or hepatic disease
/square6Patients with increased protein loss into the gastro-intestinal tract from lymphatic obstruction oftenhave steatorrhea and diarrhea.
Diagnosis
/square6Loss of protein into the gastrointestinal tract can be
demonstrated by giving radiolabeled proteins and its
quantification in stool during a 24 or 48 hours period.

/square6Gastrointestinal System277
4Treatment
/square6Underlying disease should be treated. For example,
gluten-free diet in celiac sprue or mesalamine forulcerative colitis.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investiga-
tions, and management of lactose intolerance.
/square6The term lactose intolerance refers to the develop-
ment of GI symptoms such as abdominal pain,bloating, flatulence, diarrhea, and vomiting afterthe ingestion of lactose. It is due to lactase deficiencywhich hydrolyses lactose into glucose and galactose.
/square6Intolerance to lactose-containing foods (e.g. dairyproducts) is a common problem worldwide.
Etiology of Lactose Intolerance
Primary lactase deficiency
• Racial or ethnic• Developmental• Congenital lactase deficiency
Secondary lactase deficiency
• Bacterial overgrowth• Infectious enteritis• Giardiasis• Mucosal injury• Celiac disease• Inflammatory bowel disease (especially Crohn’s disease)• Drug- or radiation-induced enteritis
Pathophysiology
/square6Lactose is hydrolyzed by intestinal lactase to
glucose and galactose in the intestine which are thenabsorbed. If there is lactase deficiency, lactose
cannot be hydrolyzed and absorbed. The un-
absorbed lactose creates an osmotic load in theintestine, which draws fluid into the intestine.Excess fluid in the intestine causes dilatation ofintestine and diarrhea. In the colon, free lactose isfermented by colonic bacteria to yield short-chain
fatty acids and hydrogen gas. The combined
increase in fecal water, intestinal transit, andgenerated hydrogen gas accounts for abdominalpain, bloating, flatulence, and diarrhea.
Clinical Features
/square6Among adults, the age of presentation is 20 to40 years.
/square6Abdominal pain:  May be crampy in nature and is often
localized to the periumbilical area or lower quadrant.
/square6Bloating
/square6Flatulence
/square6Diarrhea:  Stools are usually bulky, frothy, and
watery.
/square6Vomiting
/square6Borborygmi may be audible on physical examina-tion and to the patient.Investigations
Lactose Tolerance Test
/square650 gm of lactose is given orally and blood glucoselevels are measured at 0, 1 and 2 hours. An increasein blood glucose by less than 20 mg/dL plus thedevelopment of symptoms is diagnostic.
/square6This test is cumbersome and time consuming, andhas largely been replaced by the lactose breathhydrogen test.
Lactose Breath Hydrogen Test
/square6This is the most common test done. Oral lactose isgiven in the fasting state, at a dose of 2 gm/kg(maximum dose, 25 g). Unabsorbed lactose isfermented by intestinal bacteria leading to release
of hydrogen gas that is absorbed into the blood and
excreted by lungs. Breath hydrogen is sampled atbaseline and at 30-minute intervals after theingestion of lactose for three hours.
/square6Baseline and post-lactose values are compared. Abreath hydrogen value of more than 20 ppm isdiagnostic of lactose malabsorption.
Genetic Test for Primary Lactose Malabsorption
/square6Missing gene coding for lactase may be identified.
Intestinal Biopsy and Measurement of Lactase Enzyme Levels
/square6This is the “gold standard” test for lactose mal-absorption. However, it is not routinely required.
Treatment
Dietary Lactose Restriction
/square6Initially complete restriction of lactose-containingfoods should be tried till the symptoms improve.
Improvement of symptoms confirms the diagnosis
also.
/square6Small quantities of lactose may subsequently bereintroduced into the diet, with careful monitoring
of symptoms. Many patients will tolerate graded
increase in lactose containing foods.
Enzyme Replacement
/square6Commercially available “lactase” preparations areactually bacterial or yeast beta-galactosidases. Theycan be taken with food and reduce symptoms inmany lactose intolerant subjects.
Probiotics
/square6Lactase-containing probiotics may be beneficial.However, studies have shown mixed results.
Calcium Supplementation
/square6Avoidance of milk and other dairy products can
lead to reduced calcium intake, which may increase
the risk for osteoporosis and fracture. Hence,calcium supplementation should be given to all

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
4278 patients. A dose of 1200–1500 mg/day is necessary
for adolescents and young adults.
/square6In addition, the vitamin D status should also bemonitored. If necessary, Vit D supplementation
should also be given.
Q.Abdominal tuberculosis.
/square6Abdominal tuberculosis (TB) refers to tuberculosis
of intestine, peritoneum and abdominal lymph nodes.One or more of these structures may be affected.
/square6The most common site of intestinal involvement isthe ileocecal region. The affinity of M. tuberculosis
for this site may be due to its relative stasis andabundant lymphoid tissue.
/square6Tuberculosis is being seen more frequently inpatients with HIV infection.
Etiology
/square6Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
Routes of Spread
/square6Intestinal tuberculosis occurs due to swallowing ofinfected sputum, or hematogenous spread from activepulmonary or miliary TB, or ingestion of contami-nated milk or food, or spread from adjacent organs.
Pathology
Intestinal Tuberculosis
/square6The macroscopic appearance of the intestinal TBcan be categorized into 3 types.
Ulcerative (60%)
/square6This is characterized by multiple superficial ulcers.
/square6Ulcers are perpendicular to the long axis of intestine.Healing may result in scarring and stricture formation.
/square6This pattern has been associated with a virulentclinical course.
Hypertrophic (10%)
/square6This is characterized by scarring, fibrosis, andhypertrophic mass (pseudotumor).
Ulcerohypertrophic (30%)
/square6This is characterized by an inflammatory masscentering around the ileocecal valve with thickened
and ulcerated intestinal walls.
/square6It is common in ileocecal TB compared to other
segments of intestine.
Peritoneal Tuberculosis
/square6Peritoneum is studded with tubercles.
/square6Wet type presents with ascites which develops dueto “exudation” of proteinaceous fluid from thetubercles. Most patients have this type.
/square6Dry type is characterized by fibro adhesive form ofthe disease.
/square6Patients may have combination of both of the above.Clinical Features
/square6Constitutional symptoms like anorexia, fatigue,fever, night sweats, and weight loss.
/square6Nonspecific chronic abdominal pain, diarrhea,constipation, or blood in the stool.
/square6A doughy mass may be palpable in right lower
quadrant of abdomen.
/square6Abdominal distension due to ascites.
/square6Patients may also present acutely with small
intestinal obstruction and colonic perforation.
Complications of Abdominal Tuberculosis
/square6Intestinal perforation
/square6Abscess formation
/square6Fistula formation (between intestinal loops and into
the exterior through skin)
/square6Malabsorption
/square6Massive bleeding
/square6Intestinal obstruction.
Differential Diagnosis
/square6TB must be differentiated from other diseases
affecting ileocecal region such as Crohn’s disease,Yersinia enterocolitica, Y. pseudotuberculosis  infection
and cecal carcinoma.
Diagnosis
/square6Routine laboratory tests  reveal mild anemia, increased
ESR and hypoalbuminemia.
/square6Chest X-ray  may show evidence of active or old
tuberculosis.
/square6Plain X-ray abdomen may show calcified lymph
nodes and dilated bowel loops.
/square6Tuberculin skin test is positive in most patients.
/square6Ascitic fluid analysis
– High leukocyte count of 150 to 4000/mm3, with
predominant lymphocytes.
– Fluid is exudative (protein content is >3.0 mg/dL).
– AFB stain and culture may be positive but have
low yield rate.
– Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay can
rapidly detect mycobacteria.
– Adenosine deaminase (ADA) levels in ascitic
fluid has high sensitivity and specificity for
detecting tuberculosis.
– Cartridge based nucleic acid amplification test
(CB-NAAT/GeneXpert) of ascitic fluid.
/square6Barium meal and small bowel follow-through may
show mucosal ulcerations, strictures (string sign),
and hypersegmented bowel loops.
/square6Barium enema may show deformed cecum, a gaping
and incompetent ileocecal valve with narrowing ofterminal ileum (inverted umbrella sign).
/square6Ultrasound abdomen may show ascites, thickened ileo-
cecal region, ileocecal mass and lymphadenopathy.

/square6Gastrointestinal System279
4/square6CT scan : May show concentric mural thickening of
the ileocecal region, with or without proximalintestinal dilatation. Adjacent mesenteric lympha-denopathy may be seen on CT.
/square6Colonoscopy  shows ulcers, strictures, nodules,
pseudopolyps, fibrous bands, fistulas, anddeformed ileocecal valves.
/square6Laparoscopy: Laparoscopy examination is an
effective method of diagnosing peritoneal tuber-
culosis because it can directly visualize tuberclesand biopsy of the peritoneum can be taken. Biopsyspecimens may be tested for AFB by staining,culture and PCR.
Treatment
/square6Treatment is similar to that for pulmonary TB.Conventional antitubercular therapy for at least6 months including initial 2 months of HREZ (e.g.isoniazid, rifampicin, ethambutol and pyrazina-mide) followed by 4 months HR is recommendedin all patients.
/square6Surgery is required for complications such asintestinal perforation, abscess or fistula, massivebleeding, and intestinal obstruction.
Q.What are inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD)?
Discuss the etiology of IBD.
/square6Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is an immune
mediated chronic intestinal inflammation. There aretwo major types of IBD—ulcerative colitis (UC) andCrohn’s disease.
/square6Ulcerative colitis (UC) affects only the colon and
Crohn’s disease (CD) can affect any part of the GI
tract. There is overlap between these two conditionsin their clinical, histological and radiologicalfeatures and sometimes differentiation between thetwo is not possible. It is possible that these condi-tions represent two aspects of the same disease.
Epidemiology
/square6IBD occurs worldwide but more common in theWest. Both Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerativecolitis (UC) have an incidence of approximately5 to 10 per 100,000 annually. Whites are affectedmore commonly than non-white races. Jews are
more affected than non-Jews, and the Ashkenazi
Jews have a higher risk than the Sephardic Jews.
Etiology (Common for Both Crohn’s Disease andUlcerative Colitis)
/square6The exact etiology of IBD is unknown. But thepathogenesis involves three factors: Genetic
susceptibility, environmental factors and host
immune response. Many risk factors have beenidentified which are as follows.
/square6Familial and genetic factors: IBD is more common
amongst relatives of patients than in the generalpopulation. There is  increased concordance for IBD
in monozygotic twins than dizygotic twins.
/square6Environmental factors: Good domestic hygiene has
been shown to be a risk factor for CD but not for
UC. It is suggested that in a clean environment,intestinal immune system is not exposed to manypathogens and hence, may not be able to handle aninfection. Hence, even minor infections triggerprominent inflammation.
/square6Psychosocial factors: Major life events such as illness
or death in the family, divorce or separation, inter-personal conflict, or other major loss are associatedwith an increase in IBD symptoms.
/square6Nutritional factors: High sugar and fat intake is
suspected to be associated with IBD, but morestudies are needed to confirm it.
/square6Smoking: Patients with CD are more likely to be
smokers, and smoking has been shown to exacer-bate CD. In contrast, there is an increased risk ofUC in nonsmokers and nicotine has been shown to
be an effective treatment of UC.
/square6Appendicectomy: Appendicectomy is protective for
the development of UC, particularly if performed
before the age of 20. In contrast, appendicectomy
may increase the risk of development of CD.
/square6Intestinal microflora:  IBD is characterized by an over-
aggressive immune response to luminal bacterial
antigens and other products, occurring against a
background of genetic susceptibility. There is analteration in the bacterial flora, with an increase inanaerobic bacteria in CD and an increase in aerobicbacteria in UC.
/square6Immunological factors: Many immunological abnor-
malities have been described in IBD patients. Manypatients lack the ability to appropriately downregulate antigen-specific or antigen non-specificinflammatory responses to endogenous luminal
antigens. There is upregulation of macrophages and
T helper lymphocytes in IBD which release pro-inflammatory cytokines. There is also activation ofother cells (eosinophils, mast cells, neutrophils andfibroblasts) which leads to excess production ofchemokines (lymphokines, arachidonic acid meta-
bolites, neuropeptides and free oxygen radicals),
all of which can lead to tissue damage.
Q.Describe the etiology, pathology, clinical features,
investigations and treatment of Crohn’s disease.
/square6Crohn’s disease is an idiopathic, chronic inflamma-
tory disease of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract that can
affect any part of the tract from the mouth to the anus.
It is characterized by exacerbations and remissions.
Epidemiology
/square6Crohn’s disease is slightly commoner in females
(M: F = 1:1.2).

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
4280 /square6Its incidence has a bimodal distribution with the
onset occurring most frequently between ages 15to 30 years and 40 to 60 years old.
/square6It is more common in Western population and in
urban areas than rural areas.
Etiology
/square6Refer previous question on IBD.
Pathology
Macroscopic Changes
/square6Crohn’s disease can affect any part of the gastro-
intestinal tract from the mouth to the anus butcommonly affects the terminal ileum and ascending
colon (ileocolonic disease).
/square6The disease is characterized by skip lesions (normal
areas in between affected areas).
/square6The involved small bowel is usually thickened andnarrowed. There are deep ulcers and fissures in themucosa of the intestine, producing a cobblestoneappearance.
/square6Fistulae and abscesses may be seen in the colon.
Microscopic Changes
/square6In Crohn’s disease  the inflammation extends
through all layers (transmural) of the bowel.
/square6There is an increase in chronic inflammatory cells
and lymphoid hyperplasia.
/square6Non-caseating granulomas may be seen.
Figure 4.6 Skip leisons in Crohn’s disease
Clinical Features
/square6It is a chronic disease with remissions and exacerba-
tions.
/square6The disease may present insidiously or acutely.
/square6The major symptoms are diarrhea, abdominal pain,and weight loss.
/square6Constitutional symptoms of malaise, lethargy,anorexia, nausea, vomiting and low-grade fevermay be present.
/square6The abdominal pain can be colicky, or felt as dis-comfort.
/square6Diarrhea may be associated with blood, making it diffi-cult to differentiate from ulcerative colitis. Steatorrhea
may be present due to small intestinal involvement.
/square6It can present as an emergency with acute right iliac
fossa pain mimicking appendicitis./square6It can be complicated by anal and perianal diseaseand can be the presenting feature, often precedingcolonic and small intestinal symptoms by manyyears.
/square6Enteric fistulae, e.g. from intestine to bladder orvagina occur in some cases.
/square6Examination may show weight loss and general ill-health . Right iliac fossa tenderness and mass are
occasionally found. The mass is due either to
inflamed loops of bowel that are matted togetheror to an abscess. Anal fissures or perianal abscessesmay be present. Extra-intestinal features such asarthritis may be present.
Investigations
/square6Blood tests: Anemia is common due to blood loss.
ESR, CRP, and WBC counts are raised indicating
inflammation. Hypoalbuminemia is present in
severe disease due to protein loss from intestine. Pre-sence of antisaccharomyces cerevisiae  antibodies
(ASCA) with absence of anti-neutrophil cytoplas-mic antibodies (pANCA) is seen in Crohn’s diseaseand can distinguish Crohn’s from ulcerative colitis.
/square6Stool examination: This should be done to exclude
infective causes of diarrhea.
/square6Fecal calprotectin : This is high in IBD. Calprotectin
is a protein released by neutrophils. When there isinflammation in the intestine due to IBD neutro-phils infiltrate intestine and release calprotectin,resulting in an increased level in the stool. This testcan help distinguish between IBD and IBS (irritable
bowel syndrome).
/square6Barium meal follow-through: Examination may show
an asymmetrical alteration in the mucosal patternwith deep ulceration, and areas of narrowing or
stricturing (string sign). Changes are commonly
seen in terminal ileum. Skip lesions with normalbowel in between.
/square6Ultrasound, CT or MRI abdomen: These are used to
define the thickness of the bowel wall and mesen-
tery as well as intra-abdominal and para-intestinalabscesses and also used to rule out alternate patho-logy in acute presentations.
/square6Radionuclide scans: With radiolabelled leucocytes are
used to identify small intestinal and colonic diseaseand to localize extra-intestinal abscesses.
/square6Colonoscopy: Superficial or deep ulceration with
cobblestone appearance and deep fissures. Skip
lesions. Rectal sparing.
/square6Video capsule endoscopy: Can visualize the small
bowel when regular endoscopy or colonoscopy
cannot reach these areas.
/square6Colonic biopsy: Can be used to confirm the diagnosis
of IBD and exclude other diagnoses. The biopsycharacteristically reveals crypt abscesses, branching
of crypts, atrophy of glands, and loss of mucin in
goblet cells in ulcerative colitis.

/square6Gastrointestinal System281
4Treatment
/square6The aim of management is to induce and then
maintain a remission.
General Measures
/square6Cigarette smoking should be stopped.
/square6Diarrhea can be controlled with loperamide orcodeine phosphate. Diarrhea in long standinginactive disease may be due to bile acid malabsorp-
tion and responds to cholestyramine.
/square6Anemia may be due to B12/folic acid or iron
deficiency, which should be replaced.
5-ASA (Amino Salicylic Acid) Agents
/square6The mainstay of therapy for IBD is 5-ASA agents.These agents are effective at inducing remission inboth UC and CD and in maintaining remission inUC. It is unclear whether they can maintainremission in CD also. Example is sulfasalazine.
/square6Sulfasalazine is not broken down in small intestineand the intact molecule reaches colon where it isbroken down by colonic bacteria into sulfa and 5-ASAmoieties. 5-ASA acts as local anti-inflammatoryagent in the colon.
/square6There are many side effects of sulfasalazine includ-ing folate malabsorption. These side effects are dueto sulfa moiety. Patients on sulfasalazine should begiven folic acid supplements.
/square6Newer sulfa-free agents such as mesalamine,olsalazine and balsalazide have less of sideeffects.
/square6Topical mesalamine enemas are effective in mild-to-moderate distal CD. Mesalamine suppositoriesare effective in treating proctitis.
Glucocorticoids
/square6These are effective in patients with moderate to
severe UC and CD. Prednisone 40 to 60 mg/d is
given if there is poor response to 5-ASA therapy.
/square6Glucocorticoids play no role in maintenance therapyof either UC or CD. Once clinical remission has been
induced, they should be tapered slowly.
Immunosuppressive Agents
/square6Azathioprine, 6-mercaptopurine,  methotrexate and
cyclosporine are mainly employed as steroid spar-ing agents in the management of glucocorticoid-dependent IBD. Tacrolimus and mycophenolate
mofetil are newer immunosuppressive agents.
Biologics
/square6Infliximab is a monoclonal antibody against TNF
that is extremely effective in CD. Two other anti-TNF agents, adalimumab and golimumab may be
less immunogenic than infliximab and have shown
efficacy in the treatment of Crohn’s disease.Nutritional Therapies
/square6Patients with active CD respond to bowel rest,
along with total enteral or total parenteral nutrition(TPN). Bowel rest and TPN are as effective as gluco-
corticoids at inducing remission of active CD but
are not effective as maintenance therapy. However,
UC does not respond to dietary measures.
Surgical Management
/square6In Crohn’s disease surgery is indicated in stricture
and obstruction unresponsive to medical therapy,
massive hemorrhage and refractory fistula.
Q.Describe the etiology, pathology, clinical features,
investigations and treatment of ulcerative colitis.
/square6Ulcerative colitis is an idiopathic inflammatory
condition of the colon which results in diffuse friabi-
lity and superficial erosions on the colonic wall.
/square6It is the most common form of inflammatory boweldisease worldwide. There is an increased prevalence
of ulcerative colitis in nonsmokers or those who
recently quit smoking.
Etiology
/square6Refer to previous question on IBD.
Pathology
Macroscopic Changes
/square6UC usually involves only colon and spares small
intestine except in a few patients where terminal
ileum can also be involved (backwash ileitis).
/square6Mucosa is erythematous and has a fine granular
surface that looks like sandpaper. Mucosal involve-
ment is continuous without skip lesions.
/square6Rectum is also involved in 95% of cases.
/square6Inflammatory swollen mucosa gives the appearanceof pseudopolyps.
/square6In severe inflammation, toxic dilatation can occur.
/square6On healing, the mucosa can return to normal,although there is usually some residual glandular
distortion.
Microscopic Changes
/square6Mucosa shows a chronic inflammatory cell infiltrate
in the lamina propria. Crypt abscesses and goblet
cell depletion are also seen.
/square6Inflammation is restricted to the mucosa and
submucosa of the colon.
Figure 4.7 Ulcerative colitis


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
4282 Clinical Features
/square6The disease can be mild, moderate or severe, and
in most patients runs a course of remissions andexacerbations.
/square6The major symptom in ulcerative colitis is diarrheawith blood and mucus, sometimes accompanied bylower abdominal discomfort. Diarrhea is oftennocturnal and/or postprandial.
/square6General features include malaise, lethargy andanorexia.
/square6Aphthous ulceration in the mouth is seen.
/square6When there is proctitis (rectal inflammation) bloodmixed with the stool, urgency and tenesmus are seen.
/square6Extraintestinal manifestations can be seen in somepatients and include episcleritis, scleritis, uveitis,peripheral arthropathies, sacroiliitis, ankylosingspondylitis, primary sclerosing cholangitis,erythema nodosum, and pyoderma gangrenosum.
Investigations
Blood Tests
/square6Anemia is common due to blood loss. ESR, CRP andwhite cell counts are raised indicating inflamma-tion. Hypoalbuminemia is present in severe diseasedue to protein loss from intestine. pANCA may be
positive in ulcerative colitis.
Stool Examination
/square6This should be done to exclude infective causes of
colitis.
Plain X-ray Abdomen
/square6To exclude toxic dilatation of colon.Flexible Sigmoidoscopy and Colonoscopy
/square6Sigmoidoscopy is enough initially since totalcolonoscopy may precipitate toxic megacolon orperforation in severe disease. Colonoscopy can be
done in mild cases.
/square6Mucosa is erythematous. In addition, petechiae,
exudates, touch friability, and frank hemorrhagemay be present.
/square6Severe cases may have ulcers, profuse bleeding, andcopious exudates. Colonic involvement is continuousin ulcerative colitis (skip lesions in Crohn’s disease).
/square6Pseudopolyps may be present.
Barium Enema
/square6Rarely used in the diagnosis of ulcerative colitis. Itmay be normal in mild forms of disease.
/square6It shows ulcers, shortening of the colon, loss of
haustrae, narrowing of the lumen, and pseudo-
polyps. It should be avoided in severely ill patientsas it may precipitate ileus with toxic megacolon.
Colonic Biopsy
/square6Can be used to confirm the diagnosis. It revealscrypt abscesses and chronic changes includingbranching of crypts, atrophy of glands, and loss ofmucin in goblet cells.
Treatment
/square6Treatment is same as that of Crohn’s disease.
/square6Surgery (total proctocolectomy with ileostomy) isindicated in severe ulcerative colitis associated withtoxic megacolon, colonic perforation and massivecolonic hemorrhage.
Q.Comparison of ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease.
TABLE 4.21: Comparison of ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease
Ulcerative colitis Crohn’s Disease
Male:female ratio Equal Slightly more common in males
Smoking May prevent disease May cause disease
Oral contraceptives No increased risk Increased risk
Appendectomy Protective Not protective
Gross blood and mucus in stool Frequent Occasional
Systemic symptoms Occasional Frequent
Pain abdomen Occasional Frequent
Abdominal mass Rare Yes
Perineal disease Rare FrequentSmall intestinal involvement No (only backwash ileitis) Yes
Stricture of intestine Occasional Frequent
Intestinal obstruction Rare Frequent
Response to antibiotics No Yes
Recurrence after surgery No YespANCA-positive Frequently Rarely
Presence of anti- Saccharomyces cerevisiae antibodies No Yes
Rectal sparing Rarely Frequently
Skip leisons No Yes
Cobblestone appearance No Yes

/square6Gastrointestinal System283
4Q.Toxic megacolon.
/square6Toxic megacolon is total or segmental nonobstruc-
tive colonic dilatation associated with systemic
toxicity. It is a potentially lethal complication of
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) or infectiouscolitis.
/square6Colonic dilatation without systemic toxicity is not
considered toxic megacolon (e.g. Hirschsprung’s
disease, chronic constipation, intestinal pseudo-obstruction, diffuse gastrointestinal dysmotility).
Etiology/square6Physical examination reveals a toxic appearingpatient with altered sensorium, tachycardia, fever,postural hypotension, lower abdominal distensionand tenderness.
/square6Peritonitis symptoms indicate bowel perforation.
/square6Large doses of steroids and analgesics may maskthe signs or symptoms of toxic megacolon.
Investigations
/square6Anemia related to blood loss.
/square6Leukocytosis.
/square6Electrolyte disturbances.
/square6Hypoalbuminemia.
/square6ESR and CRP are usually increased.
/square6Plain X-ray abdomen:  Transverse or right colon is
commonly affected, multiple air-fluid levels in the
colon are seen. Normal colonic haustral pattern iseither absent or severely disturbed.
/square6Stool specimens should be sent for culture, micro-
scopic analysis, and C. difficile  toxin.
/square6Ultrasonography and computed tomography (CT).
/square6Limited endoscopy without bowel preparation is
useful to diagnose the cause. Only minimal airshould be introduced into the colon to avoidworsening ileus or distention and perforation. Fullcolonoscopy is risky in toxic megacolon. It can leadto perforation.
Treatment
/square6Initial therapy is medical. However, a surgicalconsultation should be obtained upon admission,and the patient should be evaluated daily by both
the medical and surgical team.
Medical Therapy
/square6Patients with IBD should be kept nil per oral and a
nasogastric tube is inserted to decompress thegastrointestinal tract. Enteral feeding is begun assoon as the patient shows signs of improvement.
/square6Anemia, dehydration, and electrolyte imbalancesshould be treated aggressively.
/square6All antimotility agents, opiates, and anticholinergics
should be discontinued as they aggravate ileus.
/square6Intravenous H2 blockers or proton pump inhibitors
should be given to prevent gastric stress ulcers.
/square6Broad spectrum antibiotics are given to reduceseptic complications and to prevent possibleperitonitis in case of perforation (third-generationcephalosporin plus metronidazole).
/square6Intravenous corticosteroids (hydrocortisone 100 mgor equivalent every six to eight hours or by conti-nuous infusion) should be given to all patients forthe treatment of underlying ulcerative colitis orCrohn’s disease. Steroids do not increase the risk
of perforation. Steroids are not used in toxic mega-
colon due to C. difficile  colitis or infective colitis.TABLE 4.22: Causes of toxic megacolon
Inflammatory bowel disease
• Ulcerative colitis• Crohn’s disease
Infectious
•Clostridium difficile  pseudomembranous colitis
• Salmonella—typhoid and non-typhoid• Shigella• Campylobacter• Yersinia•Entamoeba histolytica
• CMV colitis (common in HIV patients)
Ischemia
Pathogenesis
/square6Mucosal inflammation leads to the release of
inflammatory mediators and bacterial products,increased inducible nitric oxide synthase, which inturn increases nitric oxide. Nitric acid relaxessmooth muscle in colon leading to dilatation.
/square6Extension of the mucosal inflammation to thesmooth muscle layer paralyzes the colonic smoothmuscle, leading to dilatation.
/square6Precipitating factors of toxic megacolon includehypokalemia, antimotility agents, opiates, anti-cholinergics, antidepressants, barium enema, andcolonoscopy. Discontinuing or rapid tapering ofcorticosteroids, sulfasalazine, or 5-ASA compounds
in IBD may contribute to the development of
megacolon.
Pathology
/square6Marked dilatation of the colon, thinning of thebowel wall, and deep ulcers.
/square6Acute inflammation in all layers of the colon.
Clinical Features
/square6Toxic megacolon affects all ages and both sexes.
/square6Signs and symptoms of acute colitis may precedethe onset of acute dilatation.
/square6Patients usually present with abdominal pain and
distention, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea (may or may
not be bloody), and altered sensorium.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
4284 /square6If toxic megacolon is due to severe C. difficile  colitis
(antibiotic induced), the first step is to stop theoffending antibiotic, followed by oral vancomycinvia a nasogastric tube. Intravenous vancomycin hasno effect on C. difficile  colitis since the antibiotic is
not excreted into the colon. If there is response to
vancomycin, intravenous metronidazole may be
added at a dose of 500 mg every eight hours.
Surgical Therapy
/square6Perforation, massive hemorrhage, increasing trans-fusion requirements, worsening signs of toxicity,and progression of colonic dilatation are absolute
indications for surgery.
/square6Subtotal colectomy with end-ileostomy is the proce-
dure of choice for urgent or emergent surgery.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations,
and management of pseudomembranous colitis.
Etiology
/square6Pseudomembranous colitis is severe inflammation
of the inner lining of the colon. It is most oftencaused by overgrowth of Clostridioides  (formerly
Clostridium ) difficile after prolonged broad spectrum
antibiotic therapy.
/square6Commonly implicated antibiotics are:
– Ampicillin
– Clindamycin
– Tetracycline
– Third-generation cephalosporins
– Fluoroquinolones
Pathogenesis
/square6C. difficile  is an anaerobic bacterium which colonizes
the colon of 3% of healthy adults. It is acquired byfecal-oral transmission. It is readily transmitted frompatient to patient by hospital personnel.
/square6Antibiotics disrupt the normal bowel flora andallow C. difficile  to flourish.
/square6After multiplication, it produces two toxins; toxin A
and toxin B. Both toxins possess cytotoxic activity
and can damage the colon. Both toxins adhere toreceptors on the human colonocyte brush border,and cause necrosis and shedding of these cells intothe lumen. Both the toxins cause an acute inflamma-tory diarrhea with massive infiltration of the
intestinal mucosa with neutrophils and monocytes.
/square6Shedding of colonic epithelial cells produces shallow
ulcers. Serum proteins, mucus, and inflammatorycells flow outward from the ulcer, creating a pseudo-
membrane.
Pathology
/square6Rectum and colon show a yellow or off-white mem-
brane adherent to the eroded mucosa (pseudomem-
brane). Pseudomembranes are patchily distributed./square6There is edema and hyperemia of the full thickness
of the bowel wall.
Clinical Features
/square6Symptoms usually begin during or shortly after anti-
biotic therapy but may be delayed for up to 2 months.
/square6Most patients report mild to moderate greenish,
foul-smelling watery diarrhea with lower abdo-minal cramps. With more serious illness, there is
abdominal pain and profuse watery diarrhea with
up to 30 stools per day. The stools may have mucusbut seldom gross blood.
/square6Physical examination is normal or reveals left lower
quadrant tenderness. There may be fever up to 40°C.
/square6Rarely fulminant colitis with serious complications,
such as perforation, prolonged ileus, toxic mega-colon, and death can occur.
Investigations
Stool studies
/square6Demonstration of C. difficile  toxins in the stool by
cytotoxicity assay (toxin B) or rapid enzyme
immunoassays (EIA) for toxins A and B.
/square6Culture for C. difficile  is sensitive, but slower (2–3
days), more costly, and less specific than toxinassays, and not used in most clinical settings.
/square6Fecal leukocytes are present in only 50% of patientswith colitis.
Flexible sigmoidoscopy
/square6Reveals typical pseudomembranes.
Plain X-ray abdomen
/square6To look for evidence of toxic dilation or megacolon
but are of no value in mild disease.
Abdominal CT scan
/square6Useful in detecting colonic edema, and evaluation
of possible complications.
Treatment
/square6Offending antibiotic should be discontinued. This
alone may lead to resolution of symptoms in mild
cases.
/square6If diarrhea is severe, the drug of choice is oral vanco-mycin, 125 mg orally four times daily due to faster
symptom resolution and fewer treatment failures
than metronidazole. Vancomycin is not absorbedand acts directly at the infection site. Intravenousvancomycin should be not be used as it is not effec-tive. Oral or intravenous metronidazole 500 mg threetimes daily is an alternative. In fulminant cases, both
vancomycin and metronidazole can be combined.
/square6Fidaxomicin is a new macrolide approved for the
treatment of C. difficile -associated diarrhea. This
agent has a narrower antimicrobial spectrum and
alters the gut microflora less than do metronidazole
and vancomycin.

/square6Gastrointestinal System285
4/square6Probiotics such as Saccharomyces boulardii , and lacto-
bacillus may help in controlling the disease and alsoprevent relapses.
/square6Frequent recurrences despite therapy with oral
vancomycin, can be treated with fecal microbiota
transplantation.
/square6Total colectomy may be required in patients withtoxic megacolon, perforation, sepsis, or hemorr-
hage.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of mesenteric ischemia.
Or
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of ischemic colitis.
/square6Mesenteric ischemia is caused by a reduction in
intestinal blood flow. It can be acute or chronic,
involve small or large bowel.
/square6It is a serious condition and can lead to sepsis, bowelinfarction, and death.
/square6Ischemic colitis is the most frequent form of mesen-teric ischemia, affecting mostly the elderly.
Etiology of Mesenteric Ischemia
/square6Embolic occlusion (emboli arise from heart oraorta).
/square6Thrombotic occlusion (due to atherosclerosis).
/square6Hypotension (myocardial infarction, heart failure,arrhythmias or sudden blood loss).
/square6Vasculitis.
/square6Venous occlusion.
/square6Strangulated hernia.
/square6Colon volvulus.
Clinical Features
Small Bowel Ischemia
/square6It is due to occlusion of superior mesenteric artery.
/square6Pathological changes may range from mildischemia to transmural hemorrhagic necrosis andgangrene.
/square6Sudden onset abdominal pain with minimalphysical signs.
/square6Abdomen may be distended with diminishedbowel sounds.
/square6Signs of peritonitis may be present.
/square6Patients may have evidence of cardiac disease and
arrhythmia responsible for emboli.
Large Bowel Ischemia (Ischemic Colitis)
/square6The splenic flexure and descending colon are prone
for ischemic injury since they have little collateralcirculation. Ischemic injury can range from transientcolitis to gangrene and fulminant pancolitis.
/square6Patient is usually elderly./square6Sudden onset of cramping, left-sided lower abdo-
minal pain, and rectal bleeding.
/square6Symptoms usually resolve over 24–48 hours and
healing occurs within 2 weeks.
/square6Some have a residual fibrous stricture or segmental
colitis.
/square6A minority develop gangrene and peritonitis.
Investigations
/square6Leukocytosis, metabolic acidosis, and high amylaselevels.
/square6Plain X-ray abdomen may show ‘thumb-printing’due to mucosal edema.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen.
/square6CT abdomen.
/square6Mesenteric or CT angiography shows occluded ornarrowed mesenteric artery.
/square6Investigations for underlying prothrombotic dis-
orders.
/square6Colonoscopy and barium enema in ischemic colitis.
Treatment
/square6Patient is kept nil by mouth (NBM).
/square6IV fluids and electrolytes.
/square6Intravenous antibiotic therapy (ciprofloxacin and
metronidazole).
/square6Embolectomy and vascular reconstruction if possible.
/square6Thrombolysis may sometimes be effective in
patients at high surgical risk.
/square6Anticoagulation in mesenteric vein thrombosis.
/square6Laparotomy and resection of the involved segmentwith end-to-end anastomosis is required in patients
with bowel gangrene and signs of peritonitis.
/square6Small bowel transplantation can be considered in
selected patients.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of irritable bowel syndrome (IBS).
/square6Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a functional
gastrointestinal disorder characterized by chronic
abdominal pain and altered bowel habits in the
absence of any organic cause.
/square6Organic causes should be ruled out before makinga diagnosis of IBS.
Etiology
/square6Hereditary and environmental factors.
/square6Abnormal gastrointestinal motility in the form ofexaggerated gastrocolic reflex, altered gastric
emptying, increased small bowel contractions and
increased small intestinal transit.
/square6Visceral hypersensitivity.
/square6Neurotransmitters such as serotonin may be an
important factor. It stimulates intestinal secretion
and peristalsis in addition to visceral pain receptors
via 5-HT3 and 5-HT4 pathways.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
4286 /square6Microscopic inflammation:  Detailed immunohistologic
investigation has revealed mucosal immune system
activation in a subset of patients with irritable bowel
syndrome (mostly those with the diarrhea predomi-
nant type).
/square6Role of infection (post-infectious IBS): Gastroenteritis
is a common trigger for IBS. The IBS symptoms can
be triggered by an enteric infection and can persist
for weeks, months and years.
/square6Psychologic disturbances:  Many patients with IBS
have increased anxiety, depression, phobias, and
somatization.
/square6Certain foods may precipitate an attack, e.g. excesscoffee.
Clinical Features
/square6IBS is common in young people. It is 3 times more
common in women.
Rome IV Criteria for the Diagnosis of IBS
Recurrent abdominal pain on average at least 1 day per week during
the previous 3 months associated with two or more of the following:
• Related to defecation (may be increased or unchanged by
defecation)
• Associated with a change in stool frequency• Associated with a change in stool form or appearance
/square6Four subtypes of IBS have been recognized:
(1) Constipation predominant, (2) Diarrhea pre-
dominant, (3) Mixed, (4) Alternating diarrhea and
constipation. The usefulness of this classification is
debatable because the symptoms can change from
one type to another in a given patient.
/square6Abdominal pain in IBS is highly variable in intensityand location. It is frequently episodic and crampy,
but may be dull aching also. Pain may be mild or it
may interfere with daily activities. Abdominal pain
is mainly present during daytime, hence sleep
disturbance is rare. Pain is often exacerbated by
eating or emotional stress and relieved by passage
of flatus or stools.
/square6Alteration in bowel habits usually begins in adult
life. The most common pattern is constipation
alternating with diarrhea, usually with one of these
symptoms predominating. Diarrhea in IBS usually
consists of small volumes of loose stools. Nocturnal
diarrhea does not occur in IBS. Bleeding, mal-
absorption and weight loss does not occur in IBS.
/square6Patients with IBS also complain of increased
belching or flatulence. Many patients also complain
of dyspepsia, heartburn, nausea, and vomiting.
/square6Physical examination is usually normal, butpalpation of the abdomen may reveal tenderness,
particularly in the left lower quadrant.
Differential Diagnosis
/square6Anxiety disorders.
/square6Bacterial overgrowth syndrome./square6Malabsorption syndromes (such as celiac sprue).
/square6Gastroenteritis.
/square6Giardiasis.
/square6Hypercalcemia.
/square6Hyperthyroidism.
/square6Inflammatory bowel disease.
/square6Colon cancer.
Investigations
/square6Since IBS is a diagnosis of exclusion, following
investigations should be done routinely to excludeother diseases with similar presentation.
/square6Complete blood count.
/square6Stool examination—to look for ova, cysts and occultblood.
/square6Colonoscopy—in those older than 50 years to ruleout carcinoma colon.
/square6Hydrogen breath test—if the main symptoms arediarrhea and increased gas to rule out malabsorp-
tion.
/square6Upper GI scopy—if the patient has prominent dys-
pepsia.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen.
Treatment
Patient Counseling and Dietary Alterations
/square6Patients should be reassured and functional natureof the disorder explained. Foods which aggravate
symptoms (such as coffee, disaccharides, legumes,
and cabbage) should be avoided. Such diet is calledlow FODMAP diet. (FODMAP stands for ferment-able oligo-, di-, mono-saccharides and polyols).
Stool-Bulking Agents
/square6High-fiber diets and bulking agents, such as branor hydrophilic colloid, are helpful in treating IBS.Dietary fiber has multiple effects on colonic
physiology. Because of their hydrophilic properties,
stool-bulking agents bind water and thus preventboth excessive hydration and dehydration of stool.Hence these agents can reduce both diarrhea andconstipation in IBS patients.
Antispasmodics
/square6Anticholinergic drugs (e.g. hyoscyamine) mayprovide temporary relief for symptoms such as
painful cramps related to intestinal spasm.
Antidiarrheal Agents
/square6Peripherally acting opiate-based agents are the
initial therapy of choice for diarrhea-predominantIBS.
/square6Diphenoxylate (Lomotil), 2.5 to 5 mg every 4 to 6 h,
can be prescribed. Codeine is also helpful. These
agents should be used only temporarily and shouldbe replaced gradually with high-fiber diet.

/square6Gastrointestinal System287
4Antidepressant Drugs
/square6Tricyclic antidepressants (amitryptyline, imipramine,
desipramine) slow jejunal migrating motor complextransit propagation and delay orocecal and whole-gut
transit. They improve diarrhea, pain, and depression.
/square6The selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI)
paroxetine accelerates orocecal transit, and may beuseful in constipation-predominant patients.
/square6The SSRI citalopram blunts perception of rectaldistention and reduces abdominal pain.
5HT3-receptor Antagonists
/square6A 5HT3-receptor antagonists such as alosetron,
cilansetron, and ramosetron are useful in diarrhea
predominant IBS. They reduce abdominal discom-fort and improve stool frequency, consistency, andurgency. However, a major side effect ischemiccolitis has been observed with alosetron and this
drug is not commonly used now. Cilansetron was
not marketed. Ramosetron is now widely available
and commonly used. Ischemic colitis has not beenobserved with ramosetron.
5HT4-receptor Agonist
/square6Tegaserod is a 5HT4-receptor agonist which has been
approved for use in constipation predominant IBS.
Lubiprostone
/square6This agent activates chloride channels in the smallintestine. As a result, chloride ions are secreted andsodium and water passively diffuse into the lumento maintain isotonicity. It is useful in constipationpredominant IBS.
Q.Enumerate the causes of acute abdomen. What are
the clinical features of acute abdomen? How do you
investigate and manage a case of acute abdomen?Clinical Features of Acute Abdomen
History
/square6Complaints:  Acute abdomen usually presents with
pain abdomen. Find out the exact location andnature of pain. In general, the pain of an acute abdo-men can either be constant (due to inflammation)or colicky because of a blocked hollow organ.
/square6A sudden onset of pain suggests a perforation (e.g.of a duodenal ulcer), a rupture (e.g. of an aneurysmor ectopic pregnancy), torsion (e.g. of an ovariancyst), or acute pancreatitis.
/square6Vomiting is usually present in any acute abdomenbut, if persistent, suggests intestinal obstruction.The character of the vomitus should be asked—doesit contain blood, bile or small bowel contents.
/square6Absolute constipation and abdominal distensionmay be present in intestinal obstruction.
/square6Past history:  Enquire about any previous operations,
gynecological problems and any concurrent medical
condition.
General Examination
/square6The general condition of the patient should be
assessed.
/square6Most acute abdomen patients look acutely ill.
/square6Fever suggests an acute infectious process.
/square6Note pulse rate, respiratory rate, blood pressure
and state of hydration. Large volumes of fluid maybe lost from the vascular compartment into the
peritoneal cavity or into the lumen of the bowel,
giving rise to hypovolemia, i.e. a pale cold skin, aweak rapid pulse and hypotension.
The Abdomen
/square6Inspection:  Note  the presence of scars, distension or
mass.
/square6Palpation:  Tenderness, rebound tenderness, presence
or absence of guarding should be noted. Guardingindicates peritonitis. Guarding can be localized orgeneralized.
/square6Bowel sounds:  Increased bowel sounds indicate
intestinal obstruction. Absent bowel sounds suggestperitonitis.
/square6Other systems should be examined to rule out any
concurrent disease.
Investigations
/square6Blood count:  White cell count is raised in inflamma-
tory conditions.
/square6Serum amylase and lipase:  High levels (more than five
times normal) indicate acute pancreatitis.
/square6Urine pregnancy test:  Should be done in women of
child bearing age to rule out ectopic pregnancy andits rupture.
/square6X-ray erect abdomen:  Air under the diaphragm may
be seen in abdominal viscus perforation. MultipleTABLE 4.23: Causes of acute abdomen
Surgical causes
• Acute appendicitis
• Renal colic
• Gynecological disorders (torsion of ovarian cyst)• Intestinal obstruction• Urinary tract infection• Gallbladder disease• Perforated ulcer
• Diverticular disease
Medical causes
• Acute pyelonephritis• Diabetic ketoacidosis• Acute intermittent porphyria• Lead poisoning
• Haemophilia and other bleeding disorders
• Henoch-Schönlein purpura• Sickle cell crisis• Polycythemia vera• Embolic phenomenon

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
4288 air fluid levels are seen in peritonitis and intestinal
obstruction.
/square6Ultrasound:  This is useful in the diagnosis of acute
cholangitis, cholecystitis and aortic aneurysm, acute
pancreatitis and acute appendicitis. It can detect renal
and ureteric stones and ruptured ectopic gestation.
/square6CT scan:  It is more accurate than ultrasound  in most
acute emergencies.
/square6Laparoscopy:  This has gained increasing importance
as a diagnostic tool prior to proceeding withsurgery. In addition, therapeutic maneuvers, suchas appendicectomy, can be performed.
Treatment of Acute Abdomen
/square6Acute abdomen is a medical emergency.
/square6Initial treatment involves keeping the patient nilper oral and continuous nasogastric aspiration ofstomach contents through a Ryle’s tube.
/square6Hydration should be maintained by intravenousfluids.
/square6Empirical antibiotis (cephalosporins plus metro-
nidazole or tinidazole intravenously) should be
started pending the identification of cause.
/square6Once the cause is identified, treatment should bedirected towards that.
/square6Most cases of acute abdomen require surgery forthe underlying cause (e.g. acute appendicitis,perforation of peptic ulcer, etc.).
Q.Describe the etiology, clinical features and manage-
ment of acute peritonitis.
/square6Peritonitis is an inflammation of the peritoneum.
/square6It may be acute or chronic, localized or diffuse,
infectious or due to aseptic inflammation.
/square6Acute peritonitis is most often infectious and isusually related to a perforated viscus.
EtiologyLocalized Peritonitis
/square6This is seen with acute inflammatory conditions of
the gastrointestinal tract (e.g. acute appendicitis,acute cholecystitis). There is local pain and tender-
ness. The treatment is for the underlying disease.
Generalized Peritonitis
/square6This is a surgical emergency and is usually due to
perforation of a hollow viscus (e.g. perforatedappendix, perforated peptic ulcer).
/square6In case of perforated peptic ulcer, acid contents leakinto peritoneal cavity and cause chemical peritonitiswhich gets infected later with bacteria.
/square6E. coli and Bacteroides are the most common
organisms responsible for peritonitis since these arepresent in the intestine.
/square6The peritoneal cavity becomes acutely inflamed,
with production of an inflammatory exudate that
spreads throughout the peritoneum, leading tointestinal dilatation and paralytic ileus.
Clinical Features
/square6The cardinal manifestations of peritonitis are acuteabdominal pain and tenderness, usually with fever.
/square6The location of the pain depends on the underlyingcause and whether the inflammation is localized orgeneralized. In case of localized peritonitis, physicalfindings are limited to the area of inflammation.
Generalized peritonitis is associated with diffuse
abdominal tenderness and rebound tenderness.
/square6Rigidity of the abdominal wall is common in bothlocalized and generalized peritonitis.
/square6Bowel sounds are usually absent due to paralyticileus.
/square6Tachycardia, hypotension, and signs of dehydrationare common.
Investigations
/square6Leukocytosis and acidosis.
/square6Elevated serum amylase and lipase levels maydetect pancreatitis.
/square6Plain abdominal X-ray:  Shows dilated and edematous
bowel loops with air fluid levels. Gas under thediaphragm may be seen in perforated viscus.
/square6CT and/or ultrasonography can identify the causeof acute abdomen and the presence of free fluid oran abscess.
/square6If ascites is present, fluid should be aspirated andsent for cell count cell type, protein, lactate dehydro-genase levels, Gram’s stain and culture (>250neutrophils/ μL is usual in peritonitis).
Treatment
/square6Patient should be hydrated well with IV fluids.
/square6Continuous nasogastric aspiration should be done
in view of paralytic ileus.TABLE 4.24: Causes of acute peritonitis
Perforation of bowel
• Penetrating trauma• Appendicitis• Diverticulitis• Peptic ulcer• Inflammatory bowel disease
• Endoscopic perforation
• Ischemia• Strangulated hernias
Perforations or leaking of other organs
• Pancreatitis• Cholecystitis
• Salphingitis
Iatrogenic
• Peritoneal dialysis• After ascitic fluid tapping• Postoperative

/square6Gastrointestinal System289
4/square6Empirical antibiotis (cephalosporins plus metroni-
dazole or tinidazole intravenously) should bestarted.
/square6Treatment of peritonitis is always surgical. Usually
laparotomy is required.
/square6Surgery has a two fold objective; peritoneal lavage
of the abdominal cavity and specific treatment ofthe underlying condition.
Q.Discuss the causes, clinical features, investigations
and management of intestinal obstruction.
/square6Intestinal obstruction may be mechanical or non-
mechanical (e.g. paralytic ileus).
Causes of Obstruction/square6Examination of the abdomen reveals distensionwith increased bowel sounds.
/square6Pulse is rapid and there may be dehydration andsigns of shock.
/square6Tenderness of abdomen suggests strangulation orperitonitis, and urgent surgery is necessary.
/square6Examination of the hernial orifices and rectum mustbe performed.
Investigations
/square6Plain X-ray of the abdomen (erect view) shows
distended bowel loops with air fluid levels.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen and CT can identify the cause
of obstruction.
Management
/square6Initial management is by resuscitation with intra-venous fluids (mainly isotonic saline withpotassium) and continuous nasogastric aspirationthrough a Ryle’s tube. Many cases will settle on
conservative management.
/square6Exploratory laparotomy may be required in serious
cases not responding to conservative therapy.  If the
bowel is gangrenous, that segment has to be
resected and end-to-end anastomosis done.
Q.Ileus (paralytic ileus, functional ileus).
/square6Ileus, also known as paralytic ileus or functional
ileus, occurs when there is temporary arrest ofperistalsis. Clinical presentation of ileus is similarto mechanical bowel obstruction.
Causes of Ileus
/square6Postoperative (especially abdominal surgery, mostcommon cause).
/square6Intra-abdominal infection/inflammation (sepsis/
peritonitis).
/square6Retroperitoneal or intra-abdominal hematomas
(e.g. from ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm,blunt abdominal trauma).
/square6Metabolic disturbances (e.g. hypokalemia).
/square6Drugs (e.g. opioids, anticholinergics).
Clinical Features
/square6Abdominal distension which is of slow onset as
compared to the sudden onset seen with mechanical
intestinal obstruction.
/square6Pain abdomen which is usually diffuse withoutperitoneal signs.
/square6Nausea and vomiting
/square6Decreased or inability to pass flatus.
/square6Examination shows distended and tympanicabdomen with mild diffuse tenderness. Bowelsounds are usually sparse or absent as opposed toa mechanical obstruction where there is increased
bowel sounds in the early phase.TABLE 4.25: Causes of intestinal obstruction
Mechanical obstruction
• Adhesive bands• Obstructed hernia• Diverticulitis• Intestinal neoplasms• Regional enteritis• Gallstone obstruction• Intussusception• Volvulus
Non-mechanical (pseudoobstruction)
•Adynamic ileus —peritonitis, retroperitoneal, lower-lobe
pneumonia, electrolyte disturbances (hypokalemia)
•Spastic ileus, or dynamic ileus —results from prolonged
contraction of the intestine. Seen in heavy metal poisoning,uremia, porphyria, and extensive intestinal ulcerations.
Pathophysiology
/square6Distention of the intestine is caused by the accumu-
lation of gas and fluid proximal to and within the
obstructed segment.
/square6Most of the air consists of swallowed air. Fluidaccumulation is due to ingested fluid, swallowed
saliva, gastric juice, and biliary and pancreatic
secretions. Fluid from the body may also move intothe lumen causing further accumulation of fluid.This may lead to sequestration of large volumes offluid in the lumen leading to dehydration, hypo-tension, shock and renal failure.
/square6Blood supply to the obstructed segment of intestinemay get compromised (e.g. in obstructive hernia)and lead to gangrene of intestine and blood lossinto the lumen.
/square6Bacteria may get into the peritoneum through thegangrenous segment leading to peritonitis.
/square6Massive abdominal distension may compromisebreathing and cause inferior vena cava compression.
Clinical Features
/square6Patient presents with colicky abdominal pain,vomiting and constipation.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
4290 Investigations
/square6Plain X-ray abdomen usually shows multiple air
fluid levels.
/square6CT abdomen.
/square6RFT and LFT.
/square6Serum amylase and lipase to rule out pancreatitis.
/square6Serum electrolytes to rule out hypokalemia.
/square6Complete blood count—anemia is seen in intra-abdominal bleeding, raised WBC count is seen inintra-abdominal infection, abscess, or intestinalischemia.
Treatment
/square6Bowel rest is given by keeping the patient nil bymouth and giving intravenous (IV) fluids. Total
parenteral nutrition (TPN) is recommended if the
patient is unable to tolerate adequate oral intakeafter seven days.
/square6Nasogastric aspiration of stomach contents is done
if required.
/square6Chewing gum has been shown to be a cheap, well-
tolerated way to potentially help with ileus as itstimulates the cephalocaudal reflex, which promotes
peristalsis and inhibits inflammation.
/square6Treatment of the underlying condition is very
important. Treating the infection, electrolyte abnor-malities, decreasing opiate use, can all potentially
decrease the durability of an ileus.
/square6Incidence of ileus can be decreased by using
regional anesthesia rather than general anesthesia,using laparoscopic surgery wherever possible, and
decreasing the use of opiate analgesics.
Q.Probiotics.
/square6Probiotics are microorganisms that have beneficial
properties for the host. Examples are Lactobacillus,Bifidobacterium, Clostridium butyricum, Strepto-
coccus salivarius , and Saccharmomyces boulardii.
Mechanisms of Benefit
/square6Suppression of growth or invasion by pathogenic
bacteria.
/square6Improvement of intestinal barrier function.
/square6Modulation of the immune system.
Potential Uses
/square6Ulcerative colitis
/square6Crohn’s disease
/square6Antibiotic associated diarrhea
/square6Infectious diarrhea
/square6Irritable bowel syndrome
/square6Lactose intolerance
/square6Hepatic encephalopathy
/square6Allergy.Q.Prebiotics.
/square6Prebiotics are dietary substances that induce the
growth and/or activity of beneficial micro-
organisms (e.g., bacteria and fungi) that contribute
to the well-being of their host.
/square6In diet, prebiotics are typically non-digestible fibercompounds that pass undigested through the upper
part of the gastrointestinal tract and stimulate the
growth and/or activity of advantageous bacteriathat colonize the large bowel by acting as substratefor them.
/square6Commonly known prebiotics are: Oligofructose,inulin, galacto-oligosaccharides, lactulose, breastmilk oligosaccharides.
Sources of Prebiotics
/square6Chicory root is the richest natural source. Otherdietary sources are beans, raw oats, unrefined wheat,unrefined barley, onion, garlic and raw banana.
Effects of Prebiotics
/square6Reduce exogenous and endogenous intestinalinfection.
/square6Improved bowel habit.
/square6Suppress IBD inflammation.
/square6Immunomodulation (anti-inflammatory).
/square6Controlled serum lipids and cholesterol.
Q.Carcinoid syndrome.
/square6Carcinoid syndrome results from vasoactive sub-
stances (including serotonin, bradykinin, histamine,
prostaglandins, polypeptide hormones) secreted bycarcinoid tumor (neuroendocrine tumor). Serotoninacts on smooth muscle to cause diarrhea, colic, andmalabsorption. Histamine and bradykinin causeflushing through their vasodilator effects.
/square6Carcinoid tumors are neoplastic proliferation ofenterochromaffin cells.
/square6Carcinoid tumors can be found in GIT, bronchi,thyroid, ovary and testes.
/square6In GIT, the most common site is ileum andappendix.
/square6These tumors are less aggressive than carcinomasand their growth is usually slow. They can spread
locally and also metastasize to other organs
especially liver.
/square6Carcinoid syndrome refers to the systemic symp-toms produced by secretory products of carcinoidtumors. The secretory products produced by the
primary tumor are metabolized in the liver and
hence, do not reach the systemic circulation.However, when there are liver metastases, secretoryproducts from these metastases reach systemiccirculation and produce symptoms. Therefore,carcinoid syndrome is seen only when there are
liver metastases.

/square6Gastrointestinal System291
4/square6These tumors follow the so-called rule of one-third,
which is as follows:
– One-third of these tumors are multiple
– One-third of those in the gastrointestinal (GI)
tract are located in the small bowel
– One-third of patients have a second malignancy
– One-third of these tumors metastasize.
Clinical Features
/square6Carcinoids occur most frequently in patients aged
50–70 years.
/square6Episodic cutaneous flushing is the clinical hallmarkof the carcinoid syndrome, and occurs in most ofpatients. It occurs in the face, neck, upper chest andlasts from 30 seconds to 30 minutes. There may be
associated lacrimation, periorbital edema, tachy-
cardia and hypotension.
/square6Venous telangiectasias are purplish vascular lesionsseen on the face, and occur due to prolonged vaso-dilatation.
/square6Secretory diarrhea occurs in most patients. Stools
are watery and non-bloody, and may be accom-
panied by abdominal cramping.
/square6Wheezing and dyspnea due to bronchospasm oftenduring flushing episodes.
/square6Cardiac valvular lesions:  Right sided valves (tricuspid
regurgitation and pulmonary stenosis) are most
often affected, because inactivation of humoral
substances by the lung protects the left heart.
/square6Diversion of tryptophan for synthesis of serotonincan result in the development of pellagra. Normallyniacin is produced from tryptophan.
/square6Hepatomegaly due to hepatic metastases, intestinal
obstruction and bleeding from intestinal tumors.
/square6Other features include increased incidence of peptic
ulcer, muscle wasting due to poor protein synthesisand ureteral obstruction due to retroperitonealfibrosis.
Investigations
/square6Increased urinary excretion of 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) in 24-hour collection (morethan 9 mg). 5-HIAA  is the end product of serotonin
metabolism.
/square6Serotonin level in blood and platelets is high.
/square6Chest X-ray, CT scan, barium and endoscopicstudies are used to localize the tumor.
/square6Somatostatin receptor imaging with positronemission tomography (PET)/CT is a very usefulinvestigation to localize carcinoid tumors sincesomatostatin receptors are present on the cellsurface of neuroendocrine cells. For this purposescan various somatostatin analogues can be labeled
with radioisotopes and injected intravenously and
then scan is done.
/square6Laparotomy and biopsy of the lesion can beattempted in selected cases.Treatment
/square6The treatment of a carcinoid tumor without livermetastases is surgical resection.
/square6The treatment of carcinoid tumor with liver meta-stases (carcinoid syndrome) is palliative. However,primary tumor and hepatic metastases can beexcised as it decreases the tumor burden andimproves the symptoms. Hepatic artery embolisa-
tion can decrease the size of hepatic metastases.
Octreotide 200 μg 8-hourly by subcutaneous
injection is used to reduce release of secretoryproducts by tumor. Cytotoxic chemotherapy hasonly a limited role.
/square6Symptomatic treatment:  Bronchodilators for wheeze,
loperamide and serotonin-receptor antagonists(cyproheptadine, ondansetron) to control diarrhea.
/square6Avoidance of conditions and diets precipitatingflushing and diarrhea.
/square6Supplementation of food with niacin to preventpellagra.
Q.Zollinger-Ellison syndrome (gastrinoma).
/square6Zollinger-Ellison syndrome is caused by gastrin-
secreting gut neuroendocrine tumors (gastrinomas),which result in hypergastrinemia and increasedacid secretion.
/square6Gastrinomas are usually located in the pancreas orthe duodenal wall.
/square6Most gastrinomas are solitary or multifocal nodules
that are potentially resectable. Over two-thirds of
gastrinomas are malignant, and one-third wouldhave already metastasized to the liver at initialpresentation. Multifocal gastrinomas are associatedwith MEN 1 syndrome.
Clinical Features
/square6Abdominal pain occurs due to peptic ulcers. Over90% of patients with Zollinger-Ellison syndrome
develop peptic ulcers. Ulcer is usually single and
found in the duodenum, but there can be multipleulcers. These ulcers may be refractory to standardtreatment, big (>2 cm), and may recur.
/square6Symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux.
/square6Diarrhea and weight loss occur in one-third ofpatients due to direct intestinal mucosal injury andpancreatic enzyme inactivation by acid, leading tomaldigestion, and malabsorption.
Investigations
/square6Upper GI endoscopy:  To look for duodenal ulcera-
tions and hypertrophy of gastric folds.
/square6Increased fasting serum gastrin concentration (>150 pg/mL):  H
2-blocker should be withheld for 24 hours
and proton pump inhibitors for 6 days before
measuring gastrin levels.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
4292 /square6Measurement of gastric pH:  Most patients have very
low pH due to high acid output. A gastric pH of>3.0 excludes gastrinoma.
/square6Secretin stimulation test:  Useful to distinguish
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome from other causes ofhypergastrinemia. Intravenous secretin produces a
rise in serum gastrin within minutes in patients
with gastrinoma.
/square6High serum calcium level suggests hyperpara-thyroidism and MEN 1 syndrome.
/square6Serum parathyroid hormone (PTH), prolactin,luteinizing hormone (LH), follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH), and growth hormone (GH) level
should be obtained to exclude MEN 1.
/square6Imaging studies are used to locate the site of primary
tumor and to identify metastases. Gastrinomasexpress somatostatin receptors that bind radio-labeled octreotide. Somatostatin receptor imaging
with single photon emission computed tomography
(SPECT) can identify the site of gastrinomas.Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) may be usefulto detect small gastrinomas in the duodenal wall,pancreas, or peripancreatic lymph nodes. CT andMRI scans may be helpful to identify liver meta-
stases and primary lesions, but less sensitive than
SPECT.
Treatment
/square6Localized disease is treated with surgical resection.
/square6In patients with liver metastases, initial therapyshould be directed at controlling hypersecretion.Oral proton pump inhibitors (omeprazole,esomeprazole, rabeprazole, pantoprazole, or
lansoprazole) are used to decrease the acid
secretion. Surgical resection or cryoablation can betried for single metastases. Other options for livermetastases include somatostatin analogues,interferon alpha, cytotoxic chemotherapy, andhepatic arterial chemoembolization.
Q.Gardner’s syndrome (familial adenomatous
polyposis).
/square6This is an uncommon autosomal dominant disorder
characterized by multiple adenomatous polypsthroughout the colon. Hundreds to thousands ofadenomatous colonic polyps will develop by age15. Most will develop colorectal cancer by the ageof 50 years.
/square6It results from germline mutation of the APC geneon the long arm of chromosome 5 followed byacquired mutation of the remaining allele.
/square6Many extra-intestinal features are also seen in FAPwhich include subcutaneous epidermoid cysts,osteomas, dental abnormalities, retinal abnormali-
ties, desmoid tumors, and lipomas.Investigations
Colonoscopy and genetic testing
/square6All first-degree relatives of the affected patients
should also undergo testing. In families with known
FAP, at-risk family members should undergo directmutation testing at 13–14 years of age.
Treatment
/square6Affected individuals should undergo colectomy(total proctocolectomy with ileal pouch-analanastomosis). This will prevent the transformationof polyps into adenocarcinoma.
/square6Sulindac is a NSAID that has been shown to reducethe number and size of adenomas if given for a longtime.
/square6The selective COX-2 inhibitor celecoxib has alsobeen shown to reduce the adenoma burden.
Q.Peutz-Jeghers syndrome.
/square6This is characterized by multiple hamartomatous
polyps in the small intestine and colon, as well asmelanin pigmentation of the lips, mouth and digits.
/square6The disorder is caused by a mutation on chromo-some 19p.
/square6Most cases are asymptomatic. However, chronicbleeding, anemia or intussusception may be seen.Malignant potential of polyps is low though thereis a small risk of adenocarcinoma.
/square6Management involves surveillance of polyps withcolonoscopy and biopsy every 1 to 3 years.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of acute pancreatitis. What are
the complications of acute pancreatitis?
/square6Acute pancreatitis is an inflammatory condition of
the pancreas characterized by abdominal pain and
elevated levels of pancreatic enzymes in the blood.
Etiology
TABLE 4.26: Causes of acute pancreatitis
Common causes
• Gallstones• Alcohol
• Post-ERCP
• Idiopathic
Rare causes
• Postsurgical (abdominal, cardiopulmonary bypass)• Trauma (blunt or penetrating abdominal injury)• Drugs (azathioprine, thiazides, sulphasalazine, valproate)
• Metabolic (hypercalcemia, hypertriglyceridemia)
• Pancreas divisum• Vascular (ischemia, atheroembolism, vasculitis)• Infections (mumps, Coxsackievirus, HIV, leptospira, ascaris)• Cystic fibrosis• Toxins (methanol, scorpion venom, organophosphates)
• Renal failure
• Organ transplantation (kidney, liver)• Severe hypothermia

/square6Gastrointestinal System293
4Pathophysiology
/square6Damage to pancreas by any of the above causes
leads to premature activation of zymogen granules,releasing proteases which digest the pancreas and
surrounding tissue.
/square6Pancreas becomes swollen. In severe cases there
may be necrosis and hemorrhage.
/square6Pancreas has a poorly developed capsule, andadjacent structures, including the common bileduct, duodenum, splenic vein and transverse colon,are commonly involved.
/square6Both the endocrine and exocrine function of thepancreas is altered during an attack of acutepancreatitis which will return to normal if the attackis mild. However, permanent exocrine andendocrine insufficiency may develop in severe
pancreatitis (necrotizing pancreatitis).
Clinical Features
Symptoms
/square6Abdominal pain:  Severe, constant upper abdominal
pain which radiates to the back. Pain is sudden inonset and gradually increases in severity. Pain
decreases if patient sits up and leans forward and
increases on lying down.
/square6Nausea and vomiting.
/square6Anorexia.
Signs
/square6Fever (low-grade).
/square6Tachycardia.
/square6Tachypnea (due to pleural effusion, inflammationof lungs, or atelectasis).
/square6Jaundice due to compression of common bile duct.
/square6Epigastric tenderness.
/square6Guarding and rebound tenderness in severe cases.
/square6Bluish discoloration of the flanks (Grey Turner’ssign) or the periumbilical region (Cullen’s sign) arefeatures of severe pancreatitis with hemorrhage.
/square6Absent bowel sounds due to paralytic ileus.
/square6Hypotension and shock in severe cases.
/square6Erythematous skin nodules due to focal subcuta-neous fat necrosis.
/square6Ischemic injury to retina seen on fundus examina-
tion (Purtscher retinopathy).
Investigations
Serum Amylase
/square6This is elevated in acute pancreatitis for three to
five days. It is rapidly cleared by kidneys. Hence,levels may be normal if measured after 3–5 days.In this situation the diagnosis can be made byelevated urinary amylase–creatinine ratio. A
persistently elevated serum amylase concentration
suggests pseudocyst formation. High amylaselevels are also found in pancreatic ascites and
pleural effusion. Serum amylase concentration hasno prognostic value.
/square6Elevated amylase is not specific to pancreatitis. High
serum amylase levels can also occur in mesenteric
ischemia, perforated peptic ulcer, ruptured ovariancyst, renal failure, DKA, and parotitis.
Serum Lipase
/square6This is more specific than that of amylase indiagnosing pancreatitis.
/square6Lipase takes longer time to clear from the blood.Hence, it is helpful to make a diagnosis of pancrea-titis even if the patient presents late.
Ultrasound Abdomen
/square6Shows swollen pancreas. It is also useful to pick upgallstones, biliary obstruction or pseudocyst forma-tion.
CT Scan Abdomen
/square6This is the most important imaging test for thediagnosis of acute pancreatitis and its local
complications. Patients who do not improve with
initial conservative therapy or who are suspectedof having complications should undergo CT scanof the abdomen.
/square6MRI is an alternative to CT especially if contrastcannot be used due to renal failure.
Plain X-ray Abdomen and Chest
/square6To exclude other causes of acute abdominal pain(e.g. gas under diaphragm in perforation).
/square6Calcification in pancreas in chronic pancreatitis.
/square6Multiple air fluid levels due to paralytic ileus.
/square6Chest X-ray may show pleural effusion and signs
of ARDS.
Other Blood Investigations
/square6Blood glucose, total leukocyte count, platelet count,
ESR, CRP, blood urea, creatinine, calcium and otherelectrolytes, triglycerides, arterial blood gases.
Assessment of Severity of Acute Pancreatitis
/square6There are two scoring systems to predict theseverity and mortality in acute pancreatitis. Theseare Ranson criteria and Bedside Index Severity inAcute Pancreatitis (BISAP) score. BISAP score is
easy to calculate and immediate assessment can be
done about the severity of pancreatitis. In addition,BISAP score has good predictive performance forboth severe acute pancreatitis and mortality.
BISAP Score
/square6Each of the following parameter carries 1 point.
/square60 to 2 points: Lower mortality (<2 percent).

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
4294 /square63 to 5 points: Higher mortality (>15 percent).
• BUN >25 mg/dL (8.9 mmol/L)
• Abnormal mental status with a Glasgow Coma Scale score <15• Evidence of SIRS (systemic inflammatory response syndrome)• Patient age >60 years old (1 point)• Imaging study reveals pleural effusion
Ranson criteria to predict severity of acute pancreatitisDifferential Diagnosis
/square6Perforated peptic ulcer
/square6Perforation of any other hollow viscus
/square6Acute cholecystitis
/square6Acute intestinal obstruction
/square6Leaking aortic aneurysm
/square6Renal colic
/square6Acute mesenteric ischemia or thrombosis.
Management
/square6Nothing by mouth.
/square6Intravenous fluids to maintain intravascular
volume. This is the most important step and Ringerlactate is the preferred fluid.
/square6Nasogastric aspiration:  Not routinely necessary.
Required if the patient has persistent abdominal
pain in spite of analgesics, paralytic ileus, protractedvomiting or intestinal obstruction.
/square6Analgesics for abdominal pain. Adequate pain control
requires opiates such as meperidine or tramadol.
/square6Admit severe cases in intensive care unit. Monitor
pulse, BP, abdominal girth, urine output, bloodglucose and calcium levels.
/square6Prophylactic systemic antibiotics (imipenem ormeropenem or ceftazidime) should be given insevere cases to prevent pancreatic infection.
/square6Proton-pump inhibitors are used to decrease theacid output.
/square6The role of somatostatin or octreotide infusion is
controversial.
/square6ERCP with endoscopic sphincterotomy and stone
extraction is indicated if pancreatitis results fromgallstone particularly if jaundice (serum total
bilirubin >5 mg/dL) or cholangitis is present.
/square6Surgery is indicated for complications such as
infected pancreatic necrosis, pancreatic abscess,intestinal obstruction, perforation, etc.
Q.Chronic pancreatitis
/square6Chronic pancreatitis is persistent inflammation of
the pancreas that results in permanent structural
damage with fibrosis and ductal strictures, followedby a decline in exocrine and endocrine function(pancreatic insufficiency).TABLE 4.27: Ranson criteria
On admission
• Age >55• White blood cell count >16,000/mm
3
• Blood glucose >200 mg/dL• Lactate dehydrogenase >350 U/L• Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) >250 U/L
First 48 hours
• Hematocrit fall by >10 percent• Blood urea increase by 5 mg/dL despite fluids• Serum calcium <8 mg/dL•p O
2 <60 mmHg
• Base deficit >4 mEq/L• Fluid sequestration >6 liters
/square6Each of the above parameters counts for 1 point
toward the score. A Ranson score of 0–2 has aminimal mortality. A Ranson score of 3–5 has a10–20% mortality rate, and the patient should beadmitted to the intensive care unit (ICU). A Ransonscore higher than 5 after 48 hours has a mortality
of more than 50% and is associated with more
systemic complications.
Complications of Acute Pancreatitis
TABLE 4.28: Complications of acute pancreatitis
Local
• Pancreatic necrosis• Abscess formation
• Pseudocyst formation
• Pancreatic ascites or pleural effusion• Upper gastrointestinal bleeding
• Splenic or portal vein thrombosis
• Erosion into colon• Duodenal obstruction (compression by pancreatic mass)
• Obstructive jaundice (due to compression of common bile
duct)
Systemic
• Systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) and multi-
organ failure
• DIC• Renal failure
• Hypoxia
• Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)• Hyperglycemia
• Fat necrosis
• Hypocalcemia (due to sequestration of calcium in fat
necrosis)
• Hypoalbuminemia (due to increased capillary permeability)TABLE 4.29: Causes of chronic pancreatitis
• Chronic alcoholism
• Smoking• Tropical pancreatitis (India)• Stenosis of the ampulla of Vater• Pancreas divisum• Cystic fibrosis• Familial• Autoimmune diseases (Sjögren’s syndrome, primary biliary
cirrhosis)
• Idiopathic

/square6Gastrointestinal System295
4Clinical Features
/square6Middle-aged alcoholic men are predominantly
affected.
/square6Pain in the upper abdomen is the most commonsymptom. It may be constant or intermittent. It mayradiate to back. Pain may be relieved by leaningforward and worsened by food intake.
/square6Features of malabsorption:  Diarrhea, steatorrhea, and
weight loss.
/square6Diabetes develops in advanced cases.
/square6Physical examination reveals a thin, malnourishedpatient with epigastric tenderness. Skin pigmenta-tion over the abdomen and back is common due tochronic use of a hot water bottle to relieve the
abdominal pain.
Investigations
/square6Serum amylase and lipase usually normal.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen.
/square6CT (may show atrophy, calcification, ductal stricture
or dilatation).
/square6Abdominal X-ray (may show calcification).
/square6ERCP accurately demonstrates the anatomy ofpancreatic ducts. Magnetic resonance. cholangio-pancreatography (MRCP) is a non-invasivealternative to ERCP.
/square6Endoscopic ultrasound.
/square6Tests of pancreatic function:  Seceretin/cholecysto-
kinin (CCK) stimulation test, 24-hour faecal fat
estimation, oral glucose tolerance test.
Complications of Chronic Pancreatitis
/square6Pseudocyst.
/square6Pancreatic ascites.
/square6Obstructive jaundice due to stricture of the common
bile duct as it passes through the diseased pancreas.
/square6Duodenal stenosis.
/square6Portal or splenic vein thrombosis.
/square6Peptic ulcer.
Management
/square6Stop alcohol intake.
/square6Pain relief:  NSAIDs, opiates, celiac ganglion
blockade.
/square6Oral pancreatic enzyme supplements to improve
the digestion and absorption of food.
/square6Patients with severe chronic pain resistant toconservative measures are considered for surgicalor endoscopic pancreatic therapy.
/square6Endoscopic therapy involves dilatation or stentingof pancreatic duct strictures and removal of calculi(mechanical or shock-wave lithotripsy).
/square6Surgical interventions are partial pancreatic resec-
tion preserving the duodenum, total pancreatectomy
and pancreaticojejunostomy.Peptic Ulcer Perforation
/square6Previous history of recurrent epigastric pain withrelation to food and periodicity.
/square6After perforation, pain becomes severe and pene-trating type. Initially it is felt in the epigastrium,but later spreads to whole abdomen due togeneralized peritonitis.
/square6Tachycardia and hypotension are usually present.
/square6Abdominal examination shows board like rigidity,guarding and absent bowel sounds due to
peritonitis. Liver dullness may be absent or reduced
due to gas collection below the diaphragm.
/square6Plain X-ray abdomen in the erect posture may showgas under the diaphragm and multiple air fluid
levels.
Acute Cholecystitis
/square6Pain is mainly in the right hypochondrium. Pain is
constant and may also be felt in the right shoulder
tip.
/square6Associated fever, jaundice, nausea and vomiting.
/square6Tenderness in the right hypochondrium and rigidity.
Murphy’s sign present (sudden inspiratory arrestdue to pain while palpating right hypochondrium).
/square6Gallbladder may be palpable.
/square6Blood tests show leukocytosis, raised bilirubin, andliver enzymes.
/square6Plain X-ray abdomen may show gallstones.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen may show gallstones, gall-bladder wall thickening and pericholic fluid collection.
/square6Cholescintigraphy shows cystic duct obstruction.
Biliary Colic
/square6Biliary colic is usually due to gallbladder contract-
ing and pressing a stone against the gallbladder
outlet or cystic duct opening, leading to increasedgallbladder pressure and pain.
/square6Biliary colic is a misnomer, since the pain is not
typically colicky.
/square6Pain is deep and gnawing type and is occasionally
sharp and severe.
/square6Pain is localized in the right upper quadrant orepigastrium.Q.Discuss the causes and differential diagnosis of
acute upper abdominal pain.
TABLE 4.30: Causes of acute upper abdominal pain
• Peptic ulcer perforation
• Acute cholecystitis• Biliary colic• Acute pancreatitis• Lower lobe pneumonia• Myocardial infarction• Aortic dissection or rupture• Splenic abscess and infarct

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
4296 /square6As the gallbladder relaxes, stones often fall back from
the cystic duct. As a result, the attack reaches acrescendo over many hours and resolves completely.
/square6Pain may recur multiple times.
Acute Pancreatitis
/square6History of precipitating factors like alcohol binge,and gallstones.
/square6Pain is steady and usually felt in the mid-epigastrium,radiates to back between scapulae. Its onset is rapid,but not as abrupt as that with a perforated viscus.
/square6Pain of pancreatitis lasts for many days. Pain isaccompanied by nausea and vomiting.
/square6Pain decreases on sitting and leaning forward.
/square6Cullen’s sign and Grey Turner’s sign rarely.
/square6Amylase and lipase are elevated.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen and CT scan shows swollenpancreas.
Lower Lobe Pneumonia
/square6Lower lobe pneumonia causes referred pain toupper abdomen probably due to diaphragmaticirritation.
/square6Pleuritic chest pain may be present in the lowerchest.
/square6Fever, dyspnea and cough with expectoration are
usually present.
/square6Chest examination reveals crepitations and bronchial
breath sounds over the affected area.
/square6Chest X-ray shows pneumonic patch.
/square6Abdominal pain is occasionally the sole presentingcomplaint in a patient with lower lobe pneumonia.
Myocardial Infarction
/square6Risk factors such as old age, hypertension, diabetes,
and smoking may be present.
/square6Pain is felt more in the left side of chest and restro-
sternal area. It may radiate to left shoulder and leftarm.
/square6There may be associated symptoms such as dypnea,sweating.
/square6Examination may show bilateral basal crepitationsover the lungs, third and fourth heart sound.
/square6ECG shows evidence of MI such as ST segmentelevation and pathological Q waves.
/square6CK-MB and troponins are elevated.
/square6Echocardiogram shows akinesia or hypokinesia of
the involved myocardium.
Aortic Dissection
/square6Sudden, severe, tearing pain radiating to the back.
/square6Predisposing factors may be present such as
hypertension, previous aortic aneurysm, Marfan’ssyndrome, etc.
/square6Asymmetric pulses may be present./square6Chest X-ray shows mediastinal and/or aorticwidening.
/square6CT, MRI or aortogram can confirm the diagnosis.
Splenic Abscess and Infarct
/square6Splenic abscesses are associated with fever andtenderness in the left upper quadrant.
/square6Similar findings may be present in splenic infarction.
/square6Risk factors for splenic infarction such as atrial
fibrillation, hypercoagulable state, sickle cell anemia,
etc. may be present.
/square6Leukocytosis, high ESR in case of abscess.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen can confirm the presence ofsplenic abscess.
Q.Discuss the causes and differential diagnosis of
acute lower abdominal pain.
Causes of Acute Lower Abdominal Pain
/square6Appendicitis.
/square6Acute diverticulitis.
/square6Ureteric colic.
/square6Torsion of ovarian cyst.
/square6Rupture of ectopic pregnancy.
Appendicitis
/square6Common in young individuals.
/square6Pain is initially periumbilical. Later it shifts to right
lower quadrant due to development of localperitonitis.
/square6Associated nausea and vomiting present.
/square6Tenderness and rebound tenderness positive inright iliac fossa.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen reveals swollen appendix orappendicular mass.
Acute Diverticulitis
/square6Usually occurs in older individuals.
/square6Pain is often present for several days prior topresentation.
/square6Pain occurs in the right or left lower quadrant.
/square6Abdominal tenderness.
/square6CT scan and contrast enema are helpful in diagnosis.
Ureteric Colic
/square6Past history of kidney stones may be present.
/square6Pain is severe and radiates from loin to groin. Paincomes on and off and paroxysms of severe pain last
20 to 60 minutes. Pain may radiate to the ipsilateral
testicle, tip of the penis, or labia.
/square6Hematuria may be present.
/square6Nausea, vomiting, dysuria, and urgency may bepresent.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen and CT scan can confirm the
diagnosis.

/square6Gastrointestinal System297
4Ovarian Cyst
/square6Sudden onset lower abdominal pain often associa-
ted with waves of nausea and vomiting. However,this can occur in other conditions also and hence,
nonspecific.
/square6Previous history of ovarian cyst/mass.
/square6History of recent vigorous activity.
/square6Ultrasound and CT-abdomen can confirm the
diagnosis.
Rupture of Ectopic Pregnancy
/square6Women in reproductive age group.
/square6History of amenorrhea present.
/square6Sudden onset lower abdominal pain with vaginalhemorrhage.
/square6Signs of hypovolemic shock may be present suchas hypotension, tachycardia, and pallor.
/square6Pregnancy test positive. Hemoglobin low.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen confirms the diagnosis.
Q.Discuss the causes and differential diagnosis of
diffuse abdominal pain.
Causes
/square6Mesenteric infarction
/square6Ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm
/square6Diffuse peritonitis.
/square6Intestinal obstruction
Mesenteric Infarction
/square6Acute and severe onset of diffuse and persistent
abdominal pain.
/square6Pain is out of proportion to physical findings.
/square6Patients have evidence of cardiovascular, ischemic,
or atheriosclerotic disease.
/square6Stool occult blood may be positive.
/square6Angiography or MRI angiography of the celiac artery
or mesenteric arteries can confirm the diagnosis.Ruptured Aneurysm
/square6Patients present with abdominal or back pain.
/square6Physical examination shows pallor, hypotension
and a pulsatile abdominal mass.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen, CT or MRI can confirm thediagnosis.
Peritonitis
/square6Pain is diffuse and constant. It is aggravated bymovement, coughing and deep breathing. Hence,
patients with peritonitis lie down still, in supine
position with the knees flexed.
/square6Patient appears sick.
/square6Fever, tachycardia and hypotension.
/square6Abdominal tenderness, rebound tenderness andguarding present.
/square6Bowel sounds are absent.
/square6Plain X-ray abdomen shows multiple air fluid levels
and gas under diaphragm in case of visceral
perforation causing peritonitis.
Intestinal Obstruction
/square6Pain is colicky and intermittent. Paroxysms of painoccur every four or five minutes.
/square6Associated vomiting, constipation and abdominal
distention.
/square6Hypotension, oliguria, and dry mucous membranesindicate dehydration.
/square6Tenderness may be present.
/square6Tympanic note on percussion due to air filled bowel
loops.
/square6Bowel sounds increase initially but later decrease.
/square6Plain X-ray abdomen shows multiple air fluidlevels.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen, and CT abdomen can confirmthe diagnosis and reveal the cause of obstruction.

5
298Q.Enumerate the common symptoms/manifestations
of nervous system disease.
• Headache and facial pain
• Weakness• Movement disorders• Speech and language disturbances• Sensory disturbances• Sphincter disturbances• Memory disturbances• Abnormal gait and posture• Changes in personality and behavior• Dizziness and blackouts• Loss of balance• Sleep disorders• Acute confusional state (delirium)• Coma and altered sensorium
Q.Enumerate the neuroimaging techniques.
/square6Nowadays many neuroimaging techniques are
available which can help pinpoint the location andpathology of nervous system diseases. These include:
• Computed tomography (CT)
• Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
• Perfusion CT (pCT)• Perfusion MRI (pMRI)• CT angiography (CTA)
• MR angiography (MRA)
• Functional MRI (fMRI)• MR spectroscopy (MRS)• MR neurography
• Positron emission tomography (PET)
Q.Computed tomography (CT scan).
/square6CT is a cross-sectional image created by a computer
using the data obtained by passing X-ray beams
through a section of the body.Diseases of Nervous System
/square6An X-ray tube rotates axially around the patient,and a diametrically opposed array of detectorsdetect the radiation traversing the body. This data
is converted to cross-sectional images with the help
of powerful processors.
/square6Tissues such as bone which attenuate the X-raymore appear as high density areas while soft tissueswith low attenuation appear as low density areas.
/square6A modern CT scanner is capable of obtainingsections as thin as 0.5 to 1 mm. Complete study ofthe brain can be obtained in 20 to 60 seconds.
/square6CT is safe, fast, and reliable. Radiation exposure isbetween 3 and 5 cGy per study.
/square6In the helical CT the table with the patient movescontinuously through the rotating X-ray beam,generating a “helix” of information that can bereformatted into various slice thicknesses.
/square6Multiple detectors can be positioned to detect theradiation which results in multiple slices perrevolution of the X-ray beam around the patient.These “multidetector” scanners have greatlyreduced the time per examination of the patient.
/square6CT scan can be taken after giving intravenouscontrast (contrast CT). This is helpful to identify
vascular structures and to detect defects in the
blood–brain barrier (BBB), which are associatedwith disorders such as tumors, infarcts, and infec-tions. There are both ionic and non-ionic contrastagents. Ionic contrast agents can cause renal failureand allergic reactions which is not seen with non-
ionic contrasts.
Indications for CT Scan
/square6Trauma to the head and spine
/square6Stroke
/square6Intracranial space occupying lesions
/square6Suspected subarachnoid hemorrhage

/square6Diseases of Nervous System299
5/square6Conductive hearing loss
/square6Evaluation of a suspected pathology in any part of
the body.
Q.Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
/square6Magnetic resonance imaging is based on the
magnetization properties of hydrogen protons in
biologic tissues.
/square6The energy state of the hydrogen protons istransiently excited by an external powerful magnet.
The subsequent return to equilibrium energy state
(relaxation) of the protons results in a release ofenergy (the echo), which is detected and used toform a MR image.
/square6The MR image thus is a map of the distribution ofhydrogen protons, with signal intensity dependingon the density of hydrogen protons as well asdifferences in the relaxation time.
/square6MR images can be generated in sagittal, coronal,axial, or oblique planes without changing thepatient’s position. Three-dimensional imaging isalso possible with MRI.
/square6The heavy-metal element gadolinium is used asintravenous MR contrast agent. Allergic reactionsare rare with this agent and renal failure does notoccur.
/square6MRI scanning can cause claustrophobia (fear ofclosed spaces) in some patients because the patientis moved into a long, narrow gap within themagnet. This can be reduced by mild sedation.
/square6Unlike CT, movement of the patient during an MR
sequence distorts the images. Hence, uncooperative
patients should either be sedated for the MR studyor go for CT scan.
Advantages of MRI Over CT Scan
/square6No radiation exposure.
/square6Better delineation of soft tissue details.
/square6Clearly differentiates white and grey matter.
/square6Very useful in the evaluation of posterior fossalesions where CT is not very accurate due to densebony structures.
/square6Particularly useful to recognize demyelinatingplaques as in multiple sclerosis.
Contraindications to MRI
/square6The metallic parts of many medical devices andimplants can get dislodged due to powerfulmagnetic field of the MRI. Hence, in the following
situations, MRI is contraindicated.
– Cardiac pacemaker or permanent pacemaker leads.
– Internal defibrillatory device.
– Cochlear prostheses.
– Metallic bone implants.
– Electronic infusion devices.
– Intracranial aneurysm clips (metallic).– Ocular implants (some) or ocular metallic foreign
body.
– Swan-Ganz catheter.
– Magnetic dental implants.
Q.Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA).
/square6Moving protons (e.g., flowing blood, CSF) exhibit
high to low signal intensity relative to backgroundstationary tissue. This can be used to create angio-graphy-like images, which can be manipulated inthree-dimension to highlight vascular anatomy.
/square6Through the selection of different imaging para-meters, differing blood velocities can be highlightedand selective venous and arterial MRA images canbe obtained.
/square6MRA can also be obtained during infusion of acontrast material called contrast-enhanced MRAwhich has become the standard for extracranial
vascular MRA. Gadolinium-DTPA is used as
contrast.
/square6MRA is not as good as conventional angiography
for the detection of small-vessel detail, such as is
required in the workup of vasculitis. MRA is alsoless sensitive in the presence of slowly flowingblood and thus may not differentiate complete fromnear-complete occlusions.
/square6However, despite of these limitations, MRA hasbecome very important in evaluation of the extra-cranial carotid and vertebral circulation as well asof larger-caliber intracranial arteries and duralsinuses. It is also useful in the noninvasive detection
of intracranial aneurysms and vascular malforma-
tions.
Q.Positron emission tomography (PET).
/square6Positron emission tomography (PET) allows the
imaging of structures by virtue of their ability toconcentrate molecules labeled with a positron-emitting isotope.
/square6PET scan is obtained by the detection of positronsemitted during the decay of a radionuclide that hasbeen injected into a patient. The most frequentlyused moiety is fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG), which
is an analogue of glucose.
/square6Metabolically active cells, such as malignant cells,
utilize and import more glucose than other tissuesand thus take up FDG more avidly. Multiple images
of glucose uptake activity are formed after 45 to
60 min. Images reveal differences in regionalglucose activity among normal and pathologicbrain structures.
/square6A lower activity of FDG in the parietal lobes is seenin Alzheimer’s disease.
/square6Higher activity may be seen in malignant lesionsand areas of seizure focus.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5300 Q.Describe the technique, indications and contra-
indications of lumbar puncture.
Q.Composition of normal CSF.
/square6Lumbar puncture (LP) is the technique of obtaining
CSF from the lumbar area for analysis. LP is usefulin the diagnosis of a variety of infectious and non-infectious neurologic conditions.
Technique
/square6LP can be performed with the patient in the lateralrecumbent position or sitting upright.
/square6The safe site of puncture is L3/4 or L4/5 interspacesince this is well below the termination of the spinalcord. These spaces can be identified by drawing aline joining the highest points of the iliac crests. Thisline corresponds to L3/4 space./square6Once CSF begins to flow through the needle, thepatient should be instructed to slowly straightenthe legs to allow free flow of CSF within the sub-arachnoid space. A manometer should then beplaced over the hub of the needle and the openingpressure should be measured. Fluid is then serially
collected in sterile plastic tubes or bottles. A total
of 8 to 15 mL of CSF is typically removed duringroutine LP.
Indications for Lumbar Puncture
/square6Diagnosis of meningitis.
/square6Diagnosis of subarachnoid hemorrhage (RBCs arefound in CSF).
/square6CNS malignancies (malignant cells may be foundin CSF).
/square6Demyelinating conditions such as multiple sclerosisand Guillain-Barré syndrome (albuminocytologicdissociation is seen where there is increase in CSFalbumin without increase in cells).
/square6For spinal anesthesia.
/square6Administration of intrathecal antibiotics and chemo-therapeutic agents.
/square6As therapeutic in NPH (normal pressure hydro-cephalus).
/square6Injection of contrast media for myelography or forcisternography.
Complications
LP is a relatively safe procedure, but followingcomplications can occur rarely.
/square6Post-LP headache.
/square6Infection (meningitis).
/square6Bleeding.
/square6Cerebral herniation.
/square6Radicular pain or numbness.
/square6Late onset of epidermoid tumors of the thecalsac.
Contraindications
/square6Bleeding diathesis (thrombocytopenia, coagulation
defects).
/square6Infected skin over lumbar area.
/square6Raised intracranial pressure.
Composition of Normal CSF
Appearance Clear, colorless
Pressure 60–150 mm of CSF
Proteins 20–40 mg/dl
Sugar 40–70 mg/dl
Chlorides 720–750 mg/dl
Cells (per mm3) 0–5 (all lymphocytes)
Culture SterileFigure 5.1 Position of patient and site for lumbar puncture
/square6Correct patient positioning is important for the
success of LP. The patient is instructed to remainin the fetal position with the neck, back, and limbsheld in flexion. The overlying skin should becleaned with alcohol and a disinfectant such aspovidone-iodine. A sterile drape with an opening
over the lumbar spine is then placed on the patient.
/square6Local anesthesia (lignocaine) is infiltrated into the
lumbar intervertebral space and a 20 or 22 gaugespinal needle containing a stylet is inserted into the
lumbar intervertebral space.
/square6The spinal needle should be advanced slowly in
the direction of umbilicus. The bevel of the needleshould face upwards to allow the needle to spread
rather than cut the dural sac (the fibers of which
run parallel to the spinal axis).
/square6As soon as the subarachnoid space is entered, thereis loss of resistance to the insertion of needle. The
stylet should be withdrawn to check for the CSF flow.
If no CSF flow is detected the needle should be mani-pulated back and forth and rechecked for CSF flow.

/square6Diseases of Nervous System301
5Q.Electroencephalography (EEG)
/square6EEG is the recording of electrical activity of the
brain by electrodes placed on the scalp. The
recorded activity represents the postsynaptic
potentials of pyramidal cells of cerebral cortex.
/square6Normal EEG varies according to the patient’s ageand level of arousal.
/square6The electrical activity from any electrode pair canbe described in terms of amplitude and frequency.
/square6The most important use of EEG is in the evaluationof epilepsy.
Normal EEG
/square6Amplitude ranges from 5 to 200 μV. Frequency of
EEG activity ranges from 0 Hz to approximately20 Hz. The frequencies are described by Greekletters: alpha, beta, theta and delta.
Alpha:  8 to 13 Hz, seen in adults who are relaxed with their
eyes closed. They disappear with eyes open. Alpha activity
disappears normally with attention (e.g., mental arithmetic,
stress, opening eyes).
Beta:  More than 13 Hz, seen in people who are awake, with
their eyes open or closed.
Theta:  4 to 7 Hz, seen in sleep.
Delta:  0 to 4 Hz, seen in deep sleep
Abnormal EEG
/square6In routine EEG studies, some “activations” are used
to bring out inapparent abnormalities. These activa-
tions include, hyperventilation for 3 mins, photicstimulation, and sleep deprivation on the nightprior to the recording. These provocations areespecially useful to activate epileptic activity.
/square6Increased generalized slow wave (theta and delta)activity is seen in metabolic encephalopathies.
/square6Focal slow wave activity is seen in focal brain
lesions (e.g. tumor, infarct).
/square6Spike and sharp waves may be seen in epilepsy./square6Evoked potentials can be utilized to test the inte-
grity of a pathway in the CNS. For example, inmultiple sclerosis where there is demyelination ofcentral neurons, conduction is slow and evokedpotentials are delayed.
Q.Nerve conduction velocity studies (NCV studies).
/square6NCV studies are used to evaluate the integrity of
peripheral nerves. Mainly sensory and motor
nerves are tested.
/square6Conduction studies can assess the number offunctioning axons by measuring the amplitude of
action potential since each axon makes a contribu-
tion to the magnitude of the electrical field. The stateof myelin sheath of axons can be assessed by theconduction velocity of action potential since theconduction velocity depends on intact myelinsheath.
/square6In patients with axonal degenerative neuropathies,such as diabetic neuropathy, the primary abnorma-lity in NCV study is reduced sensory action potential
amplitudes. Slowing of conduction is the primary
feature in demyelinating neuropathies such as
Guillain-Barré syndrome and compression andentrapment neuropathies (e.g. carpal tunnelsyndrome).
Q.Define weakness. How do you approach a case of
weakness? How do you differentiate upper from
lower motor neuron weakness?
/square6Weakness is reduction in normal power of one or
more muscles.
/square6Paralysis and the suffix “-plegia” indicate weakness
that is complete or nearly complete. “Paresis” refersto weakness that is mild or moderate.
/square6Weakness can be due to lesions anywhere in themotor cortex, corticospinal tracts, anterior horncells, spinal nerve roots, peripheral nerves, neuro-muscular junction, and muscles.
TABLE 5.1: Differences between upper and lower motor neuron weakness
Feature Upper motor neuron lesion Lower motor neuron lesion
Muscle atrophy No Yes
Fasciculations No Yes
Tone Increased Decreased
Distribution of weakness Pyramidal/regional Distal/segmental
Tendon reflexes Exaggerated Diminished
Babinski’s sign Extensor Flexor
Abdominal reflex Absent depending on the involved spinal level Present
Clonus Present Absent
Sensory loss Loss of cortical sensations Peripheral sensations
Site of lesion Brain, brainstem, spinal cord Anterior horn cells, nerve roots, peripheral
nerves, neuromuscular junction, muscles

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5302 Approach to a Case of Weakness
History
Is it really weakness or something else?
/square6Many patients with a variety of systemic disorders
may misinterpret difficulties performing certain
tasks or fatigue as weakness. Fatigue is tiredness.Examples are cardiopulmonary disease, joint disease,anemia, and cachexia from malignancy. Objectivemuscle power is normal in such cases, but musclepower is less in weakness.
Distribution of weakness
/square6Distribution of weakness is also important. Diffuse
(generalized) weakness occurs in myasthenia gravis,
periodic paralysis, myopathies and advanced motorneuron disease.
/square6If the weakness is not generalized, it can be charac-
terized as symmetric or asymmetric. Asymmetric
weakness (e.g. hemiplegia) usually is due to centralor peripheral nervous system disease.
/square6Symmetric weakness can be distal or proximal.
Proximal weakness involves the axial muscle
groups, deltoids, and hip flexors. Patients havedifficulty in getting up from squatting position andto climb stairs. Patient also complains of difficultyin raising the upper limbs above the head. Proximalmuscle weakness is seen in myopathies, muscular
dystrophies, and myasthenia gravis.
/square6If weakness of a limb is associated with lower facial
weakness on the same side, the problem is abovethe brainstem, while if there is weakness of muscles
on one side of the head and opposite limb, then a
lesion in the brainstem is suggested.
/square6Specific distributions of weakness are characteristicof certain neuropathies or muscular dystrophies.
Examples are facioscapulohumeral dystrophy,
scapuloperoneal dystrophy, and scapulohumeraldystrophy.
Associated symptoms/diseases
/square6History of associated atrophy or fasciculations
suggest damage to anterior horn cells or motoraxons (i.e. lower motor neurons).
/square6Complaints of “numbness” or tingling suggest peri-pheral nerve involvement.
/square6A change in character of the voice or problems
swallowing (usually choking on water) suggests
involvement of pharyngeal muscles or those of thepalate.
/square6Presence of bladder symptoms usually suggests
spinal cord pathology.
/square6Presence of systemic diseases should be enquired
because many systemic diseases can involvenervous system. For example, certain rheumato-
logic disorders can attack peripheral nerves. Several
endocrine disorders, such as thyroid disorders canpresent with weakness. Diabetes mellitus causesperipheral neuropathy. Infections like tuberculosis,
HIV, syphilis can affect nervous system. History ofmalignancy should also be enquired.
/square6Past history of similar episodes with complete
recovery may suggest periodic paralysis.
Onset and course of weakness
/square6Sudden onset weakness suggests stroke (ischemic
or hemorrhagic) or trauma.
/square6If repeated activity tends to worsen the weakness(for example, if there are things that patients cannotdo at the end of the repeated activity that they couldat the beginning), it suggests a diagnosis of myas-thenia gravis.
/square6If weakness happens at random, with recovery afterfive to 30 minutes, transient ischemic attack shouldbe considered.
/square6If the weakness is insidious onset, starting in lowerlimbs and gradually ascending upwards to involveupper limbs, it suggests Guillain-Barré syndrome.
/square6If the weakness is insidious onset and very slowly
progressive (over weeks to months), it suggests
degenerative disorders (motor neuron disease) ormalignancy.
Family history
/square6Family history is important in detecting hereditary
neuropathies and myopathies. Some of the familial
periodic paralysis problems may be hereditary.
Examination of Patient
/square6Examination is focused on confirming the pattern
of weakness and determining the type of weakness.
/square6Exaggerated deep tendon reflexes, increased muscletone (spasticity), and extensor plantar responsesuggest upper motor neuron (e.g. corticospinal tract)lesion in the brain or spinal cord.
/square6Absent or decreased deep tendon reflexes, decreasedmuscle tone, muscle atrophy, and muscle fascicula-tions suggest lower motor neuron lesion.
/square6If patients have hyporeflexia and predominantlydistal muscle weakness, particularly with distalsensory deficits or paresthesias, suspect polyneuro-pathy.
Investigations
/square6Lesions can be vascular events (infarction/hemorr-hage), inflammatory/immunologic, infectious,neoplastic, toxic, or metabolic in origin.
/square6Various investigations may help in identifying theexact nature of lesion. These include CT and/orMRI imaging, NCV studies etc.
/square6Serum electrolytes to rule out hypokalemia or
hyperkalemia which occurs in periodic paralysis.
/square6Elevation of muscle enzymes (creatine kinase)
occurs in muscle diseases.
/square6Muscle biopsy may be necessary to determine theprecise form of myopathy.

/square6Diseases of Nervous System303
5Q.Describe the pathway of upper motor neuron.
Q.Pyramidal tract.
/square6Upper motor neuron pathway consists of cortico-
spinal and corticobulbar tracts.
/square6Upper motor neurons have their cell bodies in layer
V of the primary motor cortex (the precentral gyrus,or Brodmann’s area 4) and in the supplemental
motor cortex (area 6).
/square6Axons of these neurons descend through the sub-
cortical white matter and the posterior limb of theinternal capsule.
/square6In the brainstem they pass through cerebralpeduncle of the midbrain, the basis pontis, and themedullary pyramids.
/square6At the cervicomedullary junction, most pyramidalaxons cross to opposite side and form lateral cortico-spinal tract. 10 to 30% remain ipsilateral in theanterior spinal cord to form anterior corticospinaltract.
/square6Finally the axons end on anterior horn cells of spinalcord through monosynaptic connections.
/square6Corticobulbar neurons are similar to corticospinalneurons but innervate brainstem motor nuclei.hammer), starting near the heel and proceeding to
the base of the little toe and then turn medially
towards the base of big toe.
Normal Response
/square6Flexion of the big toe and adduction of other toes.This is called flexor plantar response.
Abnormal Response
/square6Extension of the big toe, with or without fanningout of other toes. It is called extensor plantar responseor Babinski sign.
Causes of Extensor Plantar Response
/square6It is a sign of upper motor neuron lesion. It is foundin lesions of corticospinal tract above S1. It is also
found in metabolic encephalopathies and after an
attack of epilepsy.
/square6Physiological: In infants, children below 2 years,and during deep sleep.
Equivocal Response
/square6This is neither flexor nor extensor and is difficult
to interpret.
Q.Define coma. Describe the mechanism and causes
of coma. How do you investigate and manage a
case of coma?
/square6Coma is a clinical state in which patient is unrespon-sive to external stimulation and is un-arouseable(“unarousable unresponsiveness”).
Mechanisms of Coma
/square6Consciousness is maintained by an interaction ofreticular activating system of brainstem and cere-
bral cortex. Hence, altered consciousness including
coma can be produced by any pathology in thebrainstem, reticular formation, and cerebral cortex.Figure 5.2 Corticospinal tract
Q.Plantar reflex (Babinski sign).
/square6Plantar reflex is a nociceptive superficial reflex
subserved by S1 segment.
/square6It was first described by Babinski.
Method of Elicitation
/square6Lateral part of sole is stroked with a blunt and
narrow tip object (e.g. a key, or handle of a reflexFigure 5.3 Plantar reflex


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5304
Examination of a Patient with Coma
Immediate Assessment
/square6Take care of ABCs first (airway, breathing, circula-
tion). If ABCs are not alright, take immediatemeasures to correct them.
/square6Get a quick short history from those who broughtthe patient. Ask about previous health of thepatient, whether there was a history of diabetes, ahead injury, a convulsion, alcohol or drug use, or aprior episode of coma or attempted suicide, andthe circumstances in which the person was found.
History of vomiting and headache, followed by loss
of consciousness suggests intracranial hemorrhage.Many patients with diabetes, epilepsy or hypo-adrenalism carry identification which may give clueabout the cause of coma.
/square6Record depth of coma by using Glasgow ComaScale.
/square6Next go for full general and neurological examina-
tion.
Vital Signs
/square6Alterations in vital signs (temperature, heart rate,
respiratory rate, and blood pressure) can provideimportant clues to the diagnosis./square6Fever indicates a systemic infection (e.g. pneumonia)or bacterial meningitis or viral encephalitis. Anexcessively high body temperature with dry skinshould arouse suspicion of heat stroke or intoxica-tion by a drug with anticholinergic activity.Hypothermia is seen in patients with alcohol or
barbiturate intoxication, drowning, exposure to
cold, peripheral circulatory failure, and myxedema.
/square6Bradycardia may suggest ingestion of medications
such as tricyclic antidepressants or anticonvulsants,
or raised intracranial pressure.
/square6Marked hypertension is observed in patients with
cerebral hemorrhage and in hypertensive encephalo-
pathy. Hypotension suggests alcohol or barbiturateintoxication, internal hemorrhage, myocardialinfarction, dissecting aortic aneurysm, septicemia,or Addison disease.
/square6Cheyne-Stokes (periodic) respiration is alternatinghyperpnoea and apnea seen in bilateral cerebraldysfunction, or brainstem problem. It also occursin metabolic comas and respiratory failure.
Kussmaul (acidotic) respiration is deep, sighing
hyperventilation seen in diabetic ketoacidosis anduremia.
General Examination
/square6Many general examination findings may provideclues to the cause of coma.
/square6Marked pallor suggests internal hemorrhage.
/square6Cyanosis:  Coma may be due to respiratory failure
or cardiac failure.
/square6Cherry-red skin color is seen in carbon monoxide
poisoning.
/square6Jaundice:  Coma may be due to liver failure, sepsis.
/square6Petechiae and purpura:  Coma may be due to intra-
cranial bleed due to some bleeding problem.
/square6Hyperpigmentation: Coma may be due to Addison’s
disease.
/square6Injection marks:  Coma may be due to drug abuse.
/square6Coarse and dry skin:  Coma may be due to hypo-
thyroidism.
/square6Excessive sweating suggests hypoglycemia orshock, and excessively dry skin, diabetic keto-acidosis or uremia.
/square6A macular-hemorrhagic rash indicates the possi-bility of meningococcal infection, staphylococcalendocarditis, typhus, or Rocky Mountain spottedfever.
/square6Odor of breath:  Look for smell of ketones, alcohol,
or ammonia. Arsenic poisoning produces the odorof garlic. OP compound poisoning produces
kerosene smell.
/square6Multiple bruises (particularly a bruise or boggy area
in the scalp), bleeding, CSF leakage from an ear or
the nose, or periorbital hemorrhage suggests the
possibility of head trauma.TABLE 5.2: Causes of coma
Diffuse brain dysfunction
• Drug overdose (sedatives, anesthetic agents, alcohol)
• Hypoglycemia• Hyperglycemia (DKA, HHS)• Hypoxic/ischemic brain injury
• Hypertensive encephalopathy
• Uremia• Hepatic failure• Respiratory failure
• Electrolyte imbalances (hypercalcemia, hypocalcemia,
hyponatremia, hypernatremia)
• Endocrine causes (hypoadrenalism, hypopituitarism and
hypothyroidism)
• Metabolic acidosis
• Hypothermia, hyperpyrexia
• Trauma (following closed head injury)• Epilepsy (following a generalized seizure)• Infections (encephalitis, meningitis, cerebral malaria, sepsis)
• Subarachnoid hemorrhage
• Cerebral edema• CO poisoning
Brainstem dysfunction
• Brainstem hemorrhage or infarction
• Brainstem neoplasm (e.g. glioma)• Brainstem demyelination• Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome
• Trauma
• Pressure effect on brainstem  (hemisphere tumor, infarction,
abscess, hematoma, cerebellar mass lesions)

/square6Diseases of Nervous System305
5Neurological Examination in Coma
/square6Only a limited examination can be done in comatose
patients.
/square6Note the predominant postures of the limbs andbody; the presence or absence of spontaneousmovements on one side; the position of the head
and eyes.
/square6Head, neck and spine: Note trauma, skull burr-holes
and bruits, neck stiffness.
/square6Pupils: Check size and reaction to light. Unilateral
dilated pupil indicates compression of the third
nerve due to temporal lobe uncus herniation(coning). This happens in raised intracranialpressure on one side (e.g. an extradural hematoma).Bilateral fixed , dilated pupils are seen in brainstem
death, and deep coma of any cause. Bilateral
pinpoint pupils are seen in pontine lesions (e.g. a
pontine hemorrhage) and opioid intoxication.
/square6Fundi: Presence of papilledema suggests raised
intracranial tension. Look for retinal hemorrhage.
/square6Ocular movements: Vestibulo-ocular reflexes . Passive
head turning produces conjugate ocular deviationaway from the direction of rotation (doll’s eyereflex). This reflex is absent in deep coma andbrainstem lesions. In c aloric stimulation test, ocular
deviation towards the irrigated ear is seen when
ice-cold water is irrigated into the external auditory
meatus. This is also absent in brainstem death.
/square6Abnormalities of conjugate gaze: Lateral deviationoccurs towards a destructive frontal lesion. Rarely,an irritative lesion in one frontal lobe can make theeyes deviate to opposite side. In a pontine lesion,conjugate lateral deviation occurs away from thelesion. Skew deviation (one eye deviated up and the
other down) indicates a brainstem or cerebellar
lesion.
/square6Decorticate rigidity and decerebrate rigidity(posturing) describe stereotyped arm and legmovements occurring spontaneously or elicited bysensory stimulation. Flexion of the elbows andwrists and supination of the arm (decortication)suggests bilateral damage rostral to the midbrain.
Extension of the elbows and wrists with pronation
(decerebration) indicates damage to motor tractsin the midbrain or caudal diencephalon.
/square6Other findings: Look for any asymmetry in tone,
reflexes and plantar responses.
Cardiac Examination
/square6Cardiac diseases such as atrial fibrillation, infectiveendocarditis, MI, etc. can produce embolic strokeand cause coma.
Abdominal Examination
/square6Look for abnormal bowel sounds, organomegaly,masses, and ascites. Bowel sounds are absent in anacute abdominal condition, as well as with anti-
cholinergic poisoning. Increased bowel soundsoccur in organophosphorus compound poisoning.Hepatomegaly is seen in hepatoma or metastaticdisease which indirectly suggests brain metastasesas the cause of coma. Look for evidence of cirrhosis
such as ascites and splenomegaly which suggests
hepatic encephalopathy as the cause of coma.
Respiratory System Examination
/square6Look for evidence of COPD, pneumonia or anyother lung disease which can produce respiratoryfailure and coma.
Investigations
/square6Tests should be chosen according to the cluesavailable from history and examination.
/square6Routine biochemistry (urea, creatinine, electrolytes,
glucose, calcium, liver function tests)
/square6Metabolic and endocrine studies (TSH, serum
cortisol)
/square6Blood cultures, malaria test to rule out cerebralmalaria and sepsis.
/square6Drugs screen (e.g. diazepam, narcotics, etc.)
/square6Urine examination for ketone bodies
/square6Arterial blood gas analysis (hypoxia and hyper-carbia can cause coma)
/square6Imaging: CT or MRI brain should be done to rule
out any intracranial pathology.
/square6CSF examination: This is helpful to rule out meningitis
and subarachnoid hemorrhage.
/square6Electroencephalography:  EEG is of some value in the
diagnosis of metabolic coma, encephalitis andongoing non-convulsive seizures.
Management
Specific Treatment
/square6The underlying cause of coma should be treated.For example, correction of blood glucose in hypo-glycemia.
General Measures
/square6Ryle’s tube and a urinary catheter should be passed.
/square6Skin care—frequent turning of patient to avoid
pressure sores. Patient should be kept preferably
in water bed to prevent pressure sores.
/square6Oral hygiene—mouthwashes, frequent suction.
/square6Eye care—taping of lids, prevention of cornealdamage by applying lubricating eye drops and eyeointment.
/square6Nutrition and hydration—food and water may begiven through Ryle’s tube. IV fluids may also beused if required.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5306 Q.Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS).
/square6The Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) is a way to grade
coma severity. It was introduced to assess the
conscious level of patients with acute brain injury
from head trauma, intracranial hemorrhage andmany other causes. The GCS reflects the initialseverity of brain dysfunction, while serial assess-ments demonstrate the evolution of the injury.
/square6Three parameters are used for this purpose; eyeresponse (E), verbal response (V), and motorresponse (M). It is easy to use and has good inter-observer reliability.
/square6The GCS is scored between 3 and 15, 3 being theworst, and 15 the best. A score of 13 or highercorrelates with mild brain injury; a score of 9 to 12correlates with moderate injury; and a score of 8 orless represent severe brain injury.
/square6The GCS is useful for prognosis, but does not aidin the diagnosis of coma./square6EEG is normal as the brain is normal. Majority ofpeople die but some may live for many years.
Q.Brain death.
/square6Brain death implies permanent absence of cerebral
and brainstem functions.
Establishing the Diagnosis
/square6In order to establish brain death, the comatosepatient must be shown to have lost all brainstemreflex responses, including the pupillary, corneal,oculovestibular, oculocephalic, oropharyngeal, andrespiratory reflexes.
/square6The apnea test:  Apnea testing is done by dis-
connecting the ventilator from the endotrachealtube. Oxygen (6 L/min) is supplied from a cannulaplaced through the endotracheal tube. If there is
no respiratory movement even after a minimum of
8 minutes of ventilator disconnection, it indicatesbrain death.
/square6Spinal reflex movements may be present even in
brain death and do not exclude the diagnosis.
/square6Before declaring brain death, there should be
normal body temperature, systolic BP >100 mmHgand no significant electrolyte imbalance. Ongoing
seizure activity should be ruled out. Also ensure
that no recent neuromuscular blocking agents orCNS depressants have been administered.
/square6An isoelectric EEG is helpful in confirming thediagnosis but not necessary.
Prognosis
/square6Patients with brain death are unlikely to survivefor more than a week.
Management of Brain Death
/square6Once brain death is diagnosed, patient is clinicallyand legally declared as deceased with the time ofdeath after testing. At this time, depending on familyand patient preference, cardiopulmonary support
can be withdrawn, or arrangements for organ
harvest should begin.
Q.Persistent vegetative state (unresponsive wakeful-
ness syndrome).
/square6Some patients awaken from coma (that is, open the
eyes) but remain unresponsive (that is, only showreflex movements without response to command).
This state is called vegetative state or unresponsive
wakefulness syndrome.
/square6It occurs due to extensive cortical gray or subcorticalwhite matter lesions with relative preservation of
brainstem.
/square6There are no purposeful or voluntary behavioral
responses to visual, auditory, tactile, or noxiousstimuli.TABLE 5.3: Glasgow Coma Scale
Eye opening
• Spontaneous 4
• To sound 3• To pain/pressure 2• No eye opening 1
Verbal response
• Inappropriate words 3
• Incomprehensible sounds 2• No verbal response 1
Motor response
• Obeys commands 6
• Localizing response to pain 5• Withdrawal response to pain 4• Flexion to pain 3• Extension to pain 2• No motor response 1
[Remember EVM; 4,5,6]
Q.Locked-in syndrome.
/square6This occurs when a lesion damages the bilateral
ventral pons. Examples of such lesions are pontinehemorrhage, pontine abscess, brainstem tumors,
and central pontine myelinolysis. Locked-in
syndrome most often is observed as a consequenceof pontine infarction due to basilar artery throm-bosis.
/square6Patients are alert and aware of their environmentbut are quadriplegic, with lower cranial nervepalsies resulting from bilateral ventral pontinelesions that involve the corticospinal, cortico-pontine, and corticobulbar tracts. Only vertical eyemovement and opening and closing of eyes are
possible.

/square6Diseases of Nervous System307
5/square6No evidence of language comprehension or
expression.
/square6Hypothalamic and brainstem autonomic functionsare intact so that there is spontaneous respiration
and other brainstem reflexes.
/square6There will be bowel and bladder incontinence.
/square6Vegetative state has no specific treatment.
Treatment is mainly supportive.
/square6Prognosis is poor.
Q.Ptosis (blepharoptosis).
/square6Ptosis refers to drooping of the upper eyelid.
/square6Ptosis is the result of dysfunction of one or both
upper eyelid elevator muscles. These elevatormuscles are the levator palpebrae superioris andthe Müller muscle. The levator palpebrae superioris
is a striated muscle innervated by the oculomotor
nerve. The Müller muscle is a smooth muscle,innervated by sympathetic system.
/square6Ptosis can be disabling, if it obstructs vision./square6Pseudopapilledema:  Congenital anomalies of the disc,
including drusen and myelinated nerve fibers, maycause the appearance of disc swelling or pseudo-papilledema.
Causes of Papilledema
Raised intracranial pressure
• Space occupying lesions (brain tumor, abscess, hematoma)
• Subarachnoid hemorrhage
• Idiopathic intracranial hypertension
• Meningitis, encephalitis
Optic nerve disease
• Optic neuritis (e.g. multiple sclerosis)
• Optic neuropathy (hereditary, ischemic and toxic)
Venous occlusion
• Cavernous sinus thrombosis
• Central retinal vein thrombosis/occlusion
• Orbital mass lesions
Other causes
• Hypercapnia
• Optic nerve glioma
• Malignant hypertension
• Vasculitis (e.g. SLE)
Clinical Features
/square6Early papilledema is usually asymptomatic.
However, as it progresses, enlargement of the blindspot and blurring of vision develop. In severepapilledema, arterial blood flow falls and infarctionof the optic nerve occurs leading to severe and
permanent visual loss.
/square6Diffuse headache and vomiting may be present if
the cause of papilledema is due to raised intra-cranial pressure. The earliest ophthalmoscopic signs
of disc swelling are pinkness of the disc followed
by blurring of the nasal margin. Later there is lossof normal venous pulsation, and obliteration ofphysiological cup. Small hemorrhages may bepresent around the disc.
Investigations
/square6Neuroimaging (e.g. CT scan, MRI) of the brainshould be done to rule out any mass lesion.
/square6Magnetic resonance (MR) venography to detectvenous sinus thrombosis.
/square6Lumbar puncture (after ruling out mass lesion) andCSF analysis to identify any infectious or neoplasticdisease.
/square6If there is doubt about disc edema, fluorescein
angiography can be used to confirm it. Fluorescein
is injected intravenously and if there is edema, itleaks in the retina.
Treatment
/square6Treat the underlying cause.Figure 5.4 Ptosis (left side normal, right side ptosis)
TABLE 5.4: Causes of Ptosis
Causes Features
• Congenital ptosis Usually unilateral. Many patients
also have amblyopia, strabismus
• 3rd nerve palsy Usually unilateral. Pupil is dilated on
the affected side
• Horner’s syndrome Usually unilateral. Pupil is constricted
on the affected side
• Myasthenia gravis Usually bilateral. Pupils are normal
size. Degree of ptosis variable.Associated diplopia often present
• Muscle disease Usually bilateral. Pupils are normal
size
• Mechanical ptosis Usually unilateral. Occurs due to
excess weight on the upper lid.Examples are eyelid tumors.
Treatment
/square6Treat the underlying cause.
/square6Patients with obstructed vision can be considered
for surgical correction.
Q.Papilledema.
/square6Papilledema refers to swelling of optic disc.
/square6In papilledema, there is axonal swelling within the
optic nerve, blockage of axonal transport with
capillary and venous congestion.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5308 /square6Diuretics:  The carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, aceta-
zolamide (Diamox), is useful in selected cases,especially idiopathic intracranial hypertension.
/square6Lumboperitoneal shunt or ventriculoperitoneal
shunt can be used to bypass CSF.
Q.Optic neuritis.
Q.Retrobulbar neuritis.
/square6Optic neuritis is inflammation of the optic nerve.
Types of Optic Neuritis
/square6Papillitis —involvement of optic disc.
/square6Neuroretinitis —involvement of optic disc and
surrounding retina in macular area.
/square6Retrobulbar neuritis —refers to optic nerve inflamma-
tion behind the eyeball. There is no abnormality
seen at the disc but there is severe visual impair-ment.
Causes
/square6Demyelinating diseases:  The most common cause
of optic neuritis is demyelination (e.g. multiple
sclerosis).
/square6Infections:  Measles, mumps, influenza, varicella-
zoster virus, sinusitis, meningitis, TB, syphilis, HIV.
/square6Autoimmune disorders, particularly systemic lupuserythematosus.
/square6Chemicals and drugs:  Lead, methanol, quinine,
arsenic, antibiotics.
Clinical Features
/square6A history of preceding viral illness may be present.
Patients are usually young adults and present with
impairment of vision in one eye or less commonly,both eyes.
/square6Dyschromatopsia (change in color perception may
be present).
/square6Presence of retro-orbital or ocular pain, usually
exacerbated by eye movement.
/square6Pupillary light reaction is decreased in the affectedeye and various types of visual field defects arepresent.
Investigations
/square6MRI is very useful in assessing inflammatorychanges in the optic nerves and to rule out struc-tural lesions.
/square6Visual evoked potentials are abnormal in opticneuritis. They may be abnormal even when MRI ofthe optic nerve is normal.
Treatment
/square6IV steroids (methylprednisolone 250 mg qid for3 days followed by rapid taper) speed the rate of
recovery./square6Plasma exchange has been used in patients with
no significant improvement with steroids.
Q.Optic atrophy.
/square6Optic atrophy  is the degeneration of optic nerve
which occurs as an endpoint of many diseaseprocesses that cause axon degeneration in the
retinogeniculate pathway.
/square6Primary optic atrophy:  Here the optic nerve fibers
degenerate in an orderly manner and are replacedby glial cells without alteration of optic nerve head.
It happens due to direct optic nerve damage from
many causes.
/square6Secondary optic atrophy : Refers to optic atrophy
secondary to papilledema due to any cause .
Causes of Optic Atrophy
/square6Primary optic atrophy:  Occurs without any preceding
swelling of the optic nerve head. Infarction of the
nerve from thromboembolism, inflammation(multiple sclerosis, syphilis), optic nerve com-pression, trauma, toxic (quinine and methylalcohol), vitamin B
12 deficiency.
/square6Secondary optic atrophy : Occurs following optic disc
swelling. Examples are raised intracranial pressuredue to various reasons, cavernous sinus thrombosis.
Clinical Features
/square6The main symptom is vision loss.
/square6Fundoscopy shows characteristic pale optic disc.
Treatment
/square6Treat the underlying cause.
Q.Describe the visual pathway. Describe briefly the
field defects produced at various levels with appro-
priate diagrams.
Visual Pathway
/square6Whenever we see an object, its image falls on the
retina. The image is converted to nerve action
potentials by retinal rod, cone and ganglion cells.
/square6The axons of ganglion cells of retina form opticnerve. From each eye, one optic nerve starts. Both
optic nerves cross in the optic chiasma.
/square6At the chiasma fibers from the nasal portion of
retina cross, whereas fibers from temporal side ofretina do not cross.
/square6Crossed nasal fibers join uncrossed temporal fibersand form optic tract. Optic tract reaches lateralgeniculate body and synapses there. Some optictract fibers reaching the lateral geniculate bodies
pass to the brainstem to control refraction (lens) and
pupillary aperture.
/square6From the lateral geniculate body, fibers pass in theoptic radiation to reach the occipital cortex.

/square6Diseases of Nervous System309
5/square6In the optic radiation fibers from upper part of
retina (representing lower visual field) lie above(parietal lobes) and those from lower part of retina
Figure 5.5 Optic pathway and visual field defects
TABLE 5.5: Visual field defects due to lesions at various levels of optic pathway
Level of lesion Structure involved Field defect
A Optic nerve Complete blindness on the side of lesion
B Lateral side of optic chiasma Right nasal hemianopia
C Optic tract Homonymous hemianopia (opposite to side of lesion)D Midline optic chiasma Bitemporal hemianopia
Q.Causes of pinpoint pupils.
• Pontine hemorrhage
• Opiate poisoning• Organophosphate poisoning• Drugs (pilocarpine drops, timolol drops)
Q.Argyll Robertson pupil (ARP).
/square6ARP refers to pupils which constrict on a near object
(they “accommodate”), but do not constrict when
exposed to bright light. (Remember the pneumonicARP = Accommodation Reflex Present.)
/square6This finding is highly specific for late-stage syphilis.
/square6The location of the lesion is believed to be in thedorsal midbrain that interrupts the pupillary lightreflex pathway but spares the more ventral
accommodation reflex pathway. A partial lesion in
the third nerve or the ciliary ganglion has also beenconsidered as a cause.
Causes
– Late stage syphilis (neurosyphilis)
– Pinealomas– Multiple sclerosis
– Diabetes mellitus
/square6Argyll Robertson pupil should not be confused with
Adie’s pupil, which may yield a similar result.Adie’s pupil is caused by ciliary gangliondestruction, and the reaction to light is absent or
greatly diminished. However, Adie’s pupil does
react slowly with prolonged maximal stimulation.Furthermore, once the Adie’s pupil reacts toaccommodation, the pupil tends to remain tonicallyconstricted and dilates very slowly.
Q.Horner syndrome.
/square6Horner syndrome results from an interruption of
the sympathetic nerve supply to the eye and ischaracterized by the classic triad of miosis (i.e.constricted pupil), ptosis, and facial anhidrosis (loss
of sweating).
/square6This sympathetic pathway originates in the hypo-
thalamus, runs through the brainstem and spinalcord, sympathetic trunk, brachial plexus, and
carotid plexus.(representing upper visual field) lie below in the
temporal lobes.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5310 Causes
/square6Central (e.g. brainstem ischemia, syringomyelia,
brain tumor).
/square6Peripheral (e.g. pancoast tumor, cervical adeno-pathy, neck and skull injuries, aortic or carotiddissection, thoracic aortic aneurysm).
Clinical Features
/square6Classic signs of a Horner syndrome are ptosis,miosis, and anhidrosis on the affected side.
/square6Ptosis is due to paralysis of the Müller’s muscle,supplied by sympathetic pathway. Miosis is due toloss of sympathetic dilator action on pupil.Anhidrosis happens because sweat glands aresupplied by sympathetic system.
/square6Loss of cilio spinal reflex on the affected side.
/square6Enophthalmos.
Diagnosis
/square6Confirmation of Horner’s syndrome:  Cocaine drops
cause pupillary dilatation in normal eyes whereas
it has no effect in eyes with impaired sympatheticinnervation. Cocaine acts by blocking the reuptakeof norepinephrine at the sympathetic nerve synapseand causes pupillary dilation in patients with intactsympathetic supply.
/square6Imaging studies (CT or MRI) may be required tolocate the site and nature of lesion.
Treatment
/square6Depends on the underlying cause.
Q.Diplopia.
/square6Diplopia is seeing two objects when there is actually
one object. Diplopia is due to problems in the extra-ocular muscles or nerves supplying them.
/square6Diplopia may be monocular or binocular. Mono-cular diplopia is present when only one eye is open.Binocular diplopia disappears when either eye isclosed.
Causes of Diplopia
/square6Monocular diplopia:  Corneal distortion or scarring,
multiple openings in the iris, cataract or subluxation
of the lens, vitreous abnormalities.
/square6Binocular diplopia:  Cranial nerve (3rd, 4th, or 6th)
palsy, myasthenia gravis, orbital infiltration (e.g.
thyroid infiltrative ophthalmopathy, orbital pseudo-
tumor).
Evaluation of a Case of Diplopia
History and Examination
/square6Ask whether diplopia is monocular or binocular .
Does covering any one of the eyes make the
diplopia disappear? This test helps to rule outmonocular diplopia, which persists in the affected
eye when the other eye is covered.
/square6Ask whether the images are separated vertically,horizontally, or both. Horizontal diplopia suggests
6th nerve palsy. Vertical diplopia suggests 4th nerve
palsy. Intermittent diplopia suggests a waxing andwaning neurologic disorder, such as myastheniagravis.
/square6Take a detailed neurologic history.
/square6Look for the presence of any squint and check theeyeball movements in all directions. If an eyeball isunable to move in a particular direction, it suggests
3rd, 4th or 6th nerve palsy as the cause of diplopia.
/square6Look for presence of ptosis. Ptosis occurs in 3rd
nerve palsy and myasthenia gravis.
Investigations
/square6CT or MRI of the brain and orbit to rule out anyintracranial or orbital pathology.
/square6Tensilon test if myasthenia gravis is suspected.
Treatment
/square6Patching one eye prevents double vision and allowsthe patient to continue functioning while awaitingresolution or intervention.
/square6Stick-on occlusive lenses can be applied to glassesto minimize the cosmetic handicap of a patched eye,while blurring one eye to minimize double vision.
/square6Strabismus surgery is occasionally necessary.Recession/resection of extraocular muscle,transposition of extraocular muscle, weakening orshortening surgery are helpful in reducing doublevision.
/square6Chemodenervation:  Injection of botulinum toxin into
the medial rectus muscle to reduce contracture dueto a weak lateral rectus muscle.
Q.Apraxia.
/square6Apraxia is inability to perform a learned motor act
in the absence of pyramidal, extrapyramidal,cerebellar, or sensory dysfunction.
/square6Apraxia results from damage (e.g. by infarct, tumor,
trauma, or degeneration) to parietal lobes or their
connections, where memories of learned movementpatterns are stored. Less commonly, it is due tofrontal lobe lesions.
/square6Apraxia can be elicited by asking the person toperform a motor act which he knew earlier, forexample, lighting a cigarette, brushing teeth, etc.
Types
/square6Ideomotor apraxia:  This is the most common type of
apraxia. Here the person is unable to carry out amotor command, e.g. lighting a cigarette andbrushing teeth. It is seen in left parietal lobe
lesions.

/square6Diseases of Nervous System311
5/square6Ideational apraxia:  Here the patient cannot plan or
execute the required movements in the correctsequence although individual movements may beperformed correctly. For example, they may puttheir shoes on before their socks.
/square6Conceptual apraxia:  This type of apraxia is similar to
ideomotor apraxia but features an impaired abilityto use tools correctly. For example, when given ascrewdriver, patients may try to write with it as ifit were a pen.
/square6Constructional apraxia:  Here the person is unable to
copy simple diagrams or build simple blocks.
Treatment
/square6Treatment includes speech therapy, occupationaltherapy, and physical therapy.
/square6Underlying cause has to be treated.
Q.Aphasia.
Q.Sensory aphasia.
Q.Motor aphasia.
Aphasia
/square6Aphasia is defined as an acquired disorder of
language caused by brain damage. It must bedistinguished from congenital or developmentallanguage disorders like dyslexias.
/square6It results from dysfunction of the language centersin the cerebral cortex and basal ganglia or of thewhite matter pathways that connect them. In right-handed people and about two-thirds of left-handedpeople, language function resides in the lefthemisphere.
/square6Aphasia can be broadly classified as sensoryaphasia and motor aphasia.
Sensory Aphasia (Wernicke’s Aphasia)
/square6Here the person is not able to comprehend verbalor written language. But able to speak fluentlythough not meaningfully. Hence, also called“empty speech”. Patient chooses inappropriatewords during speech (paraphasia).
/square6Reading is also affected.
/square6Sensory aphasia is produced by damage to posterior
part of the superior temporal gyrus in dominant
hemisphere (Wernicke’s area or area 22). Damagemay be due to infarction, hemorrhage, tumors,trauma and infections.
Motor Aphasia (Broca’s Aphasia)
/square6Here the comprehension of spoken speech isrelatively preserved but the speech is non-fluent.Speech consists of few, poorly articulated wordsdescribed as telegraphic speech. But the speech ismeaningful and allows the patient to communicate
with others in spite of deficient word output./square6Naming and writing are also affected.
/square6Motor aphasia is caused by damage to dominantposterior inferior frontal lobe (Broca’s area or area
44). Damage may be due to infarction, trauma,tumors, infection and abscess.
Diagnosis
/square6Exclude other communication problems such assevere dysarthria, impaired hearing, impairedvision (e.g. when assessing reading), or motorwriting ability.
/square6Detailed neurological examination: Bedside speechassessment includes the following:
/square6Spontaneous speech:  Speech is assessed for fluency
(ease and rapidity of producing words), number ofwords spoken, ability to initiate speech, presence
of spontaneous paraphasic errors (e.g. “fork” for
“spoon”), word-finding pauses, hesitations, andprosody (the emotional intonation of speech).
/square6Naming:  The patient is asked to name simple objects
such as a key, pencil, coin, watch, parts of the body(nose, ear, chin, fingernail, knuckle), or to namecolors.
/square6Repetition:  Patients are asked to repeat grammati-
cally complex phrases (e.g. “no ifs, ands, or buts”).Patients with impaired repetition may omit words,change the word order, or commit paraphasic
errors.
/square6Comprehension:  Patients are asked to point to objects
named by the clinician, carry out one-step and
multistep commands, and answer simple and
complex yes-or-no questions.
/square6Reading and writing:  Patients are asked to write
spontaneously or to dictation and to read aloud.Reading comprehension, spelling, and writing inresponse to dictation are assessed.
/square6Brain imaging (CT or MRI) to identify the brainpathology.
Treatment
/square6Treatment of cause.
/square6Speech therapy.
/square6Augmentative communication devices (e.g. a bookor communication board that contains pictures orsymbols of a patient’s daily needs, computer-baseddevices).
Q.Enumerate the causes of headache.
/square6Headache is a very common complaint reported by
patients. Most people experience headache at least
once during life.
/square6Most causes of headache are benign, but rarely
headache can be due to potentially life-threateningcentral nervous system (CNS) diseases such as brain
tumor, intracranial hemorrhage, etc.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5312 Causes of Headache
Primary Headache Disorders
/square6Migraine
/square6Tension headache
/square6Cluster headache
Secondary Headache Disorders
/square6Subarachnoid hemorrhage
/square6Intracranial space occupying lesion (brain abscess,
tumour, hematoma, AV malformation)
/square6Cortical vein thrombosis
/square6Severe hypertension
/square6Meningitis
/square6Temporal arteritis
/square6Metabolic disturbances (hypoxia, hypercarbia,
hypoglycemia)
/square6Glaucoma
/square6Sinusitis
/square6Idiopathic intracranial hypertension (pseudotumor
cerebri).
Q.Describe the classification, pathophysiology,
clinical features and treatment of migraine head-
ache.
/square6Migraine is recurrent headache associated withvisual and gastrointestinal disturbance. Though
migraine is a benign headache, attacks of headacheare usually severe.
/square6Migraine can be classified into three types:
– Migraine with aura (old term: Classic migraine)
– Migraine without aura (old term: Common
migraine)
– Migraine variants (retinal migraine, ophthalmo-
plegic migraine, familial hemiplegic migraine,basilar migraine).
Epidemiology
/square6The prevalence of migraine is high. It is three timesmore common in women than men. It tends to runin families, and more common in young females.Migraine without aura (common migraine) is the
most common type (80% of all migraine cases).
Pathophysiology
/square6The exact cause of migraine is unknown. However,
various theories have been put forward and various
brain abnormalities have been found in patients
with migraine.
/square6Migraine has a strong genetic component. Approxi-mately 70% of migraine patients have a first-degree
relative with a history of migraine. The risk of
migraine is increased 4-fold in relatives of peoplewho have migraine with aura.
/square6Migraine was previously thought to be a vascular
phenomenon that resulted from intracranial vaso-constriction followed by rebound vasodilation.
Currently, however, the neurovascular theoryconsiders migraine as primarily a neurogenicprocess with secondary changes in cerebralperfusion associated with a sterile neurogenicinflammation.
/square6Migraineurs have been found to have neuronalhyperexcitability in the cerebral cortex, especiallyin the occipital cortex. A phenomenon calledcortical spreading depression (CSD) (well-defined
wave of neuronal excitation in the cortical gray
matter that spreads from its site of origin) has beenfound in patients with aura. This cellular depolariza-tion causes aura phase which in turn activatestrigeminal fibers, causing the headache phase.Activation of the trigeminovascular system by CSD
stimulates nociceptive neurons on dural blood
vessels to release plasma proteins and pain-generating substances such as calcitonin gene-related peptide, substance P, vasoactive intestinalpeptide, and neurokinin A. The resultant state ofsterile inflammation is accompanied by further
vasodilation, producing pain. The serotonin receptor
(5-hydroxytryptamine [5-HT]) is believed to be themost important receptor in the headache pathwayand is found in trigeminal sensory neurons.
Migraine Precipitants
Various precipitants of migraine have been identified,
which are as follows:
/square6Hormonal changes, such as those accompanying
menstruation (common), pregnancy, and ovulation.
/square6Stress.
/square6Excessive or insufficient sleep.
/square6Excessive exercise.
/square6Eyestrain or other visual triggers.
/square6Medications (e.g. vasodilators, oral contraceptives).
/square6Exposure to bright or fluorescent lighting.
/square6Loud noises.
/square6Strong odors (e.g. perfumes, colognes, petroleumdistillates).
/square6Weather changes.
/square6Motion sickness.
/square6Certain food items (ice cream, chocolate, cheese).
/square6Hunger.
/square6Red wine.
Clinical Features
/square6Three phases of migraine can be recognized
– Premonitory symptoms
– Aura
– Headache
/square6Premonitory symptoms: Precede an attack of
migraine. These include fatigue, concentration
difficulty, sensitivity to light or sound, nausea,
blurred vision, yawning, etc.

/square6Diseases of Nervous System313
5/square6Aura:  Migraine aura is a transient neurologic symp-
tom due to transient focal neurological dysfunction.Auras typically occur before the onset of migraineheadache, and the headache usually beginssimultaneously with or just after the end of the auraphase. Most auras last for less than one hour. Auras
can be visual disturbances (blurring of vision,
fortification spectra, light flashes), sensory symp-toms, motor weakness and speech disturbances.
/square6Headache:  See the IHS criteria below.
IHS (International Headache Society) criteria to
diagnose migraineneurologic examination, onset of migraine after age
50 years, in immunocompromised patient, head-ache with fever, and migraine with epilepsy.
/square6Lumbar puncture:  It is indicated in the following
situations: First or worst headache of a patient’s life
(suggests subarachnoid hemorrhage), progressiveheadache, unresponsive, chronic, intractableheadache.
/square6Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP):  Serum level
of CGRP is elevated in most migraine patients. It isa neurotransmitter that causes vasodilation and canaid in the diagnosis of chronic migraine by servingas a biomarker for permanent trigeminovascularactivation.
Management
Treatment of an Acute Attack
/square6Paracetamol or any other simple analgesics shouldbe given, with an antiemetic such as domperidone,if necessary. Analgesics are more effective if startedin the beginning of headache.
/square6Triptans (5-HT agonists)  can also abort an attack.
These include sumatriptan, zolmitriptan, nara-triptan and rizatriptan.
/square6Ditans:  This is new class of drugs which are sero-
tonin 5-HT1F receptor agonists. The advantage ofditans over triptans is that they do not cause vaso-constriction.
/square6CGRP antagonists (gepants):  These are also a new class
of drugs. Examples are ubrogepant and rimegepant.
/square6During an attack rest in a dark and quiet room.
Prophylaxis
/square6Avoid precipitating factors.
/square6The following drugs are used to prevent migraineattacks if they are very frequent:
– Beta-blockers such as atenolol, metoprolol, and
propranolol. Propranolol 10 mg t hree times daily,
increasing to 40–80 mg three times daily.
–Antidepressants: Amitriptyline, clomipramine,
mirtazapine.
–Calcium channel blockers:  Verapamil, nifedipine.
–Antiepileptics:  Sodium valproate, topiramate.
–Calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) inhibitors:
Erenumab, fremanezumab, galcanezumab,eptinezumab.
Q.Cluster headache.
/square6The definition of cluster headaches is a unilateral
headache with at least one autonomic symptom
ipsilateral to the headache.
/square6Cluster headache (CH) is characterized by repetitive
headaches that occur for weeks to months at a time(i.e. occurring in clusters), followed by periods of
remission.TABLE 5.6: IHS diagnostic criteria for migraine without aura
A. At least 5 attacks fulfilling criteria B to D
B. Headache attacks lasting 4–72 hours (untreated or
unsuccessfully treated)
C. Headache has at least two of the following characteristics:
1. Unilateral location2. Pulsating quality3. Moderate or severe pain intensity4. Aggravation by or causing avoidance of routine physical
activity (e.g. walking or climbing stairs)
D. During headache at least one of the following:
1. Nausea and/or vomiting2. Photophobia and phonophobia
E. Not attributed to another disorder
TABLE 5.7: IHS diagnostic criteria for migraine with aura
At least two attacks fulfilling criteria B and CB. One or more of the following fully reversible aura symptoms:
• Visual• Sensory• Speech and/or language• Motor• Brainstem• Retinal
C. At least 3 of the following 6 characteristics:
1. At least one aura symptom spreads gradually over
≥5 minutes
2. Two or more aura symptoms occur in succession3. Each individual aura symptom lasts 5–60 minutes4. At least one aura symptom is unilateral5. At least one aura symptom is positive6. The aura is accompanied, or followed within 60 minutes,
by headache
Investigations
/square6Migraine is a clinical diagnosis. Hence, investiga-
tions are ordered only if an organic pathology issuspected or to rule out any comorbid illness.
/square6Routine blood tests:  Severe anemia can sometimes cause
headache. High ESR is seen in giant cell arteritis(temporal arteritis) which can mimic migraine.
/square6Neuroimaging (CT or MRI of head) : This is not
routinely necessary. It is indicated in followingsituations—first or worst severe headache, changein the pattern of previous migraine, abnormal

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5314 Etiology
/square6The exact cause of CH is unknown. The disorder is
sporadic but rarely can be inherited.
/square6Several factors can provoke CH attacks. Sub-cutaneous injection of histamine provokes attacksin many patients. Stress, allergens, seasonalchanges, or nitroglycerin and alcohol may triggerattacks. Many patients with CH are heavy smokers
and alcoholics.
Pathophysiology
/square6The exact pathophysiology of CH is incompletely
understood. There is involvement of the trigemino-vascular system and the parasympathetic nervefibers. Vasodilatation may be responsible for thepain and autonomic features of cluster headaches.
/square6Some studies have shown a defect in the centralpathway of pain control and autonomic nervoussystem dysregulation leading to dysfunction insupraspinal control of pain and cognitive processing.
/square6Activation of hypothalamus has been noted duringthe attack of headache.
Clinical Features
/square6It is a rare cause of headache and usually affectsmales between 30 and 40.
/square6Headache is strictly unilateral, usually deep,excruciating, felt around one eye and may last forseveral hours. Headaches occur every day usuallyat the same time. They most often occur at nightusually one to two hours after going to bed. Mostattacks are episodic, with daily attacks for weeks
to months (cluster), followed by a remission for
months to years.
/square6CH is associated with ipsilateral autonomicsymptoms such as lacrimation and redness of the
eye, stuffy nose, rhinorrhea, sweating, pallor, and
Horner’s syndrome.
/square6Nausea and vomiting can also occur.
Treatment
Acute Attack
/square6Oxygen inhalation (100% oxygen via a face mask)is the most effective therapy. It is effective in less
than 10 minutes.
/square6Triptans (e.g. sumatriptan, 6 mg subcutaneously)
can also be used to abort an attack.
/square6Dihydroergotamine can be an effective abortive agent.
Prevention of Attacks
/square6The best treatment is to prevent cluster attacks untilthe bout is over by using prophylactic medications.
/square6Prophylactic drugs are verapamil, prednisolone,
lithium, methysergide, ergotamine, and sodium
valproate. Verapamil is the most widely prescribedprophylactic drug./square6A 10-day course of prednisone, beginning at 60 mgdaily for 7 days followed by a rapid taper, mayprevent headache.
/square6Ergotamine can also prevent the attacks if given
1 to 2 h before an expected attack.
/square6Various invasive nerve blocks and ablative neuro-
surgical procedures (e.g. percutaneous radio-frequency ablation, trigeminal gangliorhizolysis,
and rhizotomy) can be considered in refractory CH.
Q.Enumerate the causes of facial pain.
Causes of Facial Pain
• Trigeminal neuralgia
• Postherpetic neuralgia• Glossopharyngeal neuralgia• Occipital neuralgia• Superior laryngeal neuralgia• Carotodynia• Carotid artery dissection• Post-traumatic facial pain• Sinusitis• Dental pain• Persistent idiopathic (atypical) facial pain• Thalamic pain• Cancer
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features and manage-
ment of trigeminal neuralgia (tic douloureux).
/square6Trigeminal neuralgia (TN) is sudden, usually uni-
lateral, severe, brief, stabbing or lancinating,recurrent episodes of pain in the distribution of oneor more branches of the trigeminal nerve.
Epidemiology
/square6The annual incidence of TN is 4 to 5 per lakh
population.
/square6It is one of the most common causes of facial pain
in the elderly. Most cases begin after age 50.
/square6It is slightly more common in women.
Etiopathogenesis
/square6Most cases of trigeminal neuralgia are caused bycompression of the trigeminal nerve root.
/square6Compression by an aberrant loop of an artery orvein accounts for 80 to 90% of cases. Other causesof nerve compression include acoustic neuroma,meningioma, epidermoid cyst, saccular aneurysmor arteriovenous malformation.
/square6Compression leads to demyelination of the nervein the area around the compression. Demyelinationresults in ectopic impulse generation and crossingof impulses between fibers. Touch sensation
impulses may cross into fibers carrying pain
sensation and lead to pain.
/square6Demyelination may also be caused by multiplesclerosis and lead to trigeminal neuralgia.

/square6Diseases of Nervous System315
5Clinical Features
/square6The pain of trigeminal neuralgia occurs in
paroxysms and is maximal at the onset.
/square6The pain is described as “electric shock-like” or“stabbing” and is unilateral in most cases.
/square6Pain occurs along the distribution of one or moresensory divisions of the trigeminal nerve, mostoften the maxillary.
/square6It usually lasts from one to several seconds, anddoes not awaken the patient at night. Episodes maylast weeks or months.
/square6Facial muscle spasms can be seen with severe pain.This finding gave rise to the older term for thisdisorder, “tic douloureux.”
/square6Trigger zones in the distribution of the affectednerve may be present; lightly touching these areasoften triggers an attack. Other triggers includechewing, talking, brushing teeth, cold air, smiling,and shaving.
Investigations
/square6Magnetic resonance imaging/magnetic resonanceangiography (MRI/MRA)  can identify demyelinating
lesions, a mass lesion in the cerebellopontine angle,or an ectatic blood vessel which may be responsiblefor trigeminal neuralgia.
/square6These investigations are especially indicated forpatients with sensory loss and young patients(under the age of 40).
Treatment
/square6Medical therapy:  Pharmacologic therapy is the initial
treatment for most patients with trigeminalneuralgia that is not caused by a structural lesion.Carbamazepine is the drug of choice. Other effec-tive drugs are sodium valproate, phenytoin,baclofen, or clonazepam. Newer antiepileptic drugssuch as gabapentin, lamotrigine, and topiramate arealso effective. Patients who fail to respond tomedication should be considered for microvasculardecompression surgery.
/square6Surgical therapy:  Surgery is reserved for patients
who are refractory to medical therapy. A variety ofsurgical procedures may relieve symptoms inpatients refractory to drug therapy. These include,microvascular decompression (involves theremoval or separation of vascular structures, oftenan ectatic superior cerebellar artery, from thetrigeminal nerve). Immediate postoperative reliefis found in most patients. Percutaneous radio-frequency rhizotomy creates a lesion in thegasserian ganglion of the trigeminal nerve byapplication of heat. The lesion is thought to selecti-vely destroy pain impulses carried by unmyelinatedor thinly myelinated fibers.Q.Glossopharyngeal neuralgia.
/square6Glossopharyngeal neuralgia is defined as paroxysmal
pain in areas innervated by cranial nerves IX and X.
Etiology
/square6The usual cause of glossopharyngeal neuralgiaappears to be microvascular compression, althoughabscess and tumor are sometimes associated.
Clinical Features
/square6The pain is paroxysmal, unilateral, sudden in onset,has a jabbing or briefly persistent quality.
/square6The pain is felt in or around the ear, tongue, jaw, orlarynx and it can be triggered by chewing, swallow-ing, coughing, speaking, yawning, certain tastes,or touching the neck or external auditory canal.
/square6Many attacks may occur in a day and may awakensufferers from sleep. Severe attacks have rarely beenassociated with bradycardia/asystole resulting insyncope presumably because of intense glosso-pharyngeal outflow and vagal efferent discharge.
Investigations
/square6MRI/MRA to rule out a mass lesion or vascularpathology.
Treatment
/square6Medical treatment is similar to that for trigeminalneuralgia and includes carbamazepine, gabapentin,
or baclofen.
/square6Cases refractory to adequate medical treatment
often respond to microvascular decompression.
Q.Postherpetic neuralgia (PHN).
/square6Postherpetic neuralgia (PHN) refers to pain persist-
ing beyond four months after an attack of herpes.
Clinical Features
/square6The probability of developing postherpetic neuralgia
(PHN) increases with advanced age.
/square6The pain is described as “burning” by most patientswith PHN. Most patients have allodynia, defined as
pain evoked by nonpainful stimuli such as light touch.
/square6Patients often have areas of decreased sensation
within the affected dermatomes.
Treatment
/square6There are many ways of treating postherpeticneuralgia: Antidepressants (amitryptaline, nortry-
ptaline), analgesics (aspirin, ibuprofen), capsaicin,
topical anesthetics, anticonvulsants (carbamazepine,gabapentin), intrathecal corticosteroids, NMDAreceptor antagonists (ketamine and dextromethor-phan), cryotherapy, and surgery (anterolateral cordo-tomy, and electrocoagulation of the dorsal root).

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5316
Figure 5.6 Cross-section of pons showing origin of facial nerve
Q.Idiopathic intracranial hypertension (pseudotumor
cerebri).
/square6Idiopathic intracranial hypertension (IIH) (pseudo-
tumor cerebri) is a disorder of unknown etiology
characterized by elevated intracranial pressure,headache and papilledema.
Etiology
/square6There is no hydrocephalus or an identifiable causefor increased CSF pressure. Raised intracranialpressure probably results from obstruction ofcerebral venous outflow probably because of
smaller venous sinuses.
/square6In children, this disorder sometimes develops aftercorticosteroids are stopped or after growth
hormone is used. IIH may also develop aftertetracyclines or large amounts of vitamin A aretaken.
Clinical Features
/square6Most cases occur in young women who are obese.Patients with higher body mass indexes (BMIs) andrecent weight gain are at increased risk.
/square6Patients with IIH usually present with symptomsrelated to increased intracranial pressure and
papilledema.
/square6Symptoms of increased intracranial pressure:  Diffuse
headache worsened by coughing and straining, andworse in the morning. Diplopia can occur due toincreased intracranial pressure causing abduscentnerve palsy.
/square6Symptoms due to papilledema:  Transient visual
disturbances, enlarged blind spots and loss ofperipheral visual fields. Optic atrophy can lead to
permanent loss of vision.
Diagnosis
/square6The diagnosis is made by lumbar puncture (CSF
pressure higher than 250 mm Hg; normal CSFcomposition).
/square6MRI with magnetic resonance venography toexclude other pathologies.
Treatment
/square6Weight reduction can help to some extent.
/square6Intracranial pressure should be reduced to prevent
visual loss. Drugs to reduce intracranial pressure
include acetazolamide and furosemide.
/square6Repeated lumbar punctures may be useful, if drugtreatment is ineffective.
/square6If all these measures fail, surgical options includeoptic nerve fenestration and ventricular-peritoneal
shunting of CSF.
/square6Spontaneous recovery may sometimes occur.Q.Describe the course of facial nerve. Enumerate the
causes and clinical features of facial nerve palsy at
various levels.
/square6Facial nerve is a mixed nerve, but predominantlymotor. It contains:
– Motor fibers to the facial muscles.
– Parasympathetic fibers to the lacrimal, sub-
mandibular, and sublingual salivary glands.
– Afferent fibers for taste from the anterior two-
thirds of the tongue.
– Somatic afferents from the external auditory canal
and pinna.
Course of Facial Nerve
/square6Facial nerve arises from its motor nucleus in thepons. The part of nucleus which supplies upper face
has bilateral hemispheric representation. Hence, in
unilateral UMN lesion of the facial nerve the upperpart of the face is spared.
/square6Its fibers hook around the abducens nucleus (6th
nerve) and then emerge from the lateral border of
the pons.
/square6The nerve enters the internal auditory meatus alongwith eighth nerve and nervus intermedius.
/square6In the anterior part of inner ear, it bends down-wards and anteriorly to enter facial canal.
/square6In the facial canal, it gives rise to greater petrosalnerve which supplies lacrimal glands and a branchto the stapedius muscle and is later joined by thechorda tympani nerve.
/square6It leaves the temporal bone through the stylo-
mastoid foramen and passes anteriorly through the
parotid gland to divide into its peripheral branches.
/square6Facial nerve has a small sensory component. Tastesensation from anterior two-thirds of the tongue
and sensory fibers from the external auditory canal
are supplied by facial nerve. The taste fibers runthrough the lingual nerve and then join the chordatympani which in turn joins the facial nerve in thefacial canal distal to the geniculate ganglion. Finallythe taste fibers enter the pons through the nervus
intermedius to end in the nucleus tractus solitarius.

/square6Diseases of Nervous System317
5Causes and Clinical Features of Facial Nerve Lesions at Various Levels
TABLE 5.8: Clinical features of facial nerve lesions at various levels
Level Causes Clinical features
Above the pons Vascular events (infarction and hemorrhage), Contralateral UMN facial palsy (upper half of face
(supranuclear) tumors, abscesses spared)
At the level of pons Vascular events (hemorrhage, infarct), pontine Ipsilateral LMN facial palsy. Lesions in the pons also
(nucleus) tumors (e.g. glioma), demyelination, poliomyelitis, affect abduscent nerve producing lateral rectus palsy
motor neuron disease leading to convergent squint. Contralateral hemiparesis
due to corticospinal tract involvement.
At cerebellopontine Acoustic neuroma, meningioma and secondary Along with 7th nerve, 5th, 8th cranial nerves and cere-
angle (CPA) neoplasm bellum are also affected because all are close together
in the CPA.7th nerve : Ipsilateral LMN facial palsy, loss of taste in
anterior two-thirds of tongue, impairment of salivary
and tear secretion8th nerve : Deafness, tinnitus, vertigo. Hyperacusis (if
8th is not affected).
5th nerve : Sensory loss over face and absence of corneal
reflex (5th); Cerebellum : Ipsilateral cerebellar signs.
Facial canal Bell’s palsy, trauma, middle ear infection, herpes Facial canal between internal auditory meatus and
zoster (Ramsay Hunt syndrome), and tumors geniculate ganglion:  Ipsilateral LMN facial palsy, loss
(e.g. glomus tumor) of taste in anterior two-thirds of tongue, impairment of
salivary and tear secretion, hyperacusis
Facial canal between geniculate ganglion and nerve tostapedius muscle: Ipsilateral LMN facial palsy, impaired
salivary secretion, loss of taste in anterior two-thirds of
tongue, hyperacusis.Facial canal between nerve to stapedius and leaving of
chorda tympani: Ipsilateral LMN facial palsy, impaired
salivary secretion, loss of taste in anterior two-thirds oftongue.
At the level of skull Paget’s disease of bone, parotid gland tumors, Ipsilateral LMN facial palsy with intact taste sensation.
base and parotid mumps, sarcoidosis, trauma, and Guillain-Barré
gland syndrome
Figure 5.7 Branches of facial nerve
Clinical Features of LMN Facial Palsy
/square6Unilateral LMN lesion causes weakness of both
upper and lower face on the same side of lesion./square6Drooping of angle of mouth, dribbling of salivafrom the angle of mouth, deviation of mouth tonormal side.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5318 /square6There is weakness of frowning (frontalis) and of
eye closure since upper facial muscles are weak.
/square6Corneal exposure and ulceration may occur due toinability of the eyes to close during sleep.
/square6The platysma muscle is also weak.
Clinical Features of UMN Facial Palsy
/square6In UMN lesions only the lower part of face isaffected and upper part is spared because ofbilateral hemispheric representation. Hence, raisingeyebrows, wrinkling of forehead, eye closure and
blinking are all preserved.
/square6Clinical features in the lower part of the face are
same as those described in LMN facial palsy.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of Bell’s palsy.
/square6Bell’s palsy is an acute, LMN type facial palsy. It is
the most common cause of unilateral facial paralysis.
Etiology
/square6Exact cause is unknown.
/square6It is thought to be due to a viral (often herpessimplex) infection that causes swelling of the nerve
within the facial canal leading to compression ofthe nerve. Compression of the nerve often occursat the geniculate ganglion.
Clinical Features
/square6Patient notices sudden unilateral facial weak-ness.
/square6Weakness is LMN type (see above for clinicalfeatures of LMN facial palsy). Bell’s phenomenon
is uprolling of eyeballs when patient tries to close
the eyes.
/square6Weakness progresses over hours or several days.Spontaneous recovery usually starts in the secondweek. Complete recovery may take 12 months.
/square6Some patients may be left with residual weak-
ness.
Investigations
/square6Nerve conduction studies and electromyography
(EMG) can be used to assess the severity of lesionand chances of recovery.
/square6Imaging studies:  Imaging is indicated if the physical
signs are atypical, there is slow progression beyondthree weeks, or if there is no improvement at six
months. High resolution CT scanning and MRI
can be used to rule out other causes of facial palsysuch as tumors or vascular events. Pathologicalgeniculate ganglion enhancement is seen in Bell’spalsy.Treatment
/square6Steroids (prednisolone 60 mg daily tapered over
10 days) is the drug of choice. Antivirals such asaciclovir along with steroids do not provide anyadditional benefit compared to steroids alone butcan be considered in severe cases.
/square6Eyes should be protected by applying artificialtears or tarsorrhaphy (suturing the upper to lowereyelid).
/square6Facial nerve stimulation is useful within two weeks,if surgical decompression is planned. Severedegeneration of the facial nerve is irreversible after2 to 3 weeks.
/square6Surgical decompression of the facial nerve is not acurrently recommended treatment. Decompressionmay be of benefit in patients with profound nervedysfunction.
Q.Ramsay Hunt syndrome (herpes zoster oticus).
/square6Ramsay Hunt syndrome (RHS) was described by
Ramsay Hunt in 1907. Herpes zoster oticus orcephalicus are the alternate names of this syndrome.RHS is a viral polyneuropathy, occurs after reactiva-tion of varicella zoster virus (VZV) hiding insidedorsal roots and cranial nerve ganglions. Aging,malignancy, chemoradiotherapy exposure, immunedeficiency may trigger reactivation of this virus.
Clinical Features
/square6Clinical features include a triad of ipsilateral LMN
type facial palsy, ear pain, and vesicles in theauditory canal and auricle. Taste perception inanterior 2/3rd of tongue and lacrimation are
affected in some patients. Hearing loss, tinnitus,
and/or vertigo can be seen with the involvementof the vestibulocochlear nerve.
Investigations
/square6Usually not necessary for the diagnosis.
/square6Microscopic evaluation with the Tzanck smear canbe performed on the fluid obtained from thevesicles. The smear will show multinucleated giant
cells using a Giemsa stain.
/square6MRI may be useful in showing inflammation near
the geniculate ganglion.
Treatment
/square6High dose steroids together with antiviral drugs(aciclovir, famciclovir, or valacyclovir) are used totreat RHS. The aim is to decrease the degenerationof the nerve.
/square6Intractable RHS cases resistant to medical therapyusually require surgical decompression of facialnerve.

/square6Diseases of Nervous System319
5Q.Draw a diagram showing various lobes of brain. Describe the functions and abnormalities of different
lobes.
Figure 5.8 Lobes of brain
TABLE 5.9: Normal and abnormal functions of the brain lobes
Lobe Normal function Abnormal function due to lesions
Frontal lobe Personality Disinhibition
Emotional response Obsessive-compulsive behavior
Social behavior Lack of initiative
Antisocial behavior
Impaired memory
Incontinence
Primitive reflexes (grasp reflex, snout reflex)
Anosmia
Parietal lobe Dominant side Dyscalculia
Calculation Dysphasia
Speech, la nguage Dyslexia
Planned movement Apraxia
Stereognosis Astereognosis
Homonymous hemianopia
Non-dominant side Contralateral hemispatial neglect
Spatial orientation Spatial disorientation
Constructional skills Constructional apraxia
Homonymous hemianopia
Temporal lobe Dominant side Dysphasia
Auditory function Dyslexia
Speech, language Poor memory
Verbal memory Complex hallucinations (smell, vision)
Olfaction Homonymous hemianopia
Non-dominant side
Auditory function Poor non-verbal memory
Music, tone sequences Loss of musical skills
Non-verbal memory (faces, music, etc.) Complex hallucinations
Olfaction Homonymous hemianopia
Occipital lobe Analysis of vision Homonymous hemianopia with macular sparing
Visual agnosia
Inability to recognize faces (prosapognosia)
Visual hallucinations (lights, zigzags)

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5320 Q.Define vertigo. Enumerate the causes of vertigo.
Discuss the approach to a case of vertigo.
/square6Vertigo is a false sensation of movement of the self
or the environment, usually a spinning or wheeling
sensation. Almost everyone has experienced vertigoas the transient spinning dizziness immediatelyafter turning around rapidly several times. Vertigois a symptom, not a diagnosis.
/square6Dizziness is an imprecise term patients often useto describe various related sensations, includingfaintness (a feeling of impending syncope), light-headedness, feeling of imbalance or unsteadinessand a spinning sensation. So dizziness always does
not mean vertigo.
Pathophysiology
/square6The vestibular system is the main neurologic system
involved in balance. This system includes: The
vestibular apparatus of the inner ear, the 8th
(vestibulocochlear) cranial nerve, and the vestibularnuclei in the brainstem and cerebellum.
/square6Disorders of the inner ear and 8th cranial nerve are
considered peripheral disorders. Those of the
vestibular nuclei and their pathways in the brainstem and cerebellum are considered centraldisorders. Any asymmetrical neural activityanywhere in the vestibular system producesvertigo.
Causes of Vertigo
Peripheral causes
• Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV)• Vestibular neuritis• Acute labyrinthitis• Meniere’s disease• Herpes zoster oticus (Ramsay Hunt syndrome)• Perilymphatic fistula• Otitis media• Otosclerosis• Acoustic neuroma• Aminoglycoside toxicity
Central causes
• Migrainous vertigo• Brainstem ischemia• Cerebellar infarction and hemorrhage
• Cerebellopontine angle tumors• Chiari malformation• Multiple sclerosis
Others
• Drugs (anticonvulsants, alcohol)
Approach to a Case of Vertigo
Clinical History and Findings
/square6Peripheral vertigo should be distinguished from
central vertigo, because central vertigo is of more
serious nature.
/square6Ask the patient to describe what exactly he feels.
This will help in differentiating true vertigo fromother causes of dizziness such as light headedness.
/square6Nausea, vomiting and imbalance usually accompanyvertigo.
/square6History of recurrent episodes in the past suggestBPPV.
/square6Ask about triggers and relievers, i.e. whethertriggered by head/body position change which
suggests peripheral vertigo.
/square6Tinnitus and hearing loss suggest middle ear
pathology and vertigo of peripheral origin.
/square6Presence of nystagmus should be noted. In peri-pheral lesions, nystagmus is usually horizontal witha rotatory component. In central vertigo, nystagmuscan be horizontal or vertical and may be associatedwith other signs of brainstem or cerebellar dys-
function.
/square6History of loss of consciousness, focal neurological
findings and cerebellar signs suggest a central causeof vertigo.
Investigations
/square6Audiologic tests, caloric stimulation, electronystagmo-graphy, CT scan or MRI, and brainstem auditoryevoked potential studies are indicated in patientswith persistent vertigo or when CNS disease issuspected.
/square6These studies will help distinguish between centraland peripheral lesions and to identify causesrequiring specific therapy.
TABLE 5.10: Differences between peripheral and central vertigo
Feature Peripheral vertigo Central vertigo
Nystagmus Combined horizontal and torsional; inhibited by Can be in any direction, vertical, horizontal, or
fixation of eyes onto object; fades after a few days torsional; not inhibited by fixation of eyes onto
object; may last weeks to months
Imbalance Mild to moderate; able to walk Severe; unable to stand still or walk
Nausea, vomiting May be severe Varies
Hearing loss, tinnitus Common Rare
Neurologic deficits Rare Common
Latency following Longer (up to 20 seconds) Shorter (up to 5 seconds)
provocative maneuver

/square6Diseases of Nervous System321
5Treatment
Symptomatic Treatment
/square6These medications can be used to suppress the
vertigo whatever may be the cause. These drugsact by suppressing the vestibular system. Examplesare scopolamine, cinnarazine, betahistine,meclizine, dimenhydrinate, diphenhydramine,
prochlorperazine, promethazine, metoclopramide,
and domperidone.
Disease Specific Treatment
/square6If any underlying disease is found, treatment
should be directed towards that.
Q.Nystagmus.
/square6Nystagmus is involuntary rhythmic oscillation of
the eyes. Due to the involuntary movement of theeye, it is often called “dancing eyes”.
/square6Nystagmus can be horizontal, vertical, torsionalor a combination of these. Nystagmus may beunilateral or bilateral, conjugate or disconjugate(dissociated), congenital or acquired.
Pathophysiology
/square6Eyes move reflexively to adjust for slight movementof head, which stabilizes the image that we arelooking at and allows us to see a sharper image.
Nervous system maintains position of the eyes by
three mechanisms: Eye fixation, the vestibulo-ocular reflex, and the neural integrator. Any abnor-mality in these three mechanisms stimulating theeye movements in the absence of head movementcauses nystagmus.Causes of Nystagmus
/square6Congenital:  Albinism, bilateral congenital cataract,
optic nerve hypoplasia, Noonan syndrome.
/square6Acquired:  Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo
(BPPV), brain tumors in the posterior fossa, lateralmedullary syndrome, Méniere’s disease, Wernicke–Korsakoff syndrome, cerebellar ataxia, alcoholintoxication, phenytoin overdose.
Clinical Features
/square6The primary symptom of nystagmus is involuntary
eye movement. Usually the movement is side-to-
side (horizontal nystagmus), but it can also be upand down (vertical nystagmus) or circular (torsionalor rotary nystagmus).
/square6The oscillations may be of approximately equalamplitude and velocity (pendular nystagmus) or,more commonly, with a slow initiating phase anda fast corrective phase (jerk nystagmus).
/square6Vertigo usually accompanies nystagmus due toperipheral vestibular disease.
/square6Oscillopsia (a to-and-fro illusion of environmentalmotion) and blurred vision occur due to oscillation
of retinal image.
/square6There may be abnormal head position because the
patient tends to keep their head in a position whichcauses least oscillopsia or blurred vision.
Investigations
/square6Brain imaging (CT or MRI) to rule out any brainpathology.
/square6Electronystagmographs record eye musclecontractions to evaluate the direction and velocityof nystagmus. It may be used to evaluate low-amplitude nystagmus.
Treatment
/square6Treatment of underlying cause.
/square6Medications— baclofen and gabapentin may reduce
nystagmus.
/square6Botulinum injections— this has been used to weaken
the extraocular muscles and diminish the amplitudeof nystagmus.
/square6Prism lenses—and optical solutions . These can be used
to keep the eyes in a position of gaze in whichnystagmus is minimal.
/square6Surgery —attachment of the muscles is shifted to
maintain a gaze position where nystagmus isminimal or absent.
Q.Discuss the causes, clinical features and manage-
ment of raised ICP (intracranial pressure).
/square6The CSF pressure, measured at lumbar puncture
(LP), is 100–250 mm of H2O. A pressure of more
than 250 mm of H2O is called raised ICP. Figure 5.9 Types of nystagmus.


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5322 Mechanisms of Raised ICP
/square6The volume of brain parenchyma is relatively
constant in adults. The volumes of CSF and bloodin the intracranial space are variable. Any abnormal
increases in the volume of any of these components
may lead to elevation in ICP.
/square6CSF is produced by the choroid plexus at a rate of20 mL/h (500 mL/day). CSF is reabsorbed via thearachnoid granulations into the venous system.Increased production or decreased absorption ofCSF can lead to raised ICP.
/square6Cerebral blood flow increases with hypercapniaand hypoxia and may lead to raised ICP.
Causes of Raised ICP
/square6Intracranial hemorrhage
/square6Central nervous system infections
/square6Space occupying lesion (neoplasm, abscess,hematoma)
/square6Vasculitis
/square6Ischemic infarcts with cerebral edema
/square6Obstructive hydrocephalus
/square6Cortical venous sinus thrombosis
/square6Pseudotumor cerebri
/square6Idiopathic.
Clinical Features
/square6Symptoms of elevated ICP include headache,depressed consciousness and vomiting.
/square6Signs include 6th nerve palsies, papilledema, and
a triad of bradycardia, respiratory depression, and
hypertension (Cushing’s triad, sometimes calledCushing’s reflex or Cushing’s response). Cushing’striad may be due to brainstem compression. Thepresence of this response is an ominous finding thatrequires urgent intervention.
/square6Signs and symptoms of underlying disease.
Management
/square6Head end elevation : It increases venous return from
head and lowers ICP.
/square6Hyperventilation : It decreases PaCO2 and causes
cerebral vasoconstriction which decreases thevolume of intracranial blood and thus reducesraised ICP.
/square6Intravenous mannitol : This is an osmotic diuretic. It
reduces brain volume by drawing free water out ofthe tissue into the circulation which is excreted bythe kidneys, thus dehydrating brain parenchyma.Dose is 1 to 1.5 g/kg of 20% mannitol every 6 to8 hours.
/square6Corticosteroids:  Dexamethasone 4 mg 6th hourly is
used in raised ICP due to meningitis and braintumors.
/square6Glycerol:  30 ml orally every 6th to 8th hourly./square6Barbiturates:  It reduces brain metabolism and
cerebral blood flow, thus lowering ICP and exertinga neuroprotective effect. Pentobarbital is generallyused, with a loading dose of 5 to 20 mg/kg as abolus, followed by 1 to 4 mg/kg per hour.
/square6Therapeutic hypothermia : Hypothermia decreases
cerebral metabolism and may reduce cerebral bloodflow and ICP.
/square6Removal of CSF : Removal of CSF reduces ICP which
can be done by ventriculostomy.
/square6Decompressive craniectomy : Removal of the rigid
confines of the bony skull allows the intracranial
contents to expand and reduces ICP.
/square6Specific treatment : The best treatment of elevated ICP
is to correct the underlying cause. Examples areremoval of meningioma or intracranial hematoma.
Q.Classify and enumerate the causes of meningitis.
Meningitis is an inflammatory disease of the arachnoid
mater and the cerebrospinal fluid.
TABLE 5.11: Causes of meningitis
Bacteria Spirochetal
•Neisseria meningitidis • Leptospirosis
•Streptococcus pneumoniae • Lyme disease
•H. influenzae • Syphilis
•Mycobacterium tuberculosis Rickettsial
•Staphylococcus aureus • Typhus fever
• Group B streptococcus Protozoal
•Listeria monocytogenes • Naegleria
•Treponema pallidum Miscellaneous
Viruses • Sarcoidosis
• Enteroviruses • Leukemic meningitis
• ECHO • Chemical meningitis
• Coxsackie • Drug induced—NSAIDs,
• Mumps rofecoxib, intravenous
• Herpes simplex immunoglobulin
• HIV• Epstein-Barr virusFungi•Cryptococcus neoformans
• Candida
•Coccidioides immitis
•Histoplasma capsulatumFigure 5.10 Meningeal layers covering brain


/square6Diseases of Nervous System323
5Q.Describe the etiology, clinical features, investiga-
tions and management of acute pyogenic meningitis
(acute bacterial meningitis).
Q.Causes of neck stiffness.
Q.Kernig’s sign; Brudzinski’s sign.
Q.Prevention of meningitis.
Etiology
Common organisms
/square6Neisseria meningitidis
/square6Streptococcus pneumoniae
/square6H. influenzae
Uncommon organisms
/square6Staphylococcus aureus
/square6Group B streptococcus
/square6Listeria monocytogenes
/square6Klebsiella
/square6Proteus
/square6Pseudomonas
/square6Salmonella
/square6Neisseria gonorrhoeae
Pathogenesis
/square6The organism responsible for meningitis can reach
the CSF via three routes: (1) Colonization of thenasopharynx with subsequent bloodstreaminvasion and subsequent central nervous system
(CNS) invasion, (2) invasion of the CNS following
bacteremia due to a localized source, such aspneumonia, infective endocarditis or a urinary tractinfection, (3) direct entry of organisms into the CNSfrom a contiguous infection (e.g. sinuses, mastoid),trauma, or neurosurgery.
/square6There are many steps involved before frankmeningitis develops such as colonization of the hostmucosal epithelium by pathogens, invasion intobloodstream, crossing of the blood–brain barrier,and multiplication within the CSF.
/square6Much of the damage from meningitis results from
cytokines (interleukin-1, interleukin-6, and tumor
necrosis factor-alpha) released within the CSF dueto inflammatory response. Once inflammation isinitiated, a series of injuries occur to the endo-thelium of the blood–brain barrier (e.g. separationof intercellular tight junctions) that result in
vasogenic brain edema, loss of cerebrovascular
autoregulation, and increased intracranial pressure.This results in localized areas of brain ischemia,cytotoxic injury, and neuronal apoptosis. All thesepathologic changes manifest clinically as coma,seizures, deafness, and motor, sensory, and
cognitive deficits.Predisposing Factors
/square6Immunodeficient states:  Asplenism, complement
deficiency, corticosteroid excess, diabetes mellitus,chronic alcoholism and HIV infection.
/square6Acute otitis media.
/square6Recent exposure to someone with meningitis.
/square6Recent travel, particularly to areas with endemicmeningococcal disease.
/square6Injection drug use.
/square6Recent head trauma with CSF otorrhea orrhinorrhea.
Clinical Features
/square6Patients with bacterial meningitis usually appearill. The classic triad of acute bacterial meningitis
consists of fever, nuchal rigidity, and a change in
mental status.
/square6Patients are usually febrile but some may havehypothermia.
/square6Headache is also common and is diffuse and severe.
/square6Neck stiffness:  Spasm of neck muscles on attempted
flexion.
/square6Brudzinski’s neck sign:  Passive neck flexion, while
the patient is in supine position, produces involun-tary flexion of hips and knees.
/square6Brudzinski’s leg sign:  Passive flexion of one leg
produces automatic flexion of the other leg.
/square6Kernig’s sign:  Extension of knee from flexed thigh
position causes passive resistance. This is due tothe spasm of hamstring muscles due to the inflamedsciatic nerve as it passes through the spinal theca.
/square6Other manifestations include photophobia, seizures,focal neurologic deficits (including cranial nervepalsies), and papilledema.
/square6Certain bacteria, particularly N. meningitidis,  can
cause characteristic skin manifestations, such as
petechiae and palpable purpura.
/square6Arthritis occurs in some patients with bacterialmeningitis.
Investigations
/square6Blood counts : White blood cell count is often elevated
with a let shift. However, there may be leukopenia
in severe infection. Platelet count may be reducedif disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) ispresent or in the face of meningococcal bacteremia.
/square6Blood cultures:  Blood cultures may be able to identify
the causative organism in 50 to 75% of patients withbacterial meningitis.
/square6Serum procalcitonin  levels can be used as a guide to
distinguish between bacterial and aseptic menin-
gitis in children. Elevated serum procalcitoninlevels predict bacterial meningitis.
/square6Lumbar puncture and CSF analysis: This is the test of
choice to diagnose meningitis. Every patient with
suspected meningitis should have LP done unless

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5324
the procedure is contraindicated. CSF should be
sent for protein, sugar, cell count, cell type, Gram’sstain, India ink stain, culture sensitivity, AFB stainand culture and PCR studies. Opening pressureshould be noted at the time of LP.
/square6CT scan head : A contrast CT shows meningeal
enhancement in meningitis. It is also helpful to ruleout other pathologies such as subarachnoid hemorr-hage, cerebral abscess, mass lesion, middle ear andsinus disease. It should be done before LP in patients
with raised ICP or mass lesion to prevent the risk
of herniation. CT scan before an LP is indicated inpatients with one or more of the following riskfactors for a mass lesion.
Indications for CT scan before LP in meningitis
/square6Immunocompromised state (e.g. HIV infection,
immunosuppressive therapy).
/square6History of CNS disease (mass lesion, stroke, or focalinfection).
/square6New onset seizure (within one week of presentation).
/square6Papilledema.
/square6Abnormal level of consciousness.
/square6Focal neurologic deficit.
Treatment
/square6Bacterial meningitis is a medical emergency andtreatment should be initiated immediately as soonas it is suspected. The mortality rate of untreateddisease approaches 100%.
/square6There are two general principles of antibiotictherapy: Use of bactericidal drugs effective againstthe infecting organism; and the use of drugs thatenter the CSF.
Empiric antibiotic therapy
/square6Pending identification of the causative organism,
empiric antibiotic therapy should be started.
/square6Third-generation cephalosporins, such as cefotaxime
or ceftriaxone, plus vancomycin are the drugs ofchoice for this purpose because they have good CSF
penetration and also good activity against
pathogens. Ampicillin should be added for thoseabove 60 years to cover the possibility of listeriameningitis.
/square6Vancomycin is added initially to cover for thepossibility of cephalsporin resistant Streptococcuspneumoniae . It can be withdrawn later if the
organism isolated from CSF is sensitive toceftriaxone.
Age range Empirical antibiotics
Adults up to age 60 Ceftriaxone (or cefotaxime) plus
vancomycin
Dosage:  Ceftriaxone 2 gm IV 12th
hourly for 10 to 14 days. Vancomycin
500 mg IV 6th hourly
Above 60 years Ceftriaxone (or cefotaxime) plus
vancomycin, plus ampicillin
Role of steroids in meningitis
/square6Trials have shown that dexamethasone given
shortly before or at the same time as the first dose
of antibiotics significantly improves outcomes in
patients with meningitis.
/square6Dexamethasone reduces CSF synthesis of cyto-kines (such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha and
interleukin-1), CSF inflammation, and cerebral
edema which are responsible for much of thedamage and sequelae.
Complications of Meningitis
Neurological
/square6Cerebrovascular abnormalities (thrombosis,
vasculitis, hemorrhage, and aneurysm formation)
/square6Cerebral edema and raised ICP
/square6Obstructive hydrocephalus
/square6Seizures
/square6Intellectual impairment
/square6Deafness and cranial nerve palsies
/square6Subdural abscess.
Systemic
/square6Septic shock
/square6ARDS
/square6DIC
Prevention of Meningitis
Some forms of meningitis can be prevented by
vaccination and chemoprophylaxis.
Vaccines
/square6Vaccines are available for S. pneumoniae, N. meningi-
tidis, and H. influenzae.TABLE 5.12: CSF findings in meningitis of different etiology
Normal Viral Pyogenic Tuberculosis
Appearance Crystal-clear Clear/turbid Turbid/purulent Turbid/viscous
Pressure 60 to 200 mm of CSF Normal Increased Increased
WBC count <5/mm3, all lymphocytes 10–300/mm3 lymphocyte 100–5000; >80% 100–500/mm3, most are
predominant neutrophils lymphocytes
Protein Less than 50 mg/dL Increased Increased Increased >100
Glucose 40–60%  of blood glucose Normal Low Low

/square6Diseases of Nervous System325
5/square6Pneumococcal vaccine:  Pneumococcal vaccine is
administered to chronically ill and older adults(over age 65). Pneumococcal vaccine is adminis-tered intramuscularly as a 0.5 mL dose. Effect lastsup to 5–10 years.
/square6Meningococcal vaccine:  A quadrivalent meningococcal
polysaccharide conjugate vaccine (serogroups A, C,Y and W-135) is available in many countries. It isgiven to children and adults as a single intra-muscular (IM) 0.5 mL dose. Effect lasts up to 1 year.
/square6H. influenzae vaccine:  This vaccine is now routinely
administered to children. It is available in combina-tion with hepatitis-B vaccine. For adults, it isindicated only for those with prior splenectomy.
Chemoprophylaxis
/square6Chemoprophylaxis can prevent the spread of
meningococcal and haemophilus meningitis.
/square6Neisseria meningitides: Rifampicin (600 mg PO every
12 h for a total of four doses in adults), or cipro-floxacin (500 mg PO once), or ceftriaxone (250 mg
IM once). Chemoprophylaxis is necessary only in
close contacts of an isolated case of invasivemeningococcal infection. Close contacts includehousehold members and other intimate contacts,children in school environments, coworkers in thesame office, young adults in dormitories, and
recruits in training centers.
/square6H. influenza: Unvaccinated, young children (less than
four years of age) should receive brief course ofrifampicin (20 mg/kg with a maximum of 600 mg/
day PO for four days) if they are exposed to a case
of meningitis.
Q.Aseptic meningitis.
/square6Aseptic meningitis refers to patients who have
clinical and laboratory evidence for meningealinflammation with negative routine bacterialcultures.
/square6Causes of aseptic meningitis are viruses, fungi,spirochetes, drugs (NSAIDs, rofecoxib, carbama-zepine, ciprofloxacin, isoniazid), malignancy,sarcoidosis and Behçet’s disease.
/square6Clinical features are similar to bacterial meningitis(e.g. fever, headache, altered mental status, stiffneck, photophobia).
/square6CSF show increased pressure and lymphocytic pleo-cytosis. CSF protein and sugar are usually normal.
/square6Treatment involves correction of the underlyingcause. However, in contrast to bacterial meningitis,
majority of patients with aseptic meningitis have a
self-limited course that will resolve without specifictherapy.
Q.Describe the etiology, clinical features, investiga-
tions and management of tuberculous meningitis
(TBM)./square6Tuberculous meningitis (TBM) is the most severetype of extrapulmonary tuberculosis, but it is theleast common type. It can occur as the sole mani-festation of TB or concurrent with pulmonary orother extrapulmonary sites of infection.
Etiology
/square6Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
Pathophysiology
/square6TBM develops in 2 steps. In the first step myco-
bacterium tuberculosis  bacilli enter the host by
droplet inhalation, and are phagocytosed byalveolar macrophages. Subsequently bacilli spread
to regional lymph nodes to produce the primary
complex. During this stage, bacteremia occurs andthe tubercle bacilli seed many organs. In personswho develop TBM, bacilli seed the meninges orbrain parenchyma, resulting in the formation ofsubpial or subependymal foci of caseous lesions.
These are termed Rich foci, after the original
pathologic studies of Rich.
/square6The second step in the development of TBM is anincrease in size of a Rich focus until it ruptures into
the subarachnoid space. Tubercles (Rich focus)
rupturing into the subarachnoid space causemeningitis. Those deeper in the brain or spinal cordparenchyma cause tuberculomas or abscesses. Asevere inflammatory response is elicited by myco-bacterial components. A thick exudate, phlebitis,
arteritis, thrombosis, infarction and obstruction of
CSF flow are common findings. Basal meningitisaccounts for the frequent dysfunction of cranialnerves (CNS) III, VI, and VII, eventually leading toobstructive hydrocephalus from obstruction ofbasilar cisterns. Complications include raised
intracranial pressure, cerebral edema, syndrome
of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion(SIADH), hydrocephalus, brain infarcts, hemi- orquadriplegia, convulsions, deafness, blindness,mental retardation and other neurological sequelae.
Clinical Features
/square6TBM presents as a subacute febrile illness associatedwith headache and neck stiffness. Neck stiffnessmay be absent in the early stages.
/square6Features of CNS dysfunction such as personality
change, vomiting, lethargy, confusion, and cranial
nerve palsies may be present.
/square6Sudden onset of focal neurologic deficits, includingmonoplegia, hemiplegia, aphasia, and tetraparesis
can occur.
/square6Involuntary movements may be seen in some
patients. Tremor is the most common movementdisorder seen. Other abnormal movements such as
myoclonus, choreoathetosis, and hemiballismus
can also be seen.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5326 /square6Fundoscopic examination often shows choroidal
tubercles.
/square6If untreated, death occurs within five to eight weeksof the onset of illness.
Diagnosis
/square6CSF examination:  CSF shows elevated protein and
decreased glucose concentration with predominantlymphocytosis. The demonstration of acid-fast bacilli(AFB) in the CSF remains the most rapid and effectivemeans of reaching an early diagnosis. PCR for AFB
should be sent in all suspected cases of TB meningitis.
/square6Brain imaging: CT scan head may show meningeal
enhancements especially basal meninges. Obstruc-tive hydrocephalus may be present. MRI has more
sensitivity in detecting the distribution of menin-
geal inflammatory exudates.
/square6Mantoux test:  It is usually positive.
/square6Chest X-ray:  May show evidence of pulmonary
tuberculosis.
/square6Cartridge-based nucleic acid amplification test (CB-
NAAT/GeneXpert): This test has high sensitivity and
specificity. It can also detect drug resistance.
/square6Other tests:  HIV test to rule out immunocompro-
mised state, blood sugar, electrolytes, LFT, RFT, and
CBP with ESR.
Treatment
/square6Antituberculous therapy should be started if there
is strong clinical suspicion of TB meningitis even ifit cannot be confirmed by investigations.
/square6Treatment involves initial two months period ofintensive therapy with 4 drugs (isoniazid, rifampicin,pyrazinamide and ethambutol). This is followed bya continuation phase lasting 7 to 10 months with2 drugs (isoniazid, rifampicin). Streptomycin can
be used instead of ethambutol but is available only
as injection.
/square6Steroids should be given to all patients with TBmeningitis. Dexamethasone is given at a dose of
12 mg/day in divided doses or prednisolone at a
dose of 60 mg/day. Steroids should be given in fulldose for 3 weeks, and then tapered off graduallyover the following 3 weeks.
/square6Surgery: Patients with hydrocephalus may requiresurgical decompression to reduce raised intra-cranial pressure.
Q.Define stroke.
Q.What are the types of stroke (cerebrovascular
accident)?
Q.Enumerate the risk factors for stroke.
/square6Stroke or cerebrovascular accident (CVA) is defined
as sudden onset of a neurologic deficit from a
vascular mechanism./square6Stroke is the leading cause of neurologic disability
in adults. It is more common in males and mainlyaffects elderly people. Blacks have almost twice therisk of stroke compared to whites.
Types
/square6Ischemic:  85% of strokes are ischemic.
/square6Hemorrhagic:  15% are hemorrhagic strokes, further
classified as subarachnoid hemorrhage and intra-cerebral hemorrhage.
Risk Factors for Stroke
• Hypertension
• Diabetes• Smoking• Alcohol consumption• Family history of stroke• Obesity• Hyperlipidemia• Trauma (hemorrhagic stroke)• Drug use, especially cocaine and amphetamines• Male sex• Older age• Race or ethnic background (e.g. blacks and Mexican Americans)
Q.Discuss the etiology, risk factors, clinical features,
investigations and management of ischemic stroke.
Etiology
/square6Ischemic stroke is due to sudden occlusion of an
intracranial vessel, with reduction in blood flow to
the brain area supplied by that vessel. Occlusionhappens either due to in situ  thrombosis or embolus
from a distant site.
/square6In situ  thrombosis can happen in a previously
diseased vessel such as atherosclerotic vessels.Rupture of an atherosclerotic plaque or acutedissection of a large vessel (e.g. internal carotidartery, middle cerebral artery) can also lead to acutethrombosis.
/square6Emboli can come from distant sites and occludecerebral vessels. Sources of emboli include heartand other arteries (e.g. the internal carotid andaortic arch).
/square6The causes listed under “cardioembolic and un-common causes” produce stroke in young (<50years) also.
Pathophysiology of Ischemic Stroke
/square6Acute occlusion of an intracranial vessel causesreduction in blood flow to the brain region itsupplies. Reduction of blood supply produces
ischemia or infarction depending on the severity
of reduction of blood flow.
/square6If blood flow is restored before significant amountof cell death, patient may experience only transient
symptoms, i.e. a TIA (transient ischemic attack).

/square6Diseases of Nervous System327
5/square6The infarcted area is surrounded by ischemic area
the function of which is reversible, if blood flow is
restored within a reasonable time. This area is calledischemic penumbra . The ischemic penumbra will
eventually infarct if blood flow is not restored.Saving the ischemic penumbra is the goal ofrevascularization therapies.
/square6Cerebral infarction occurs via two pathways:(1) Cellular necrosis and (2) apoptosis in whichcells become programmed to die.
/square6Cellular necrosis happens due to severe reductionin blood supply which results in failure of mito-chondria to produce ATP. Loss of ATP production
leads to stoppage of membrane ion pumps allowing
calcium to accumulate inside cells and glutamaterelease from synaptic terminals. Excess glutamatealso leads to intracellular calcium accumulation.Excess calcium inside neurons produces freeradicals by membrane degradation and mito-chondrial dysfunction. Free radicals ultimately lead
to death of neuronal cells.
/square6In apoptosis, cells die days to weeks later. It is seen
in ischemic penumbra.
Clinical Features of Ischemic Stroke
/square6Initial symptoms occur suddenly. Generally, they
include numbness, weakness, or paralysis of the
contralateral limbs and the face, inability to speak(aphasia); confusion; visual disturbances in one or
both eyes; dizziness or loss of balance and coordina-
tion; and headache.
/square6Systemic or autonomic disturbances (e.g. hyper-tension, fever) occasionally occur.
/square6History of sudden, severe headache, vomiting,
impaired consciousness or coma suggests intra-
cranial bleed.
/square6Neurologic deficits depend on the vessel blocked
and the area of brain involved (Table 5.14).TABLE 5.13: Causes of ischemic stroke
Common causes Uncommon causes
Thrombosis • Hypercoagulable disorders
• Small vessel thrombosis (lacunar stroke) – Protein C deficiency• Large vessel thrombosis – Protein S deficiency• Dehydration – Antithrombin III deficiency
Embolic occlusion – Antiphospholipid syndrome
• Artery-to-artery – Factor V Leiden mutation
– Carotid disease – Malignancy
– Aortic disease – Sickle cell anemia
• Cardioembolic – Polycythemia vera
– Atrial fibrillation – Essential thrombocytosis– Mural thrombus – Homocysteinemia
– Myocardial infarction – Nephrotic syndrome– Dilated cardiomyopathy • Venous sinous thrombosis– Valvular lesions (mitral stenosis, mechanical valve) • Fibromuscular dysplasia– Infective endocarditis • Vasculitis (PAN, Wegener’s, Takayasu’s, giant cell arteritis,– Paradoxical embolus (ASD, patent foramen ovale) syphilis, tuberculosis)
• Atrial myxoma• Drugs: Cocaine, amphetamine• Moyamoya disease
TABLE 5.14: Clinical features of ischemic stroke
Occluded blood vessel Clinical manifestations
Middle cerebral artery (MCA) Contralateral hemiparesis (worse in the arm and face than in the leg), dysarthria, hemi-
anesthesia, contralateral homonymous hemianopia, aphasia (if the dominant hemisphere
is affected) or apraxia and sensory neglect (if the nondominant hemisphere is affected)
Anterior cerebral artery (ACA) Contralateral hemiparesis (worse in the leg than arm), urinary incontinence, apathy,
confusion, poor judgment, mutism, grasp reflex, gait apraxia
Posterior cerebral artery (PCA) Contralateral homonymous hemianopia, unilateral cortical blindness, memory impairment,
unilateral 3rd cranial nerve palsy, hemiballismus
Internal carotid artery Ipsilateral blindness (variable) and features of MCA territory stroke on the opposite side
Vertebrobasilar system Unilateral or bilateral cranial nerve deficits (producing nystagmus, vertigo, dysphagia,
dysarthria, diplopia, blindness), truncal or limb ataxia, spastic paresis, crossed sensoryand motor deficits, impaired consciousness, coma, death (if basilar artery occlusion is
complete), tachycardia, labile BP

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5328 Investigations
CT Scan Head
/square6Plain CT head is the imaging modality of choice in
acute stroke because it can be done fast and iswidely available. An infarct appears as hypointensearea. However, infarct may not be visible for 24–48hours in CT scan. Brainstem lesions may not bevisible properly on CT scan.
/square6CT scan can also exclude hemorrhage, and otherpathologies like neoplasms, abscesses, and condi-tions that mimic stroke.
/square6Contrast—CT is more useful in subacute infarctsand can also visualize venous structures.
MRI Brain
/square6MRI is less sensitive in excluding hemorrhage thanCT. It is also more expensive and time consuming,
not widely available, and limited by claustrophobia.
Because of all these reasons, MRI is not preferredin the acute evaluation of stroke.
/square6However, MRI is more sensitive than CT in picking
up infarction in all areas of the brain, including
cortex and brainstem.
/square6It is more sensitive in picking up early braininfarction than CT scan.
CT-angiogram and MR-angiogram
/square6Can be done to identify the exact location of vessel
block.
Carotid and vertebral artery Doppler
/square6Useful to identify diseases of the carotid and
vertebral arteries.
ECG and echocardiogram
/square6To rule out any heart problem.
Blood tests
/square6Blood sugar, urea, creatinine, electrolytes, hemoglobin,
cell count, coagulation parameters, lipid profile,toxicology screen (if toxin or overdose suspected).
Treatment
Initial Management
/square6Assess ABCs (airway, breathing, circulation).
/square6Secure airway.
/square6Monitor oxygenation.
/square6Provide ventilatory support if required.
Antithrombotic Treatment
/square6Antiplatelet agent, aspirin should be given as soonas the diagnosis of ischemic stroke is confirmed. Aloading dose of aspirin 325 mg should be givenfollowed by 150 mg daily life long. Aspirin preventsthe extension of clot and also reduces the chances
of recurrent stroke (secondary prevention).
However, withhold these agents before and for24 hours after thrombolytic therapy./square6If patients have had a TIA or minor stroke,clopidogrel plus aspirin (dual antiplatelet therapy)given within 24 hours of symptom onset andcontinued for 21 days appears more effective thanaspirin alone for reducing risk of subsequent majorstroke in the first 90 days and does not increase risk
of hemorrhage. However, prolonged (e.g. >3
months) use of clopidogrel plus aspirin is avoidedbecause it has no advantage over aspirin alone inlong-term secondary stroke prevention and resultsin more bleeding complications.
Anticoagulation
/square6They are not useful in atherothrombotic cerebralischemia. However, they are indicated in cardio-
embolic stroke (e.g. in atrial fibrillation) and stroke
caused by cerebral venous thrombosis. Heparin orlow-molecular-weight heparin can be given sub-cutaneously and later changed to oral anticoagulanttherapy with warfarin.
Intravenous Thrombolysis
/square6Recombinant tPA (tissue plasminogen activator)has been shown to improve the outcome if given
within 3 hours after the onset of stroke. There is a
slightly increased risk of intracranial bleed espe-cially if given after 3 hours. tPA is contraindicatedin the presence of high BP (>185/110), recent majorsurgery, prior stroke or head injury within 3 monthsand gastrointestinal bleeding in preceding 3 weeks.
Mechanical Thrombectomy
/square6These techniques include intra-arterial thrombo-
lysis and endovascular thrombectomy. They can
be used in ischemic stroke due to large-vesselocclusions such as middle cerebral artery (MCA),internal carotid artery, and the basilar artery.Mechanical thrombectomy is recommended withinthe time frame of 6 to 16 hours after the stroke onset.
Statins
/square6High-intensity statins (atorvastatin 80 mg daily or
rosuvastatin 20 mg daily) are recommended for
patients who have clinical atherosclerotic cardio-vascular disease. In addition, patients may becontinued on statins if they were on them prior tothe ischemic stroke. Statins should be continuedlifelong to prevent stroke recurrence.
Supportive Measures
/square6Prevent infections (pneumonia, urinary tract, andskin) and deep venous thrombosis (DVT).
/square6Fever is detrimental and should be treated withantipyretics and surface cooling.
/square6Blood glucose should be monitored and kept at<110 mg/dL.

/square6Diseases of Nervous System329
5/square6Patients may develop cerebral edema which causes
obtundation or brain herniation. Edema peaks onthe second or third day. It is likely to develop inlarge infarcts. It should be reduced by IV mannitoland head end elevation.
Rehabilitation
/square6Rehabilitation services improve neurologic out-comes. Proper rehabilitation of the stroke patient
includes early physical, occupational, and speech
therapy. The goal of rehabilitation is to return thepatient to home and to maximize recovery byproviding a safe, progressive regimen suited to theindividual patient.
Q.Lacunar infarcts (lacunar stroke).
/square6Lacunar infarcts are small (<15 mm in diameter)
subcortical infarcts caused by occlusion of small
penetrating branches that supply deep subcorticalstructures.
/square6These branches arise at acute angles from the largearteries of the circle of Willis, stem of the middlecerebral artery (MCA), or the basilar artery.
Etiology
/square6Lipohyalinosis.
/square6Microatheroma.
/square6Small emboli.
Risk Factors
/square6Hypertension
/square6· Diabetes mellitus
/square6Smoking
/square6Hyperhomocysteinemia
/square6Genetic factors.
Clinical Features
There are 5 important lacunar stroke syndromes.
1. Pure motor hemiparesis2. Pure sensory stroke3. Ataxic hemiparesis4. Sensorimotor stroke5. Dysarthria-clumsy hand syndrome.
Pure Motor Hemiparesis
/square6This is the most frequent lacunar stroke syndrome.
It is characterized by hemiparesis without anycortical signs (aphasia, agnosia, apraxia, etc.) or
sensory deficit. Sometimes weakness may affect
only the arm or leg.
/square6The site of lesion is posterior limb of internalcapsule (carries corticospinal and corticobulbartracts) or basis pontis.Pure Sensory Stroke
/square6Pure sensory stroke is defined as numbness of oneside of the body in the absence of motor deficit orcortical signs.
/square6The site of lesion is thalamus.
Ataxic Hemiparesis
/square6These patients present with unilateral limb ataxiaand weakness. Patients may also exhibit other
ipsilateral cerebellar signs such as dysarthria,
dysmetria, and nystagmus.
/square6The site of lesion is posterior limb of internalcapsule, or basis pontis.
Sensorimotor Stroke
/square6This is characterized by both weakness and numb-ness on one side of the body in the absence ofcortical signs.
/square6The site of lesion is posterolateral thalamus andposterior limb of the internal capsule.
Dysarthria-clumsy Hand Syndrome
/square6This is the least common of all lacunar syndromes.
/square6This is characterized by facial weakness, dysarthria,dysphagia, and weakness and clumsiness ofone hand. There are no sensory deficits or corticalsigns.
/square6The site of lesion is contralateral pons or internalcapsule.
Investigations
/square6CT scan—less sensitive in picking up lacunar
infarcts.
/square6MRI scan—more sensitive than CT scan.
/square6CT-angiography or MR-angiography to rule out
major artery block.
Treatment
/square6Thrombolytic therapy: Intravenous recombinant
tissue-type plasminogen activator or rt-PA if the
patient presents within 3 hours.
/square6Dual antiplatelet therapy (aspirin plus clopidogrel)for 3 weeks followed by single antiplatelet (aspirin,75–300 mg daily) lifelong to prevent strokerecurrence.
/square6Treatment of underlying risk factors such as hyper-tension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, etc.
Q.Draw a diagram of circle of Willis and label the
various arterial branches.
/square6Circle of Willis is formed by the anastomosis
between two internal carotid arteries and twovertebral arteries. This extensive anastomosis helpsin maintaining the blood supply to brain even when
a major feeding vessel gets blocked.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5330
/square6Aneurysms can occur in the circle of Willis
especially at the branching points. Most of theaneurysms occur in the anterior circulation of circle
of Willis.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of subarachnoid hemorrhage.
/square6Subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH)  is bleeding into
the subarachnoid space.
Etiology
• Rupture of saccular aneurysms (most common cause)
• Trauma
• Arteriovenous malformations/fistulae
• Vasculitis
• Intracranial arterial dissections
• Amyloid angiopathy
• Bleeding diatheses
• Illicit drugs used (cocaine and amphetamines)
• Unknown cause
Risk Factors
/square6Cigarette smoking
/square6Hypertension
/square6Alcohol
/square6Family history
/square6Phenylpropanolamine (used in cold remedies,
increases the risk of hemorrhagic stroke)
/square6Estrogen deficiency (this may be the cause of
increased risk of SAH in postmenopausal women)
/square6Anticoagulant use.Clinical Features
/square6Symptoms of SAH begin abruptly.
/square6Main symptom is a sudden, severe headache(thunderclap headache) classically described asthe “worst headache of my life.” Headacheis usually diffuse. Some patients have warningheadaches preceding major hemorrhage for manydays.
/square6Headache may be associated with brief loss ofconsciousness, seizure, nausea, and vomiting.
/square6Examination reveals variable level of consciousness,neck stiffness and Kernig’s sign. Subhyaloidhemorrhage is seen on fundoscopy occasionally.
/square6Blood in the subarachnoid space causes a chemical
meningitis which increases intracranial pressure
lasting few days to few weeks. Secondary vaso-spasm may cause focal brain ischemia and stroke.
Investigations
CT Scan Head
/square6Plain CT head is the cornerstone of SAH diagnosis.
Clot is demonstrated in the subarachnoid space in
most cases if the scan is done within 24 hours ofthe bleed. There may be intracerebral and intra-ventricular extension of blood in some cases. Thesensitivity of CT for detecting SAH is highest inthe first 12 hours after SAH (nearly 100%) and then
decreases over time. Minor bleed may not be picked
up on CT scan.
Lumbar Puncture
/square6Lumbar puncture should be done in all cases ifthere is a strong suspicion of SAH despite anormal CT scan. The classic findings are an elevatedopening pressure and a uniformly blood stained CSF.
/square6Blood can be present in CSF due to traumatic tapand it should be differentiated from SAH. Clearingof blood (a declining RBC count with successive
collection tubes) suggests traumatic tap. If the last
tube is normal, it reliably excludes SAH.
/square6Xanthochromia (pink or yellow tint) representshemoglobin degradation products. Xanthochromiain CSF is highly suggestive of SAH because bloodhas to be present in CSF for a few hours for it to occur.
Angiogram
/square6It helps to identify the nature and location of lesionthat causes SAH such as AV malformations andaneurysms. It also gives necessary details for neuro-
surgeon to ligate the aneurysm.
CT or MR Angiography
/square6This is a noninvasive way of imaging cerebrovas-
cular anatomy. Hence, it has replaced conventionalangiogram as the initial diagnostic test of choice.
Figure 5.11 Circle of Willis

/square6Diseases of Nervous System331
5Treatment
General Measures
/square6Admit the patient in intensive care unit.
/square6Bedrest, stool softeners, adequate analgesia to
diminish hemodynamic fluctuations.
/square6Deep venous thrombosis (DVT) prophylaxis withpneumatic compression stockings.
/square6Discontinue all anticoagulants and antiplatelet
agents if the patient is taking any. Anticoagulant
effect should be reversed immediately with vitaminK and fresh frozen plasma.
Reduction of Intracranial Pressure (ICP)
/square6Head end elevation.
/square6Mannitol 20%, 100 ml IV every 6th to 8th hourly.
/square6Loop diuretics (e.g. furosemide) also can decreaseICP.
/square6Use of intravenous steroids (e.g. dexamethasone)for decreasing ICP is controversial.
Reduction of Blood Pressure
/square6If BP is high, it should be lowered by using labetalolinfusion. Vasodilators such as nitroprusside or nitro-glycerin should be avoided because they increasecerebral blood volume and, therefore, increase intra-cranial pressure.
Prevention of Vasospasm
/square6Nimodipine 60 mg every four hours by mouth or
nasogastric tube.
Seizure Prophylaxis
/square6Antiepileptic drugs (phenytoin, sodium valproate)
should be given to prevent seizures. Long-termseizure prophylaxis is not required.
Treatment of Aneurysms and AV Malformations
/square6Placement of a clip across the neck of the aneurysmremains the treatment of choice for most aneurysms.Endovascular techniques with coil placement arebecoming popular for obliteration of aneurysms
and AV malformations.
Complications
/square6Rebleeding is the most dreaded complication of
SAH. It usually occurs within the first 24 hours.
/square6Vasospasm (presence of blood in the subarachnoid
space causes smooth muscle contraction and vaso-
spasm. Vasospasm can lead to brain ischemia andinfarction).
/square6Hydrocephalus can occur due to obstruction of freeCSF flow by the presence of blood in the sub-arachnoid space.Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of intracerebral hemorrhage.
/square6Intracerebral hemorrhage refers to bleeding within
the brain parenchyma. This is the most common type
of intracranial hemorrhage. Symptoms are due tomass effect of bleeding and associated edema.
Epidemiology
/square6Intracerebral hemorrhage is common in old age.
However, it can also occur in young people due torupture of arteriovenous malformation. It is more
common in men. Incidence is high in Asians and
African Americans.
Etiology
/square6Head injury.
/square6AV malformation or aneurysm rupture.
/square6Cavernous angioma.
/square6Capillary telangiectasias.
/square6Hypertension (usually causes hemorrhage into the
putamen).
/square6Large infarct (bleeding can occur into the infarct).
/square6Cortical venous sinus thrombosis (can causehemorrhagic infarct).
/square6Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (occurs in elderly).
/square6Drugs (cocaine, amphetamine, phenylpropranol-amine).
/square6Anticoagulant therapy.
/square6Brain tumor (hemorrhage can occur into a tumor).
/square6Vasculitis (polyarteritis nodosa or SLE).
/square6Sepsis (may cause small petechial hemorrhages inthe brain).
/square6Moyamoya disease (it is an occlusive arterial
disease which can occasionally cause intracerebral
hemorrhage).
/square6Coagulopathy.
Risk Factors
/square6Alcohol consumption
/square6Aging
/square6Diabetes mellitus
Clinical Features
/square6Patients present with sudden onset of headache, focalneurologic deficits, and impaired consciousness.
Headache, vomiting, and impaired consciousness
occur due to increased intracranial pressure. Some
patients may present in coma.
/square6Intracerebral hemorrhages especially hypertensive
hemorrhages occur when the patient is active.
/square6Seizures occur in some patients and are more
common in lobar hemorrhages involving cerebral
cortex (due to irritation of the cortex).
/square6Patients may complain of a stiff neck and havemeningismus on physical examination, if there is
extension to ventricles and subarachnoid space.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5332 /square6Neurologic symptoms and signs vary depending
upon the location of the hemorrhage and usuallyincrease gradually over minutes or a few hours.
/square6Putaminal hemorrhage causes hemiplegia, hemi-sensory loss, homonymous hemianopia, gaze palsy,
stupor, and coma.
/square6Cerebellar hemorrhage causes an inability to walk
due to imbalance, vomiting, headache (which isusually occipital), neck stiffness, gaze palsy, andfacial weakness. There is no hemiparesis. Patient
may slip into coma due to brainstem compression.
/square6Thalamic hemorrhage produces hemiparesis,
hemisensory loss, and occasionally transienthomonymous hemianopsia.
/square6Lobar hemorrhage produces unilateral hemiparesisand hemisensory deficits. Speech impairment canoccur if dominant hemisphere is involved. Occipitalhemorrhages present with contralateral homo-nymous hemianopia.
/square6Pontine hemorrhage produces deep coma due todisruption of the reticular activating system. Thereis total paralysis. Pupils are pinpoint and react to astrong light source.
Differential Diagnosis
/square6Ischemic stroke
/square6Seizure
/square6Migraine
/square6Subarachnoid hemorrhage
/square6Metabolic encephalopathy.
Investigations
CT Scan Head
/square6Plain CT head is the investigation of choice todiagnose intracerebral hemorrhage. CT can provideinformation about the size and location of the hema-toma, extension into the ventricular system, thepresence of surrounding edema, and shifts in brain
contents (herniation). Hyperacute blood will appear
hyperdense (white appearance). Over weeks, it willappear isodense and later becomes hypodense.
MRI Head
/square6MRI and CT are equivalent for the detection of acuteICH, but MRI is more accurate for the detection of
chronic ICH.
Other Tests
/square6Routine tests such as blood sugar, urea, creatinine,
electrolytes, lipid profile and complete hemogramshould be obtained.
Management
/square6Admit the patient in ICU for continuous neuro-logical and hemodynamic monitoring.
/square6All anticoagulant and antiplatelet drugs should bediscontinued for at least one to two weeks after theonset of hemorrhage and any anticoagulant effect
should be reversed immediately with appropriateagents.
/square6Blood pressure control:  BP is often elevated in patients
with ICH and in hypertensive hemorrhage. BP
should be controlled with intravenous nitroprusside,nicardipine, or labetalol. The goal is to maintain thesystolic pressure between 140 and 160 mmHg. BPless than this may compromise cerebral perfusion.
/square6Surgery:  Surgical evacuation is indicated for all
cerebellar hemorrhages greater than 3 cm indiameter since there is a high risk of brainstemcompression and obstructive hydrocephalus.Surgical evacuation is also indicated in lobar
hematoma if there is gradual deterioration of
neurological deficits.
/square6Managing raised ICP
– Hyperventilation
– Mannitol
– Inj frusemide 20 mg IV Q 6th hourly
– Elevation of head of bed.
/square6Prevention of seizures:  Inj phenytoin 15 mg/kg body
weight loading dose given as IV infusion over30 mins, then 100 mg every 8th hourly
/square6Hemostatic therapy:  If the patient presents within
3 hours of onset, treatment with activated recombi-nant factor VIIa (rFVIIa) may stop the ongoinghemorrhage and hematoma enlargement. FactorVIIa promotes hemostasis at sites of vascular injury.
/square6General measures:  Take care of ABCs (airway, breath-
ing circulation), DVT prophylaxis, nutrition (RTfeeds, IV fluids)
Q.Causes of hemiplegia in an elderly male.
/square6Hemiplegia is paralysis of one side of the body.
TABLE 5.15: Causes of hemiplegia
Acute onset
• Stroke (ischemic, hemorrhagic)
• Trauma
Subacute onset
• Cerebral metastases• Subdural hematoma• Granulomas (tubercular, fungal)• Brain abscess
• Cortical vein thrombosis
Chronic
• Slowly growing neoplasms
Q.What is stroke in young? Enumerate the causes of
stroke in young.
/square6Stroke in young refers to stroke occurring in indivi-
duals of less than 45 years.
/square6The underlying cause of stroke in young should beidentified and treated. Treatment is same as thosein elderly.

/square6Diseases of Nervous System333
5Q.Transient ischemic attack (TIA)
/square6Transient ischemic attack (TIA) is focal brain
ischemia that causes sudden, transient neurologicdeficit and is not accompanied by permanent brain
infarction.
/square6The symptoms of TIA usually last less than one
hour. Deficits that resolve spontaneously between1 and 24 h are often accompanied by infarction and
are thus no longer considered TIAs.
/square6TIAs increase the risk of subsequent stroke. TIA can
be considered as a serious warning for animpending ischemic stroke; the risk is highest in
the first 48 hours following a TIA.Causes of TIA
Risk factors for TIA are the same as those for ischemic
stroke. Modifiable risk factors include the following:
/square6Hypertension
/square6Cigarette smoking
/square6Dyslipidemia
/square6Diabetes
/square6Obesity
/square6Lack of physical activity
/square6High-risk diet (e.g. high in saturated fats, trans fats,and calories)
/square6Heart disorders (particularly disorders thatpredispose to emboli, such as acute MI, infectiveendocarditis, and atrial fibrillation)
/square6Drugs (e.g. cocaine, amphetamines)
/square6Hypercoagulable states
/square6Vasculitis
/square6Alcoholism
Unmodifiable risk factors include the following:
/square6Prior stroke
/square6Old age
/square6Family history of stroke
/square6Male sex.
Clinical Features
/square6Neurologic deficits are similar to those of stroke.
Symptoms and signs depend on the blood vesseland the brain area that is involved.
/square6Features of anterior circulation TIA (carotid system)include amaurosis fugax (transient monocularblindness due to ophthalmic artery involvement),
aphasia, hemiparesis, hemisensory loss, and
hemianopic visual loss.
/square6Features of posterior circulation TIA (vertebro-
basilar system) include diplopia, vertigo, vomiting,
dysarthria, ataxia, transient global amnesia, andloss of consciousness.
Differential Diagnosis
/square6TIAs must be distinguished from other causeswhich cause transient neurological dysfunctionsuch as following.
– Stroke (both ischemic and hemorrhagic).
– Post ictal (Todd) paralysis following an attack
of epilepsy.
– Hypoglycemia.
– Migraine aura.
Investigations
/square6MRI or CT head to rule out any intracranial
pathology.
/square6Carotid and vertebral artery Doppler to rule out
stenosis.
/square6MR angiography.TABLE 5.16: Causes of stroke in young
Hypercoagulable disorders
• Protein C deficiency• Protein S deficiency
• Antithrombin III deficiency
• Antiphospholipid antibody (APLA) syndrome• Factor V Leiden mutation
• Systemic malignancy
• Sickle cell anemia•β-thalassemia
• Polycythemia vera
• Homocysteinemia• Oral contraceptives
• Dysproteinemias
• Nephrotic syndrome• Dehydration
Connective tissue diseases
• Systemic vasculitis (PAN, Wegner’s, Takayasu’s, giant cell
arteritis)
• Systemic lupus erythematosus
• Inflammatory bowel disease
Infections
• Syphilis
• Meningitis• Tuberculosis
• HIV
Drug abuse
• Cocaine, amphetamine
Cardiac disorders (cardioembolic)
• Atrial fibrillation• Atrial myxoma
• Intracardiac tumor
• Infective endocarditis• Libman-Sacks endocarditis
• Myocardial infarction (mural thrombus)
• Dilated cardiomyopathy• Paradoxical embolism (atrial septal defect, patent foramen
ovale)
• Valvular heart diseases (MS, MR, AS, AR)
CNS lesions
• AV malformations
• Aneurysms• Neoplasms
Bleeding diathesis
• Thrombocytopenia• Hemophilia
• Liver failure

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5334 /square6ECG and echocardiogram to rule out cardiac
problems.
/square624-hour ECG monitoring (Holter monitoring) torule out transient arrhythmias.
/square6Other routine tests (blood sugar, lipid profile, CBC,ESR, electrolytes, urea, creatinine).
Treatment
/square6The main aim of treatment of TIA is to decrease therisk of subsequent stroke or TIA. Early treatment aftera TIA can significantly reduce the risk of early stroke.
Antiplatelet agents
/square6Give a loading dose of aspirin (300 mg) immedia-
tely, followed by aspirin (75 mg daily) lifelong. Thiswill reduce the risk of subsequent stroke. Dual anti-
platelet therapy with both aspirin and clopidogrel
for the first 4 weeks followed by single antiplatelettherapy (aspirin) lifelong is more effective in
preventing subsequent stroke).
Statins
/square6Statins (such as atorvastatin and rosuvastatin) along
with antiplatelet agents reduce the risk of subsequentstroke.
Anticoagulants
/square6Heparin and warfarin should be given in embolic
TIA such as atrial fibrillation.
Surgical approaches
/square6Internal carotid endarterectomy is recommended if
internal carotid artery stenosis greater than 70%.
/square6Percutaneous transluminal angioplasty (stenting)is an alternative procedure.
Treatment of risk factors
/square6Diabetes, hypertension, dyslipidemia, etc. should
be treated. Smoking should be stopped.
Q.Clinical differentiation among hemorrhagic, thrombotic and embolic stroke.
TABLE 5.17: Differentiation among hemorrhagic, thrombotic and embolic stroke
Feature Hemorrhagic Thrombotic Embolic
• Time of onset During activity In sleep Any time
• Progression Over minutes and hours Over hours Within seconds
• Headache Present Usually absent Usually absent
• Vomiting Present Absent Absent• Seizures Usually present Unusual Unusual
• Early resolution Unusual Variable Possible
• Presence of known bleeding May be present Absent Absent
disorder or on anticoagulation
• Signs of meningeal irritation May be present Absent Absent
• Severe hypertension Usually present May or may not be present May or may not be present• Carotid bruit Does not support the diagnosis Supports the diagnosis Supports the diagnosis
• Cardiac disease (valvular heart Does not support the diagnosis Does not support the diagnosis Highly supportive
disease, atrial fibrillation, etc.)
Q.Amaurosis fugax.
/square6Amaurosis fugax (from the Greek “amaurosis,”
meaning dark, and the Latin “fugax,” meaningfleeting) refers to a transient loss of vision in oneor both eyes. Amaurosis fugax is due to occlusionor stenosis of the internal carotid artery circula-
tion.
/square6Patients with amaurosis fugax are at risk of
stroke, myocardial infarction and vision loss. Hencethe underlying cause should be identified and
treated.
Etiology
/square6Retinal artery emboli (carotid artery disease, cardiac
emboli).
/square6Hypoperfusion.
/square6Retinal vasospasm.
/square6Elevated plasma viscosity, for example, withleukemia, multiple myeloma.
/square6Atherosclerotic cerebrovascular disease.Differential Diagnosis
Amaurosis fugax should be differentiated from other
causes of transient visual loss which are as follows.
/square6Retinal vein occlusion
/square6Migraine headache
/square6Optic neuropathy
/square6Papilledema
/square6Optic nerve compression
/square6Migraine
/square6Seizure.
Investigations
/square6Tests to rule out vascular risk factors such as
diabetes, hypertension, dyslipidemia.
/square6Ophthalmologic evaluation.
/square6ESR and C-reactive protein to exclude giant cellarteritis (GCA).
/square6Carotid Doppler.
/square6MR angiogram to r/o carotid artery dissection.

/square6Diseases of Nervous System335
5/square6ECG and echocardiogram to rule out cardiac
disease.
/square6EEG if seizures are suspected.
/square6Hypercoagulable testing in patients prior throm-bosis, miscarriage, or family history.
/square6Complete blood count to screen for polycythemia
vera and essential thrombocythemia.
/square6CT or MRI brain to rule out other causes of vision
loss.
Management
/square6Treatment of underlying vascular risk factors, suchas hypertension, diabetes, and dyslipidemia.
/square6Treatment of any other underlying cause.
Q.Wallenberg’s syndrome (lateral medullary syndrome).
/square6Wallenberg’s syndrome (lateral medullary syndrome)
is due to lateral medullary infarction. It can happendue to occlusion of any of five vessels—vertebral,
posterior inferior cerebellar, superior, middle, or
inferior lateral medullary arteries.
Signs and Symptoms/square6Loss of taste:  Due to involvement of nucleus and
tractus solitaries.
/square6Numbness of ipsilateral arm, trunk, or leg:  Due to
involvement of cuneate and gracile nuclei.
On the opposite side of lesion
/square6Impaired pain and temperature sensation over half the
body, sometimes face : Due to involvement of spino-
thalamic tract).
Investigations
/square6CT or MRI of the brain:  CT scan can be done within
a short time and useful in emergencies. However,significant artifacts can occur due to the bony struc-tures surrounding the brainstem and cerebellum.Brainstem lesions are better identified by MRI scan
due to the absence of these artifacts.
/square6Other routine tests:  Complete blood count, blood
sugar, renal and liver function tests, lipid profile
and serum electrolytes.
Treatment
/square6Admit the patient to ICU.
/square6Since the patients have dysphagia and are at highrisk of aspiration, pass a Ryle’s tube and performendotracheal intubation. Patient should be fedthrough Ryle’s tube to avoid aspiration until thereis improvement of lower cranial nerve function.
/square6Antiplatelets and statins:  Since infarction is the
commonest cause of lateral medullary syndrome,antiplatelets such as aspirin plus statins such as
atorvastatin should be given lifelong.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of acute viral encephalitis.
/square6Encephalitis means inflammation of brain paren-
chyma, usually due to viral infection. Encephalitiscan also be caused by bacteria, fungi, protozoa and
helminthes.
/square6If both brain and spinal cord are involved, it isreferred to as encephalomyelitis.
/square6Brain inflammation can be associated with menin-gitis and is known as meningoencephalitis.
Etiology of Viral Encephalitis
• Herpes simplex
• ECHO viruses• Coxsackie• Mumps• Epstein-Barr virus• Influenza virus• Japanese encephalitis virus• West Nile virus• Rabies• HIVOn the side of lesion
/square6Pain, numbness, impaired sensation over half the face:
Due to involvement of the spinal nucleus of 5thnerve and the descending spinal tract of 5th nerve.
/square6Ataxia of limbs, falling to side of lesion : Due to involve-
ment of inferior cerebellar peduncle, cerebellarhemisphere, cerebellar fibers, spinocerebellar tract.
/square6Nystagmus, diplopia, oscillopsia, vertigo, nausea,
vomiting : Due to involvement of vestibular nucleus.
/square6Horner’s syndrome (miosis, ptosis, decreased sweating):
Due to involvement of descending sympathetic tract.
/square6Dysphagia, hoarseness, paralysis of palate, paralysis ofvocal cord, diminished gag reflex:  Due to involvement
of nucleus ambiguous, ninth and tenth cranial nerves.
/square6Hiccoughs:  Exact cause unknown, but probably due
to the involvement of nucleus ambigus or adjacentareas regulating respiration.Figure 5.12 Lateral medullary syndrome


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5336 /square6Common viruses causing encephalitis are herpes
simplex, ECHO, coxsackie, mumps and Epstein-Barr viruses. Herpes simplex encephalitis is themost common etiology.
/square6Most of the time viral etiology cannot be confirmed
and diagnosis is based on clinical features.
/square6Viral encephalitis can occur in epidemic and
endemic forms in many places. Examples areJapanese encephalitis in South East Asia, Californiaencephalitis in USA, West Nile encephalitis in Egypt
and Sudan, etc.
/square6Rabies is a variety of sporadic viral encephalitis.
Clinical Features
/square6Symptoms include fever, headache, and altered
mental status, often accompanied by seizures andfocal neurologic deficits.
/square6Symptoms and signs of meningeal irritation
(photophobia and neck stiffness) are usually absent
in encephalitis but may be present in meningo-encephalitis.
/square6Status epilepticus, particularly convulsive statusepilepticus, or coma suggests severe brain inflamma-
tion and a poor prognosis
/square6Specific clinical findings may sometimes suggest the
causative virus:  Parotitis suggests the mumps; flaccid
paralysis suggests West Nile virus infection; find-ings of hydrophobia, aerophobia, and hyperactivity
suggest rabies virus; grouped vesicles in a derma-
tomal pattern suggest varicella-zoster virus.
Differential Diagnosis
Encephalitis should be differentiated from othercauses of altered sensorium which are as follows:
/square6Meningitis with cerebral edema
/square6Cerebral venous thrombosis
/square6Cerebral abscess
/square6Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM)
/square6Cerebral malaria
/square6Delirium
/square6Septicemia
Investigations
/square6CT and MRI scan may show areas of cerebraledema, often in the temporal lobes.
/square6EEG often shows characteristic slow waves.
/square6CSF shows a raised cell count with predominantlymphocytes. CSF sugar is normal and protein ismildly elevated. PCR for herpes simplex and otherviral serology (blood + CSF) is helpful to identifythe virus.
/square6Brain biopsy is occasionally performed especiallyin case of rabies encephalitis.
Treatment
/square6If herpes simplex encephalitis is suspected, it shouldbe treated immediately with intravenous aciclovir(10 mg/kg IV Q 8 h). There is no specific treatment
for other viral encephalitis.
/square6Supportive treatment involves anticonvulsants,antiedema measures, bedsore prevention, attention
to nutrition through Ryle’s tube, IV hydration and
Foley’s catheterization, etc.
/square6Prophylactic immunization against Japaneseencephalitis is advised for travellers to endemic
areas in Asia.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of brain abscess.
/square6Brain abscess is a focal collection of pus within the
brain parenchyma. It behaves as a space occupyinglesion.
Etiology
Bacteria (most common cause)
• Streptococcus•Bacteroides species
• Staphylococci (after trauma or neurosurgery)• Listeria
Fungi
• Actinomyces• Nocardia• Candida• Aspergillus•Coccidioides immitis
In HIV infected patients
• Toxoplasmosis•Cryptococcus neoformans
Pathogenesis
/square6Bacteria can invade the brain either by direct
spread, trauma, neurosurgery or hematogenousspread.
/square6Direct spread:  Organisms come from a contiguous
site such as otitis media, mastoiditis, sinusitis anddental infections.
/square6Trauma:  Bullet wounds to the brain can carry
bacteria into the brain. Skull fractures can also
expose the brain tissue to infections.
/square6Neurosurgery:  Brain abscess can also complicate
neurosurgical procedures.
/square6Hematogenous spread:  Bacteria can reach brain
through blood from other sources of infection suchas lung abscess, empyema, skin infections, pelvicinfection, intra-abdominal infection and bacterialendocarditis. Brain abscesses associated with
bacteremia usually result in multiple abscesses.
Clinical Features
/square6Fever and headache is the most common presenta-
tion. Since abscess is a space occupying lesion, itcauses symptoms of raised intracranial pressure
such as headache, vomiting, and altered sensorium.

/square6Diseases of Nervous System337
5Headache is localized to the side of the abscess and
severe. Focal signs (e.g. hemiparesis, aphasia,hemianopia) and seizures occur depending on thelocation of the abscess.
/square6Third and sixth cranial nerve deficits may developdue to raised intracranial pressure.
/square6Papilledema is a late manifestation of cerebraledema and usually takes several days to develop.
Differential Diagnosis
/square6Epidural and subdural empyema.
/square6Septic dural sinus thrombosis.
/square6Mycotic cerebral aneurysms.
/square6Septic cerebral emboli with associated infarction.
/square6Focal necrotizing encephalitis.
/square6Neoplasms.
/square6Pyogenic meningitis.
Investigations
/square6CT head with contrast or MRI scan shows the ring
enhancing abscess.
/square6Lumbar puncture is better avoided as there is risk
of herniation due to raised ICP.
/square6Aspiration with stereotactic guidance allows theinfective organism to be identified.
/square6Serology:  Anti-toxoplasma IgG antibody in blood
and anticysticercal antibodies on CSF specimens,
can aid in the diagnosis of Toxoplasma gondii  or
neurocysticercosis.
Management
/square6Treatment of brain abscess usually requires acombination of antibiotics and surgical drainage.
/square6Streptococcal and anaerobic infections are treated withintravenous cephalosporins plus metronidazole.
/square6Staphylococcal infections should be treated withflucloxacillin or vancomycin. Other bacteria are
treated appropriately.
/square6Duration of antibiotic therapy is usually 6–8 weeks.
/square6Glucocorticoids (dexamethasone) should be used
when there is significant brain edema causing masseffect and altered mental status.
/square6Antiepileptics may be required to prevent seizures.
/square6Surgical decompression may be necessary ifparenteral antibiotics are unsuccessful.
Q.Neurocysticercosis.
Etiology
/square6Neurocysticercosis is the result of accidental inges-
tion of eggs of Taenia solium  (i.e. pork tapeworm),
through contaminated food. Man is the definitive
host and pig is the intermediate host.
/square6When man ingests eggs, they develop into larvalcysts called oncospheres, which invade the intestine
and are carried by the blood to various organsincluding brain. In the brain, they remain as cysts
for many years which is called neurocysticercosis.
Clinical Features
/square6Common presentation is seizures. Other symptomsinclude headache, vomiting, focal neurologicalsigns, and raised intracranial pressure.
/square6Symptoms are due to mass effect, an inflammatoryresponse, or obstruction of the foramina and ventri-cular system of the brain.
Investigations
/square6CT scan or MRI scan:  Can identify cysts. MRI is more
sensitive than CT scan.
/square6Serological studies:  Detection of antigen or antibodies
to cysticerci can support the diagnosis of neuro-
cysticercosis.
Treatment
/square6Asymptomatic neurocysticercosis  need not be treated
as treating them may lead to more inflammationand onset of symptoms.
/square6Symptomatic neurocysticercosis  should be treated
with albendazole or praziquantel. Dose of albenda-zole is 15 mg/kg per day (usually 800 mg/day) intwo divided doses for 15 days. Corticosteroids areusually recommended (30 to 40 mg prednisolone
or 12 to 16 mg dexamethasone daily in divided
doses) for patients during antihelminthic therapy.Anticonvulsants are indicated to prevent seizures.
/square6Neurosurgery to removal of cysts is indicated in
case of cysts producing mass effect and cysts
present in 4th ventricle producing hydrocephalus.
Q.Discuss the classification, etiology, clinical features,
investigations and management of epilepsy.
Or
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of grand mal epilepsy (GTCS
= generalized tonic clonic seizures).
/square6A seizure  is a transient disturbance of cerebral
function due to an abnormal paroxysmal neuronaldischarge in the brain.
/square6Epilepsy  is defined as a neurological condition
characterized by recurrent epileptic seizures
unprovoked by any immediately identifiable cause.Traditionally, the diagnosis of epilepsy requiresthe occurrence of at least 2 unprovoked seizures.Unprovoked seizure means seizure which is notdue to any reversible transient cause such as hypo-
glycemia and electrolyte imbalance.
/square6Note that in a known epileptic even though the
seizures are unprovoked, seizures can also beprovoked by transient causes such as hypoglycemia
and electrolyte disturbances.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5338 /square6Convulsion is widespread, forceful, and repetitive
contraction of the body musculature which usuallyaccompanies seizure. But convulsion can occur dueto other reasons also.
/square6Epilepsy is common and its prevalence is about4 to 8%.
Etiology
/square6The etiology  of epilepsy is usually multifactorial.
Both hereditary and environmental factors play a
role.
/square6Following are the common causes of seizures someof which lead to epilepsy.
• Idiopathic (commonest cause of epilepsy)
• Birth trauma• Cerebral anoxia• Developmental abnormalities (e.g. microcephaly, poren-
cephaly)
• Metabolic abnormalities (e.g. hypocalcemia, hypoglycemia,
hypomagnesemia, hyponatremia, uremia, hepatic encephalo-
pathy, phenylketonuria)
• Infections (meningitis, tuberculosis, congenital syphilis,
parasitic infestations)
• Toxins (heavy metals like lead; carbon monoxide poisoning)·
Congenital abnormalities (hydrocephalus)
• Head injury• Neoplasm• Cerebrovascular disease• Degenerative (Alzheimer’s disease)
Pathophysiology of a Seizure
/square6Seizures develop when the balance between
excitatory and inhibitory mechanisms is disturbedat the cellular or the synaptic level. Glutamate isthe most common excitatory neurotransmitter andgamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) is the most
common inhibitory neurotransmitter involved.
Failure of inhibitory processes is increasinglythought to be the major mechanism leading to statusepilepticus.
/square6Spread of electrical activity between neurons isnormally restricted. During a seizure, large groupsof neurons are activated repetitively, unrestrictedlyand hypersynchronously. Inhibitory synapticactivity between neurons fails. This produces high-voltage spike-and-wave EEG activity, the electro-
physiological hallmark of epilepsy.
/square6A focal (partial) seizure is epileptic activity confined
to one area of cortex. Focal seizure can spread andinvolve all parts of the brain. This is called focal
seizure with secondary generalization. Seizure
can be generalized from the onset. This is calledgeneralized onset seizure.
/square6Significant physiologic changes occur if seizures are
prolonged especially in generalized tonic clonic
seizures. These are tachycardia, hypertension,cardiac arrhythmias, hyperglycemia which resultfrom catecholamine surge. Blood pressure may
decrease as the seizure activity continues. Bodytemperature may increase as a result of the vigorousmuscle activity and increased sympathetic drive.Marked acidosis usually occurs and has bothrespiratory and metabolic component. It should not
be treated, as acidosis is known to have an anti-
convulsant effect and resolves with termination ofthe seizure. Hypoxia occurs due to breathinggetting affected by convulsions and also due toaspiration.
/square6Neuronal death occurs with prolonged seizures dueto abnormal neuronal discharges. Neuronal deathprobably occurs due to the inability to handle largeincreases in intracellular calcium brought about byprolonged exposure to excitatory neurotransmitters.
Classification
/square6International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) has
developed a new classification system for seizures
in 2017 which is as follows.
Based on type of onset seizures are broadly classified
as follows:
/square6Generalized onset
/square6Focal onset
/square6Unknown onset
All seizures are then classified, if possible, as:
/square6Motor onset
/square6Nonmotor onset
Generalized-onset Seizures
Generalized-onset motor seizures
/square6Tonic-clonic seizures (formerly, grand mal seizures)
/square6Clonic seizures (sustained rhythmic jerking)
/square6Tonic seizures (stiffening without rhythmic jerking)
/square6Atonic seizures (loss of muscle tone)
/square6Myoclonic seizures (rhythmic jerking not preceded
by stiffening)
/square6Myoclonic-tonic-clonic seizures (myoclonic jerkingfollowed by tonic and clonic movements)
/square6Myoclonic-atonic seizures (myoclonic jerkingfollowed by atonia)
/square6Epileptic spasms (formerly, infantile spasms)
Generalized-onset nonmotor seizures
/square6Typical absence seizures
/square6Atypical absence seizures (e.g. with less abrupt
onset or termination or with abnormal changes intone)
/square6Myoclonic seizures
/square6Eyelid myoclonia
Focal-onset Seizures
Focal-onset seizures originate in one hemisphere.Focal-onset seizures may be classified by level of

/square6Diseases of Nervous System339
5awareness as focal aware seizures (formerly, simple
focal seizures) and focal impaired-awareness seizures
(formerly, complex focal seizures).
Focal-onset motor seizures
/square6Automatisms (coordinated, purposeless, repetitive
motor activity)
/square6Atonic (focal loss of muscle tone)
/square6Clonic (focal rhythmic jerking)
/square6Epileptic spasms (focal flexion or extension of arms
and flexion of trunk)
/square6Hyperkinetic (causing pedaling or thrashing)
/square6Myoclonic (irregular, brief focal jerking)
/square6Tonic (sustained focal stiffening)
Focal-onset nonmotor seizures
/square6Autonomic dysfunction (autonomic effects such as
gastrointestinal (GI) sensations, a sense of heat orcold, flushing, etc.)
/square6Behavior arrest (cessation of movement and
unresponsiveness as the main feature of the entire
seizure)
/square6Cognitive dysfunction (impairment of language orother cognitive domains or positive features such
as déjà vu, hallucinations, illusions, or perceptual
distortions)
/square6Emotional dysfunction (manifesting with emotionalchanges, such as anxiety, fear, joy, other emotions,
or affective signs without subjective emotions)
/square6Sensory dysfunction (causing somatosensory,
olfactory, visual, auditory, gustatory, or vestibularsensations or a sense of heat or cold)
Focal to bilateral tonic clonic seizure (formerly called
focal onset with secondary generalization)
/square6This occurs when a focal-onset seizure spreads and
activates the entire cerebrum bilaterally.
Unknown-onset seizures
/square6Here the information about onset of seizure is
lacking. Detailed video EEG monitoring can helpclarify whether onset is focal or generalized. They
can be motor or nonmotor.
Clinical Features of Important Seizure Types
Generalized Onset Seizures
/square6In generalized-onset seizures, seizures originate in
both hemispheres. Awareness is usually impaired,and consciousness is usually lost.
Tonic-clonic seizures (earlier called grand mal seizures)
/square6These begin with sudden loss of consciousness.
/square6All muscles of the arms and legs as well as the chest
and back become stiff which is called tonic phase.
The patient may begin to appear cyanotic during this
tonic phase. A loud cry may occur in the tonic phaseas air is forcibly expelled across constricted vocal
cords. Incontinence of urine and feces may occur.
/square6After approximately one minute, there is synchro-
nous clonic muscle jerking./square6Following the seizure the patient may be uncon-scious, confused, complain of a headache, bodyache
or feeling weak, and changes in the mood may
be noticed for 24 hours. Injuries include tonguebite, head wounds, dislocation of shoulders, and
compression fractures of vertebrae.
/square6Serum levels of prolactin and creatine phospho-
kinase are elevated following a seizure.
/square6The interictal EEG may show generalized spikes,which may or may not be followed by waves, sharpwaves and slow waves.
Clonic seizures
/square6Clonic seizures consist of rhythmic jerking motor
movements.
Tonic seizures
/square6These are associated with intense stiffening of the
body. There is no convulsive jerking. They occurmost often during sleep, usually in children. The
cause is usually the Lennox-Gastaut syndrome.
Tonic (sustained) contraction of axial muscles maybegin abruptly or gradually, then spread to the
proximal muscles of the limbs. Tonic seizures
usually last 10 to 15 sec.
Atonic seizures
/square6Sudden loss of postural tone, with falling and loss
of consciousness.
Myoclonic seizures
/square6Myoclonic seizures consist of brief jerking motor
movements that last less than 1 second and often
cluster within a few minutes. It can involve any partof the body, but is mostly seen in limbs or facial
muscles. If the seizures evolve into rhythmic jerking
movements, they are classified as clonic seizure.Myoclonus is not always pathological. Physiological
myoclonus is seen when a person is falling asleep
and during early sleep phases. Non-epileptic myo-clonus is also seen in hypoxia, drug toxicity and
metabolic disturbances. In myoclonic seizure, EEG
shows fast polyspike-and-slow wave complexes.
Absence seizures
/square6Absence seizures involve brief, sudden lapses
of consciousness. There is no aura or postictal
confusion. Absence seizures are more common in
children and there is significant inherited pre-disposition for absence seizures.
/square6Clinical features are vacant stare that lasts 10 to15 seconds. There will be sudden stop in motionwithout falling as if frozen. There may be automatic
movements such lip smacking, eyelid flutters,
chewing motions, finger rubbing, etc. Afterward,there’s no memory of the incident. Some people
have dozens of episodes daily, which interfere with
school or daily activities. A decline in a child’slearning ability may be the first sign of this disorder.
Teachers may comment about a child’s inability to
pay attention.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5340 /square6The classic ictal EEG shows 3 Hz generalized spike-
and-slow wave complexes.
Focal aware Seizures (Formerly Simple Focal)
/square6Involve a part of the brain and consciousness is notlost.
/square6Focal aware seizure can be motor, sensory, andpsychic or associated with autonomic symptoms.
/square6Focal aware motor seizure may consist of jerking
of one hand or twitching of one half of the face.
/square6Focal aware nonmotor seizure may consist of
subjective paraesthesiae involving a hand or a leg.
/square6They have an abrupt onset and usually last for afew seconds. EEG may show focal spikes. If theseizure focus is deep seated EEG may be normal.
Focal Seizures with Impaired-Awareness (Formerly
Complex Focal Seizures)
/square6These also involve a part of the brain but conscious-ness is impaired or lost. Most of these seizures arisein the temporal lobe.
/square6A motionless stare with altered consciousness
followed by automatisms is the usual pattern.
Automatisms are repetitive, purposeless, complexmovements such as picking at clothes, smackinglips or swallowing. EEG usually shows abnormalspikes in the area where the seizures originate.
/square6Psychic symptoms related to memory known as deja
vu and jamais vu  may be seen in complex focal
seizures. Deja vu is a feeling of familiarity in anunfamiliar situation, and jamais vu is a feeling ofstrangeness in a familiar situation.
/square6Todd’s paralysis  refers to reversible neurological
deficit, which lasts less than 48 hours, following afocal seizure.
Focal to Bilateral Tonic Clonic Seizure (Formerly called Focal
Onset with Secondary Generalization)
/square6Here the seizures start in a focal area of the brainand then spread to involve the whole brain tobecome generalized seizure.
/square6“Jacksonian march ” refers to orderly progression of
focal seizure due to the spread of seizure in thecerebral cortex (for example, from thumb to fingersto face to leg).
/square6Patient is conscious initially but later loses conscious-ness when the seizure becomes generalized.
Differential Diagnosis
/square6Syncope (e.g. cardiac arrhythmia, vasovagalsyncope, dysautonomia)
/square6Metabolic conditions (e.g. hypoglycemia, hypo-
natremia)
/square6Migraine (e.g. migrainous aura, migraine equi-
valent)
/square6Transient ischemic attacks/square6Sleep disorders (e.g. cataplexy, narcolepsy, nightterror)
/square6Movement disorders (e.g. paroxysmal dyskinesia,chorea)
/square6Psychiatric conditions (e.g. conversion, panicattacks, breath-holding spells, malingering).
Investigations
Neuroimaging
/square6CT or MRI scan should be done to exclude astructural brain lesion which could be the cause ofseizures.
/square6MRI is better than CT to identify lesions such as
cortical dysplasia, infarcts, or tumors. However, in
an emergency situation CT scan is suitable toexclude a mass lesion, hemorrhage, or large strokebecause it can be done faster and also more widelyavailable.
/square6PET (positron emission tomogram) scan can showthe seizure focus as hypermetabolizing area.
Electroencephalography (EEG)
/square6EEG is an essential study in the evaluation ofepileptic seizures. It can help confirm the diagnosisand also differentiate between generalized andpartial seizures. However, a normal EEG does not
rule out epilepsy. Video-EEG monitoring is very
helpful for confirming or classifying the type ofseizure or for diagnosing pseudo-seizures. Video-EEG records EEG activity and clinical behaviorsimultaneously, usually for 2 to 7 days. However,it is expensive and time consuming, hence monitor-
ing all patients is impractical. Only those who do
not respond to treatment or in whom pseudo-seizures are suspected should undergo video-EEG.
/square6Use of provocation techniques such as sleep depriva-
tion, hyperventilation and intermittent photic
stimulation, increase the sensitivity of EEG.
Prolactin Levels
/square6Serum prolactin concentration may rise and remainelevated for up to 6 hours after an epileptic attack.
Lumbar Puncture
/square6This is helpful to exclude CNS infections such asmeningitis, if there are clinical features suggestiveof meningitis along with seizures.
/square6It should be done only after a space occupying brainlesion has been excluded by neuroimaging.
Treatment
During an Attack
/square6Put the patient in a safe place away from fire andsharp objects.
/square6Put the patient in lateral position and insert apadded mouth gag.

/square6Diseases of Nervous System341
5/square6Inj lorazepam 4 mg slow IV OR inj diazepam
10 mg slow IV.
Treatment of Underlying Condition
/square6For example, correcting hypocalcemia or hypogly-cemia; removal of a structural lesion such as braintumor, vascular malformation, or brain abscess.
/square6If the underlying cause can be corrected fully andthere is no risk of further seizure, antiepileptic treat-ment is not needed. However, after the removal of a
brain lesion, a scar may form and act as a seizure focus.Hence such lesions require antiepileptic therapy.
Antiepileptic Drug Therapy
/square6Antiepileptics are indicated in people with 2 ormore episodes of seizures. Choice of antiepileptic
drug depends on the type of epilepsy which is given
in the following table.
/square6Antiepileptics should be introduced slowly tominimize side effects, and gradually increased to
achieve the therapeutic levels. If seizures continue
to occur even after the maximum dose of first drug,a second antiepileptic drug should be added to thefirst drug. If seizures are controlled with the seconddrug, first drug can be gradually withdrawn.
/square6An attempt can be made to discontinue antiepilepticdrugs if the patient is seizure free for at least 2 yearswith a normal EEG. Drugs should be withdrawngradually over 2 to 3 months.Surgical Treatment for Epilepsy
/square6Surgery is an option for patients with refractoryepilepsy not responding to medical therapy.
/square6Surgical procedures include temporal lobectomy oramygdalohippocampectomy in patients withtemporal lobe epilepsy, removal of an identifiedlesion (lesionectomy) in focal seizures.
/square6Hemispherectomy or multilobar resection is usefulfor some patients with severe seizures due tohemispheric abnormalities, and corpus callosotomyhas been shown to be effective for tonic or atonicseizures.
Vagus Nerve Stimulation (VNS)
/square6VNS is a new treatment option for patients with
medically refractory epilepsy who are not candi-
dates for resective brain surgery.
/square6It involves repetitive electrical stimulation of leftvagus nerve by a subcutaneous generator placed
in the infraclavicular region.
/square6The exact mechanism of action of VNS is unknown,
although it is supposed to increase seizure thres-hold.
Q.Status epilepticus.
/square6Current definition of status epilepticus is 5 minutes
of ongoing seizure activity for convulsive statusepilepticus (generalized tonic-clonic seizures) and10 minutes for focal status epilepticus and absencestatus epilepticus.
/square6Status epilepticus is an emergency and must betreated immediately.
Causes of Status Epilepticus
/square6Anticonvulsant withdrawal or noncompliance.
/square6Metabolic disturbances (hypoglycemia, hypo-natremia, hypocalcemia, hypomagnesemia).
/square6Drug intoxication or withdrawal.
/square6CNS infection (encephalitis, abscess).
/square6CNS lesions (tumors, AV malformations).
/square6Cerebral hypoxia.
/square6Refractory epilepsy.
/square6Head trauma.
Pathophysiology
/square6Seizures are sustained by excess excitation andreduced inhibition of neurons. Glutamate is themost common excitatory neurotransmitter andgamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) is the mostcommon inhibitory neurotransmitter involved.
Failure of inhibitory processes is increasingly
thought to be the major mechanism leading to statusepilepticus.
/square6Significant physiologic changes occur in status
epilepticus especially in generalized tonic clonicTABLE 5.18: Treatment of epilepsy
Type of epilepsy First line drugs Second line drugs
Generalized onset Valproic acid Phenytoin
tonic-clonic Topiramate Levetiracetam
Lamotrigine Carbamazepine
PrimidonePhenobarbital
Focal onset Carbamazepine Topiramate
Phenytoin LevetiracetamLamotrigine GabapentinValproic acid Primidone
Phenobarbital
Absence Ethosuximide Lamotrigine
Valproic acid Clonazepam
Tonic, atonic and Valproic acid
myoclonic seizures Lamotrigine
Topiramate
General Measures
/square6Avoid precipitating factors such as sleep depriva-
tion, physical stress, blinking lights, loud noise, andalcohol intake.
/square6Advice the patient to avoid swimming, going toheights, fire and moving machinery.
/square6Avoid an occupation which puts the patient or publicat risk such as driving a public transport vehicle.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5342 seizures. These are tachycardia, hypertension,
cardiac arrhythmias, hyperglycemia which resultfrom catecholamine surge. Blood pressure maydecrease as the seizure activity continues. Bodytemperature may increase as a result of the vigorousmuscle activity and increased sympathetic drive.
Marked acidosis usually occurs and has both
respiratory and metabolic component. It should notbe treated as acidosis is known to have an anti-convulsant effect and resolves with terminationof the seizure. Hypoxia occurs due to breathinggetting affected by convulsions and also due to
aspiration.
/square6Neuronal death occurs with prolonged seizures due
to abnormal neuronal discharges. Neuronal deathprobably occurs due to the inability to handle large
increases in intracellular calcium brought about by
prolonged exposure to excitatory neurotransmitters.
Investigations
/square6Serum electrolytes, calcium, magnesium.
/square6Blood sugar level.
/square6Complete blood count.
/square6Liver and renal function tests.
/square6Toxicology screen.
/square6Anticonvulsant level.
/square6Arterial blood gas.
/square6Other tests as indicated:  Chest X-ray, CT scan or MRI
of brain, lumbar puncture, blood cultures
/square6EEG also should be obtained.
Treatment
/square6Take care of ABCs (airway, breathing and circula-tion). Admit the patient in ICU. Intubate the patient.Insert urinary catheter.
/square6Do a brief medical and neurologic examination,establish IV line and send samples for investigations.
/square6Anticonvulsant drugs:  Intravenous benzodiazepines
are the drugs of choice to terminate a seizure attack
(examples, lorazepam or diazepam). Furtherseizures should be prevented by loading the patientwith phenytoin. See the following algorithm.
Inj lorazepam 4 mg slow IV Or Inj diazepam 10 mg slow IV
if seizures continue
↓↓↓↓↓
Inj phenytoin 20 mg/kg IV at 50 mg/min
seizures continuing
↓↓↓↓↓
Inj phenytoin (give additional 5–10 mg/kg slow IV)
seizures continuing
↓↓↓↓↓
Inj phenobarbitone 20 mg/kg IV at 50–75 mg/ kg wt
seizures continuing
↓↓↓↓↓
Inj phenobarbitone (give additional 5–10 mg/kg slow IV)
seizures continuing
Anesthesia with midazolam or propofolComplications
/square6Rhabdomyolysis.
/square6Lactic acidosis.
/square6Aspiration pneumonia.
/square6Neurogenic pulmonary edema.
/square6Respiratory failure.
/square6Cardiac injury (due to massive release of catechol-
amines).
/square6Neuronal death (due to repetitive firing).
Q.Sodium valproate.
Sodium valproate (valproic acid) is a broad-spectrum
antiepileptic drug used alone or in combination forthe treatment of generalized and focal onset seizures.
Pharmacokinetics
Valproate is tightly protein-bound. It is metabolizedin the liver by several processes involving oxidation
and conjugation.
Mechanism of Action
/square6Valproate acts by multiple mechanisms.
/square6Suppresses high frequency, repetitive neuronalfiring by blocking voltage-dependent sodium
channels. Valproate increases brain gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) concentrations whichis an inhibitory neurotransmitter. Valproate alsoacts against T-type calcium currents.
Dosage and Route of Administration
/square6The initial dose is 15 mg/kg per day in three
divided doses; it may be increased by 5 to 10 mg/kg
per day every week as needed. A serum levelshould be checked one to two weeks after the initialdose; therapeutic concentrations are usually in the50 to 150 μg/mL range.
/square6Valproate can be given by both oral and intra-
venous (IV) routes. IV administration should beslow over 60 minutes.
Side Effects
/square6Weight gain and obesity, nausea, vomiting, hairloss, easy bruising, and tremor.
/square6Valproate can also cause thrombocytopenia andsubclinical hypothyroidism.
/square6Most important side effect is liver failure. HenceLFTs should be monitored every 6 months to1 year.
/square6A syndrome of reversible Parkinsonism and cogni-tive decline has been described with valproate use.The parkinsonism does not respond to levodopatherapy, but usually reverses within a few weeks
to months after valproate is discontinued.

/square6Diseases of Nervous System343
5Q.Levetiracetam.
/square6Levetiracetam is an antiepileptic drug. It is a
pyrrolidine derivative.
Mechanism of Action
/square6Exact antiepileptic mechanism is unknown. It may
inhibit voltage-dependent N-type calcium channels;
may bind to synaptic proteins that modulateneuro transmitter release; may facilitate GABA-ergic
inhibitory transmission.
Pharmacokinetics
/square6Levetiracetam is available as oral and IV prepara-
tion. After oral administration, absorption is rapid,with peak plasma concentrations occurring in about
an hour. It has got 100% oral bioavailability. It is
metabolized in the liver by enzymatic hydrolysis.Plasma half-life in adults is 7 ± 1 hour and is un-affected by either dose or repeated administration.It is excreted through renal clearance. Hence dosehas to be reduced in renal failure. No dose adjust-
ment is needed for patients with hepatic impairment.
Indications
/square6Generalized onset seizures
/square6Focal onset seizures
/square6Myoclonic seizures
Side Effects
/square6Suicidal behavior and ideation.
/square6Somnolence, fatigue.
/square6Serious dermatological reactions such as Stevens-
Johnson syndrome (SJS) and toxic epidermal
necrolysis (TEN) are rare but can occur.
/square6Coordination difficulties.
/square6Hematologic abnormalities such as agranulo-cytosis.
/square6Pregnancy category C.
Q.Extradural hematoma (epidural hematoma).
/square6Extradural hematoma is accumulation of blood
between the skull and the dura (extra or epidural)./square6It usually occurs after head injury due to ruptureof the middle meningeal artery, its branches or theaccompanying veins.
Clinical Features
/square6Most patients are unconscious when first seen.
/square6A “lucid interval” of minutes to hours before coma
occurs can be seen in extradural hemorrhage, but
uncommon.
/square6The enlarging hematoma compresses and shifts theunderlying brain. The rising intracranial pressure
results in transtentorial herniation of the medial
temporal lobe (uncal herniation) with consequentpressure on the brainstem, the third nerve and theposterior cerebral artery.
/square6Pressure on brainstem leads to unconsciousness. Ifnot relieved promptly, pressure on the brainstemmay lead to irreversible brainstem hemorrhage,resulting in respiratory and cardiac arrest.
Diagnosis
/square6Immediate CT scan should be done if extraduralhematoma is suspected. Extradural hematoma isseen as a biconvex high-attenuating lesion between
the skull and the brain, with shift of the midline to
opposite side.
Treatment
/square6Very small hematomas without mass effect may bemanaged conservatively without surgery.
/square6Large hematomas with mass effect and midline shift
need to be evacuated through burr holes.
Q.Subdural hematoma.
/square6This is accumulation of blood beneath the dura. It
happens due to tear of bridging veins runningbetween the cortical surface and the dural venous
sinuses. The hematoma is usually associated with
contusion/laceration of the brain.
/square6It can be acute (manifests within 3 days of injury),subacute (manifests within three weeks), and
chronic (present after three weeks). The earlier a
hematoma becomes symptomatic, the more seriousit is.
Clinical Features
/square6Clinical features are due to expanding hematomaand associated brain injury and edema.
/square6Majority of these patients are unconscious from thetime of injury, and manifest focal symptoms andsigns of brain injury or compression.
/square6Raising intracranial pressure may result in head-
ache and tentorial herniation.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis can be confirmed by CT scan. Figure 5.13 Extradural hemorrhage


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5344 Treatment
/square6Antiepileptics.
/square6Antiedema measures (mannitol, diuretics, head end
elevation).
/square6Surgical evacuation is indicated if the hematoma isbig (25–30 ml), causing mass effect and the patient
fails to improve on conservative management.
Q.What are the movement disorders? Enumerate
movement disorders.
Q.Classify involuntary movements.
Q. Mention the CNS disorders characterized by involun-
tary movements.
/square6Movement disorders are neurologic syndromes
characterized by either an excess of movement or a
paucity of voluntary and automatic movements,
unrelated to weakness or spasticity.
Classification
/square6Movement disorders are commonly classified asthose with decreased or slow movement (hypokinetic
disorders) and increased movement (hyperkineticdisorders).
Hypokinetic disorder
• Parkinson disease
Hyperkinetic disorders
• Tremor• Myoclonus
• Dystonia
• Chorea• Hemiballismus (rapid chorea)• Athetosis (slow chorea)• Tics
• Cerebellar disorders
Q.Classify Parkinsonism.
/square6Parkinsonism is a clinical syndrome presenting
with any combination of bradykinesia, rest tremor,
rigidity, and postural instability. Most commoncause of parkinsonism is Parkinson disease whichis idiopathic.
Classification of Parkinsonism
Primary (idiopathic) parkinsonism
• Parkinson’s disease
Secondary (acquired) parkinsonism
• Drug or toxin induced• Vascular (multi-infarct)• Post-trauma (punch drunk syndrome)• Postencephalitis• Normal pressure hydrocephalus (NPH)
Parkinsonism plus syndromes (multisystem degenerations)
• Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP)• Multiple system atrophy• Dementia with Lewy bodies• Corticobasal syndromes
Heredodegenerative Parkinsonism
• Spinocerebellar ataxia• Wilson disease• Juvenile onset Huntington’s disease
Q.Describe the etiology, clinical features, diagnosis
and management of Parkinson disease (idiopathic
parkinsonism; paralysis agitans).
/square6Parkinson disease is an idiopathic, slowly pro-gressive, degenerative disorder characterized byresting tremor, stiffness (rigidity), slow anddecreased movement (bradykinesia).
/square6James Parkinson, a physician based in London, firstdescribed this condition. He called it The Shaking
Palsy.
Epidemiology
/square6Parkinson’s disease (PD) is seen worldwide with aprevalence of 150/100 000.
/square6Its peak age of onset is in the 60s. Rarely, PDbegins during childhood or adolescence (juvenileparkinsonism). Onset between ages 21 and 40 yearsis sometimes called early-onset PD. Genetic causes
are more likely in juvenile and early-onset PD.
/square6It affects both sexes .
/square6It less prevalent in tobacco smokers than nonsmokers.
Etiology
The exact etiology of Parkinson’s diseases is unknown.
Some factors possibly involved are:
/square6MPTP: Minute doses of methylphenyltetrahydro-
pyridine (MPTP), a toxic product of heroin, cancause severe parkinsonism. MPTP-like herbicides
have been implicated in the causation of PD.
/square6Genetic factors: There is clustering of early-onset
Parkinson’s disease in some families. Mutations inthe parkin gene on chromosome 6 have been found
in families with autosomal recessive cases of PD
and some young apparently sporadic cases.
Pathology
/square6The main pathology in Parkinson’s disease is deple-tion of the dopaminergic neurons of the substantia
nigra and degeneration of the nigrostriatal tract.
/square6The degenerating neurons contain Lewy bodies
(alpha-synuclein) and neurofibrillary tangles. Lewybody is a highly sensitive marker for PD.
/square6All these changes result in reduction of striataldopamine, which is the main biochemical abnor-mality in PD. Normally an equilibrium existsbetween acetylcholine and dopamine. With dopa-
mine deficiency, there is acetylcholine hyperactivity
which can account for some clinical features suchas tremors and rigidity.

/square6Diseases of Nervous System345
5/square6Other neurotransmitters such as norepinephrine,
serotonin, somatostatin, substance P, and theenkephalins are also decreased in Parkinson’s
disease. Depression may be related to reduction of
noradrenaline and serotonin in the brain.
Clinical Features
/square6The symptoms start insidiously and tend to beunilateral or asymmetrical at the onset. The rate of
progression is very variable, with a benign form
running over several decades. Usually the courseis over 10–15 years, with death resulting from
bronchopneumonia.
/square6The initial manifestations may be tremor, slowness,stiffness or clumsiness of an arm or, less commonly,
of a leg.
/square6The classical triad of tremor, rigidity and akinesiadevelop slowly, over months or several years.Limbs and joints feel stiff due to rigidity.
/square6Fine movements become difficult due to tremors.Writing becomes small (micrographia) due to
hypokinesia and spidery due to tremors.
Tremor
/square6The tremor has a frequency of 4–6 Hz, is presentmainly at rest (resting tremor) and is suppressed
on voluntary movement. Distal muscles are affectedmore than the proximal, and the rhythmic tremor
at the wrists and fingers resemble “pill-rolling”
movement. It disappears during sleep and isaggravated by emotional excitement. This tremor
may also be seen in the legs or lower jaw.
Rigidity
/square6Rigidity is present over the entire range of move-ment (lead-pipe rigidity) and is present equally in
both agonist and antagonistic muscles groups. Itis seen mainly in the limbs but can also be present
in the neck and axial muscles. When rigidity is
associated with tremor, smooth lead pipe rigidityis broken up into a jerky resistance to passive
movement—known as cogwheel rigidity.
Akinesia
/square6There is lack (akinesia) or paucity (bradykinesia)of movement. There is difficulty initiating
movement. Motor acts like dressing, feeding andwalking show a marked slowing. Rapid fine finger
movements, such as piano-playing, become
indistinct, slow and tremulous. Facial immobilitygives a mask-like appearance. Blinking rate is
reduced, producing a stare.
Posture and Gait
/square6The head and body becomes stooped forwards,often with pronounced kyphosis. The arms becomeflexed at the elbow and wrists. Flexion also occursin the joints of the legs. The posture is sometimescalled ‘simian’ to describe the apelike forward
flexion, immobility and lack of associated handmovements. The gait may be slow or hurried withdiminished arm swing.
/square6Patients may walk rapidly with short steps(festinating gait) as though they are chasing theircenter of gravity.
/square6Sometimes, patient may not be able to initiate
walking as if their feet are glued to the floor (called
freezing phenomenon).
/square6Balance deteriorates, and falls are common in laterstages of PD.
Speech
/square6Speech is initially a monotonous and later becomesslurred as a result of akinesia, tremor and rigidity.
Cognitive, Autonomic and Sensory Disturbances
/square6Patients with PD often become passive and dis-interested in daily activities. Slowness of thought
process and inattentiveness are often seen. Anxiety
and depression is more common. Cognitive distur-bances suggestive of frontal lobe dysfunction arecommon. Dementia may develop in the late stages.
/square6Autonomic dysfunction such as constipation,increased frequency of micturition, nocturia, andorthostatic hypotension may occur. Skin is greasyand sweating excessive. Subjective sensorydysfunction such as muscle pains, abdominaldiscomfort, dysaesthesia in feet may be present.
Diagnosis
/square6Diagnosis is made by clinical features. There is no
lab test to confirm the diagnosis. Neuroimaging
should be done (CT or MRI) if any other disease issuspected. PD must be differentiated from otherdiseases shown below which cause slowness anddecreased cognitive functions.
Differential Diagnoses
/square6Alzheimer’s disease.
/square6Multi-infarct dementia.
/square6Sequelae of repeated head injury (e.g. in boxers).
/square6Hypoxic brain damage.
/square6Hypothyroidism.
/square6Depression.
/square6Normal pressure hydrocephalus.
Treatment
/square6Treatment of Parkinson’s disease can be dividedinto non-pharmacologic, pharmacologic, andsurgical therapy.
Non-pharmacologic Treatment
/square6Education of both patient and his family about thedisease.
/square6Emotional and psychological support to the patient.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5346 /square6Regular physical exercise, physiotherapy and
speech therapy may keep the patient more active.
/square6Good nutritious diet, rich in fiber.
Pharmacologic Treatment
Dopamine agonists
/square6Dopamine agonist monotherapy is the initial treat-ment of choice for most of the symptomatic patients.
These drugs act directly on postsynaptic dopamine
receptors (primarily D
2 type). Compared to
levodopa, they are longer acting and thus providea more uniform action. They can be combined withcarbidopa/levodopa and also with anticholinergicsand amantadine. Examples of dopamine agonists are
pramipexole, ropinirole, pergolide and bromocrip-
tine. Rotigotine is a new drug which can be giventransdermally once and can provide more conti-nuous dopaminergic stimulation than other drugs.
Levodopa/carbidopa combinations
/square6Carbidopa is combined with levodopa because
carbidopa blocks the peripheral decarboxylation oflevodopa into dopamine and thus reduces the
symptoms of nausea and orthostatic hypotension.
Also more levodopa becomes available to crossthe blood–brain barrier and act in the brain asdopamine cannot cross the blood–brain barrier.Treatment should be started with low dose andgradually increased.
Levodopa augmentation
/square6These drugs augment the action of levodopa.
Selegiline is a selective and irreversible MAO-B
inhibitor. Typically, selegiline is used as initialtherapy or is added to alleviate tremor or levodopa-associated wearing-off effect. Selegiline can causeinsomnia. Rasagiline is similar to selegiline withsame mechanism of action and is well-tolerated in
early and late disease. Advantages of rasagiline
over selegiline are once a day dosing and no chanceof hypertensive crisis when patients consumetyramine which can happen with selegiline.
/square6The catechol O-methyltransferase (COMT) inhibitorsentacapone and tolcapone also augment the effectsof levodopa by blocking the enzymatic degradationof levodopa and dopamine. They decrease thewearing-off symptoms of levodopa.
Anticholinergics and amantadine
/square6These drugs can be used along with levodopa. Anti-
cholinergics are useful for controlling rest tremorand dystonia. Amantadine has both anticholinergicand dopaminomimetic properties and can reducedrug-induced dyskinesias.
Neuroprotective therapy
/square6Many agents can slow down the decline of dopami-
nergic neurons. These agents include selegeline,coenzyme Q
10, vit E, and L-carnitine. Some trialshave shown that these drugs delay the progression
of Parkinsonism.
Surgical Therapy
/square6Several surgical procedures have been studied inadvanced Parkinson’s disease (PD), including deepbrain stimulation (DBS), thalamotomy, and pallido-tomy.
/square6Deep brain stimulation (DBS) causes an effect similarto surgery due to high frequency stimulation of sub-thalamus and palladium without producing a lesion.
Q.Write briefly about dystonia.
/square6Dystonias are sustained involuntary muscle
contractions of antagonistic muscle groups in the
same body part, leading to abnormal posturing.
Etiology of Dystonia
Primary (idiopathic)
• Can be familial or sporadic
Secondary
CNS disorders• Wilson disease• Pantothenate kinase associated neurodegeneration [PKAN]
associated with PANK2 mutations
• Various lipidoses• Multiple sclerosis• Cerebral palsy• Stroke• Brain hypoxia
Drugs
• Antipsychotics, metoclopramide, prochlorperazine
Treatment
/square6Treatment depends on the cause.
/square6Anticholinergics such as trihexyphenidyl are effective
for primary dystonia. Tetrabenazine, a monoamine-depleting agent, is also effective in some patients.
/square6Other effective drugs include baclofen, carbama-zepine, valproate, primidone, and lithium.
/square6Botulinum toxin injections are helpful if drug
therapy fails, especially for focal dystonia.
/square6Neurosurgical treatment, such as stereotactic thalamo-
tomy, or neurostimulation can help in selected cases.
Q.Chorea.
/square6Chorea is non-rhythmic, jerky, rapid, involuntary
movement. It is not suppressible and involves distal
muscles and face commonly.
/square6Chorea and athetosis result from impairedinhibition of thalamocortical neurons by the basal
ganglia. Excess dopaminergic activity may be the
mechanism.
/square6Chorea and athetosis can occur together (calledchoreoathetosis).

/square6Diseases of Nervous System347
5Causes of Chorea
Hereditary
/square6Benign hereditary chorea
/square6Lesch-Nyhan syndrome
/square6Huntington’s disease
Acquired
/square6Physiologic chorea (seen in infants).
/square6Cerebral palsy.
/square6Sydenham chorea (seen in rheumatic fever).
/square6After cardiac surgery.
/square6Kernicterus.
/square6Drugs—phenytoin, levodopa, alcohol.
/square6Systemic lupus erythematosus.
/square6Stroke (basal ganglia).
Treatment
/square6Underlying cause must be treated. Phenothiazines
(e.g. haloperidol) and tetrabenazine provide somesymptomatic relief.
Q.Athetosis.
/square6Athetosis is a slow form of chorea characterized
by twisting, writhing movements (worm like
movements).
/square6Athetosis result from impaired inhibition of thalamo-cortical neurons by the basal ganglia. Excessdopaminergic activity may be the mechanism.
/square6It most often accompanies static encephalopathydue to cerebral palsy, kernicterus, prematurity,post-stroke hemiplegia, and other causes of earlylife brain damage.
/square6Athetosis usually does not respond to pharmaco-logic therapy.
Q.Sydenham chorea (St Vitus dance).
/square6Sydenham chorea is one of the major clinical
manifestations of acute rheumatic fever and themost common form of acquired chorea in child-hood.
/square6Chorea usually develops 1 to 8 months after thestreptococcal infection, whereas carditis andarthritis usually develop within the first month.
Pathology
/square6The exact pathology of Sydenham chorea isunknown. However, vasculitis involving the basal
ganglia, cortex, and cerebellum has been identified
in some brains of affected patients.
Clinical Features
/square6It usually affects children between 5 and 13 yearsof age.
/square6The onset usually is insidious but may be sudden./square6The chorea typically begins in the hands, and laterinvolves face and feet also. The movements arerapid, irregular jerks that are continuous while thepatient is awake but improve with sleep. The choreausually is generalized but may be more prominenton one side. Some may have unilateral chorea.
Diagnosis
/square6The diagnosis is made by clinical features as thereis no specific laboratory test.
Treatment
/square6Sydenham chorea usually improves in 3–4 months.
/square6Underlying rheumatic fever should be treated withpenicillin for at least 10 days followed by antibioticprophylaxis.
/square6Chorea can be reduced by many drugs such asvalproic acid, phenobarbital, haloperidol, chlor-promazine, and carbamazepine.
Q.Huntington chorea (chronic progressive chorea;
hereditary chorea; Huntington disease).
/square6Huntington disease is an autosomal dominant
disorder characterized by chorea and progressivecognitive deterioration, usually beginning duringmiddle age.
/square6Huntington disease results from a gene mutationcausing abnormal repetition of the DNA sequenceCAG, which codes for the amino acid glutamine.The resulting gene product, a large protein calledHuntington, accumulates in the neurons and leadsto disease via unknown mechanisms.
/square6Symptoms and signs develop insidiously, startingat about age 35 to 40. The disease is progressiveand patients usually die 10–15 years after the onsetdue to motor dysfunction and dementia. Clinicalfeatures are chorea, gait disturbances, emotional
disturbances, dementia and postural instability.
/square6Diagnosis is based on the clinical features, family
history and genetic testing.
/square6Treatment is symptomatic. The psychosis mayimprove with neuroleptic agents, such as halo-peridol, pimozide, fluphenazine, and thioridazine.Anxiolytics and antidepressants may be useful insome patients.
Q.Hemiballismus/Ballismus.
/square6Hemiballismus is unilateral rapid, nonrhythmic,
nonsuppressible, violent flinging movement of theproximal arm and/or leg. It is actually a severecoarse form of chorea.
/square6It is usually unilateral (hemiballismus) but rarelyit can be bilateral and is called ballismus.
/square6It is usually caused by infarction or hemorrhagein the contralateral subthalamic nucleus. Other

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5348 causes are abscess, AV malformation, cerebral
trauma, tumor, and multiple sclerosis involvingsubthalamic nucleus.
/square6Drugs used in chorea are useful for hemiballismus,
but the disorder usually subsides spontaneously
within several weeks.
/square6Prolonged disabling and medically intractablehemiballismus can be treated with contralateral
thalamotomy or pallidectomy.
Q.Myoclonus.
/square6Myoclonus is sudden, brief, jerk-like contractions
of a muscle or a group of muscles. These may besingle or repetitive jerks.
/square6Myoclonus can also be a part of epileptic disorderssuch as myoclonic epilepsy.
Causes
Physiologic
/square6Sleep
/square6Infants
Pathologic
/square6Myoclonic epilepsy
/square6Wilson’s disease
/square6Encephalitis
/square6Metabolic encephalopathy
/square6Post-hypoxic myoclonus
/square6Drugs:  Levodopa, tricyclic antidepressants.
Treatment
/square6Many drugs are helpful to treat myoclonus such as
clonazepam, valproate and levetiracetam.
Q.Define tremor. Mention different types of tremors.
/square6Tremor is defined as a rhythmic and oscillatory
movement of a body part. It is caused by alternatingcontractions of antagonistic muscles. It is the most
common movement disorder encountered in
clinical practice.
/square6Tremor may be normal (physiologic) or pathologic.Physiologic tremor is seen in many people during
physical or mental stress.
/square6Tremors can be intermittent or constant, gradual
or sudden in onset and vary in severity. The severityof tremor may not be related to the seriousness of
the underlying disorder. For example, essential
tremor is benign, but symptoms can be disabling.
Pathophysiology
/square6Various lesions (ischemia, injury, degeneration,metabolic abnormalities) in the brainstem, extra-pyramidal system, or cerebellum can cause tremors.Sometimes tremor is a familial condition (e.g.essential tremor).Types of Tremors
Resting Tremors
/square6The tremor is evident when the affected body partis supported and at rest and decreases duringvoluntary activity.
/square6Examples: Parkinson disease, midbrain (rubral)
tremor, Wilson’s disease.
Action Tremors
/square6Occur when a body part is moved voluntarily.
Action tremors may change in severity as a targetis reached. Action tremors include kinetic,intention, and postural tremors.
/square6Kinetic tremor occurs in the last part of a movement
toward a target. Examples:  Essential tremor,
cerebellar, dystonic, and drug-induced tremors.
/square6Intention tremor is a subtype of kinetic tremor. It
occurs during voluntary movement toward a target
which worsens as the target is reached. Example:
Cerebellar disease.
/square6Postural tremor occurs when a body part is held
motionless against the force of gravity (e.g. holding
the arms stretched out). Examples:  Physiologic
tremor, essential tremor, primary writing tremor,Parkinson disease, Wilson’s disease.
Q.Essential tremor.
/square6Essential tremor is the most common movement
disorder characterized by kinetic and/or posturaltremors of hands.
/square6Essential tremor is a benign condition. However, itmay interfere with feeding, speaking, writing, andother activities of daily living.
Etiology
/square6The cause of essential tremor is uncertain but maybe due to genetic mutation which is inherited as auto-
somal dominant trait. Environmental factors also
play a role. Some reports suggest that the pathologyis in the brainstem (locus coeruleus) and cerebellum.
Clinical Features
/square6Essential tremor occurs at any age but occurs mostfrequently in the elderly. Family history can befound in almost 50% of cases.
/square6The frequency of the tremor is usually 6–12 Hz, and
most often affects the hands and arms. It can also affect
the head (titubation), voice, chin, trunk, and legs.
/square6It is bilateral, symmetrical and postural. It developswhen the hands adopt a posture, such as holding a
glass or a spoon. It is slowly progressive but rarely
produces severe disability. Writing is shaky anduntidy.
/square6Anxiety exacerbates the tremor, sometimes
dramatically.

/square6Diseases of Nervous System349
5Treatment
/square6Treatment is usually not needed. Patients should
be reassured that it is not a serious disease.
/square6Propranolol and primidone are the most effectiveand well-studied medications for the treatment ofessential tremor.
/square6Small amounts of alcohol can also reduce the seve-rity of tremor. Sympathomimetics (e.g. salbutamol)worsen the tremor and should be avoided.
/square6Stereotactic thalamotomy and thalamic stimulation
are used in severe cases.
Q.Intention tremor.
/square6Intention tremor is a subtype of kinetic tremor which
worsens as the target is reached. It is due to lesionsof cerebellum and its connections. Other causes ofintention tremor include Wilson’s disease, hepato-cerebral degeneration, and mercury poisoning.
/square6The tremor typically increases in severity as thehand moves closer to its target. Intention tremorsare usually coarse due to involvement of proximalmuscles. There may be other cerebellar signs such
as ataxia, dysmetria, titubation, and dysdiado-
chokinesia.
/square6There is no drug available to treat intention tremor.Physical therapy (e.g. weighting the affected limbs,
teaching patients to brace the proximal limb during
activity) sometimes helps. Patients with severetremor can be helped by deep brain stimulation ofthe thalamus.
Q.Enumerate demyelinating neurological disorders.
/square6Demyelinating diseases are conditions where there
is breakdown of the myelin sheath with relativepreservation of axons. This affects the conductionof signals through nerve fibers.
/square6Examples of demyelinating diseases are as follows.
Idiopathic (Autoimmune)
/square6Multiple sclerosis
/square6Transverse myelitis
/square6Acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuro-pathy (AIDP)
/square6Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM).
Viral Infections
/square6Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
/square6Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE).
Nutritional Disorders
/square6Subacute combined degeneration (vitamin B12
deficiency)
/square6Demyelination of the corpus callosum (Marchiafava-Bignami disease)
/square6Central pontine myelinolysis.Anoxic-ischemic
/square6Delayed postanoxic cerebral demyelination
/square6Progressive subcortical ischemic encephalopathy.
Leukodystrophies
/square6Adrenoleukodystrophy (Schilder’s disease)
/square6Metachromatic leukodystrophy.
Q.Describe the etiology, clinical features, diagnosis
and management of multiple sclerosis.
/square6Multiple sclerosis is an autoimmune disorder charac-
terized by multiple demyelinating lesions in the
brain and spinal cord.
Epidemiology
/square6Multiple sclerosis (MS) is common in western
countries but rare in India and other countries of
Asia and Africa.
/square6It usually affects young people between 15 and50 years. It has a prolonged course.
/square6It is about twice as common in women as men.
Etiology
/square6The exact cause of MS is unknown. It is probably
an autoimmune disorder where T cells are activated
and destroy the myelin sheath.
/square6Infection by a latent virus (possibly a human herpesvirus such as Epstein-Barr virus) has been suspectedto trigger a secondary autoimmune response
leading to MS.
/square6Genetic factors may play a role as suggested by
increased incidence among certain families andpresence of human leukocyte antigen (HLA)
allotypes (HLA-DR2).
/square6Environmental factors also play a role in the causa-
tion of the disease. The disease is more common intemperate climate (European countries) than
tropical climate (Asian countries).
Pathology
/square6There are multiple areas of demyelination with
reactive gliosis (hence called multiple sclerosis)scattered in the white matter of brain, spinal cordand in the optic nerves.
/square6Demyelination is initiated by inflammation due tothe entry of activated T lymphocytes through theblood–brain barrier. There is release of cytokinesand attraction of macrophages which destroy the
myelin sheath. Histologically, the characteristic
lesion is a plaque of inflammatory demyelinationoccurring most commonly in the periventricularregions of the brain, the optic nerves and the subpialregions of the spinal cord. After an acute attack,gliosis occurs, leaving a shrunken grey scar
(sclerosis).

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5350 /square6In the later stages there is destruction of axons also
which is responsible for the progressive and persis-tent disability.
Disease Patterns
The different patterns of multiple sclerosis are asfollows:
/square6Relapsing remitting MS (RRMS) —this is charac-
terized by relapses with full recovery in between.This is the initial type in most patients. However,
most patients will eventually enter a secondary
progressive phase.
/square6Secondary progressive MS (SPMS) —this is charac-
terized by an initial RRMS followed by progressionof the disease with minor remissions.
/square6Primary progressive MS (PPMS) —this is charac-
terized by disease progression from the onset withoccasional minor improvements but without anyacute attacks.
/square6Progressive relapsing MS (PRMS) —this is charac-
terized by progressive disease from onset, withacute attacks, with or without full recovery.Progression continues during the periods betweendisease relapses.
Clinical Features
/square6The typical patient presents as a young adult withtwo or more clinically distinct episodes of CNSdysfunction with at least partial resolution.
/square6The hallmark of MS is symptomatic episodes that
occur months or years apart and affect different
anatomic locations.
Cranial Nerves
/square6Optic neuritis is a common presentation and leadsto central scotoma. Trigeminal neuralgia can occur.Motor System
/square6Motor symptoms are due to lesions of corticospinaltracts and include upper limb weakness, para-paresis or paraplegia. UMN signs such as spasticity,
exaggerated deep tendon reflexes, clonus and
extensor plantar responses are usually present.
/square6Internuclear ophthalmoplegia results if there is alesion in the medial longitudinal fasciculus connect-ing the 3rd, 4th, and 6th nerve nuclei.
Sensory System
/square6Sensory symptoms are also very common feature
of MS and are due to demyelinating lesions in spino-
thalamic, posterior column, or dorsal roots. Sensorysymptoms are numbness, tingling, pins-and-needles, tightness, coldness, radicular pains, etc.
Cerebellum
/square6Lesions in cerebellum and its connections can causecerebellar signs such as ataxia and incordination.
Spinal Cord
/square6Spinal cord involvement causes bowel, bladder, andsexual dysfunction leading to urgency, urinaryincontinence, constipation or fecal incontinence,erectile dysfunction, etc.
/square6Neuromyelitis optica (Devic’s disease) is a variant
of MS characterized by involvement of only optic
nerve and spinal cord. Brain lesions are absent.There are symptoms and signs of motor, sensoryand sphincter disturbances.
/square6Lhermitte’s sign also called the barber chair pheno-
menon, is an electric shock like sensation that runs
down the back and into the limbs on flexing theneck. It is caused by involvement of the posteriorcolumns of spinal cord.
Figure 5.14 Patterns of multiple sclerosis


/square6Diseases of Nervous System351
5Other Features
/square6Heat sensitivity (Uhthoff’s phenomenon) is a well-
known occurrence in MS; small increases in thebody temperature can temporarily worsen current
or pre-existing signs and symptoms.
Diagnosis
/square6Multiple sclerosis should be suspected when
multiple areas of the CNS are involved at differenttimes. At least two or more different central whitematter lesions should occur at different times (i.e.dissemination in place and time).
/square6MRI of the brain and cervical cord is the investiga-tion of choice. It shows multiple demyelinatinglesions. Lesions are often found in the periventri-cular area. MRI can identify both old and newlesions in different areas.
/square6Evoked potential recordings (such as visual evokedresponse) show prolongation and can detectsubclinical involvement of the visual, auditory andsomatosensory pathways.
/square6CSF examination may show lymphocytosis orincreased protein concentration. CSF electro-phoresis shows oligoclonal bands.
Management
Patient Education
/square6Patient and family members should be educatedabout the nature of disease. Patient should be toldabout the unpredictable course and also emphasizethe fact that significant proportion of patientsremain neurologically intact for many years.
Acute Attacks
/square6Acute attacks are treated with corticosteroids. A
typical course is methylprednisolone, 1 g intra-
venously for 3 days followed by oral prednisone,60 or 80 mg per day for 1 week, after which it istapered over next 2 to 3 weeks.
/square6Plasmapheresis and intravenous immunoglobulinshave shown benefit in some trials.
/square6Relapses are also treated with similar course ofsteroids.
Preventing Relapses
/square6Two forms of recombinant beta interferon, interferon
beta-1a and interferon beta-1b, have been approved
for use in relapsing remitting MS patients. Betainterferon therapy reduces the frequency and seve-rity of MS relapses, slows disability progression,reduces the number of new lesions.
/square6Glatiramer acetate is a polypeptide consisting of basicamino acids. It is thought to inhibit cellular immunereactions to myelin. It reduces the relapse rates.
/square6Immunosuppressive therapy with cyclophospha-mide, azathioprine, methotrexate, cladribine, ormitoxantrone may help arrest the course of pro-
gressive multiple sclerosis.
/square6Fingolimod is an orally administered drug withimmunomodulatory effects.
/square6Treatment with natalizumab, a recombinant mono-clonal antibody also reduces relapse rate.
Symptomatic Therapy
/square6Spasticity —physiotherapy, baclofen, tizanidine,
diazepam, injection of botulinum toxin.
/square6Ataxia —isoniazid, clonazepam.
/square6Sensory symptoms —carbamazepine, gabapentin,
amitriptyline.
/square6Spastic bladder —anticholinergics like oxybutynin or
propantheline.
/square6Fatigue —amantadine.
/square6Impotence —sildenafil.
/square6Depression —imipramine, amitriptyline.
Q.Describe the anatomy of the spinal cord and
enumerate the diseases affecting the spinal cord.
Q.Causes of spinal cord compression (compressive
myelopathy).
/square6The spinal cord extends from the lower border of
medulla at the foramen magnum till the lowerborder of L1 vertebra. The tip of the spinal cord iscone-shaped and is called conus medullaris. In thelumbosacral region, nerve roots from lower cordsegments descend vertically within the spinal canal,
forming the cauda equina (so called because of
resemblance to horse tail).
/square6The white matter at the cord’s periphery containsascending and descending tracts of myelinated
sensory and motor nerve fibers. The central H-
shaped gray matter is composed of cell bodies ofneurons and nonmyelinated fibers. The anterior(ventral) horns contain lower motor neurons, whichreceive impulses from the motor cortex via thedescending corticospinal tracts. The axons of the
lower motor neurons are the efferent fibers of the
spinal nerves. The posterior (dorsal) horns containsensory fibers that originate in cell bodies in thedorsal root ganglia. The gray matter also containsmany internuncial neurons that carry motor,sensory, or reflex impulses from dorsal to ventral
nerve roots, from one side of the cord to the other,
or from one level of the cord to another. The spino-thalamic tract transmits pain and temperaturesensation contralaterally in the spinal cord; mostother tracts transmit information ipsilaterally.
/square6On each side of the spinal cord, the anterior anddorsal nerve roots combine to form the spinalnerve as it exits from the vertebral column throughthe neuroforamina. The cord is divided into 31functional segments corresponding to the attach-
ments of the 31 pairs of spinal nerve roots.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5352
/square6The blood supply of the spinal cord consists of
1 anterior and 2 posterior spinal arteries. Theanterior and posterior spinal arteries arise from thevertebral arteries. The anterior spinal artery suppliesthe anterior two-thirds of the cord and the posteriorspinal arteries supply the posterior one-third.
Diseases Affecting the Spinal Cord
/square6Spinal cord problems are generally referred to as
myelopathies which are as follows.
Compressive Myelopathy
/square6Extradural:  TB spine, epidural abscess, epidural
tumor, spinal metastases, disc prolapse, spondy-losis, lymphomas, extradural AV malformations orhematoma.
/square6Intradural:  Meningioma, neurofibroma, intradural
AV malformations, arachnoiditis.
/square6Intramedullary:  Syringomyelia, ependymoma,
astrocytoma.
Noncompressive Myelopathy
/square6Transverse myelitis
/square6Radiation myelopathy
/square6AIDS myelopathy
/square6Tropical spastic paraplegia
/square6Spinal cord infarction
/square6Multiple sclerosis.
Clinical Features of Spinal Cord Disease
/square6Spinal cord can be affected both horizontally and
vertically to a variable extent. Clinical features
depend on how much of the spinal cord is involved
horizontally and how much is involved vertically./square6Horizontal lesions of the spinal cord can be groupedinto various clinical patterns (syndrome) as shownin Fig. 5.15.
Complete Spinal Cord Transection (Transverse Myelopathy)
/square6With complete cord transection, all ascending tractsfrom below the level of the lesion and all descendingtracts from above the level of the lesion areinterrupted. Therefore, all motor and sensory
functions below the level of spinal cord damage are
disturbed. Transverse myelopathy is a general termfor diseases causing complete horizontal damageto spinal cord. Transverse myelitis is a type oftransverse myelopathy due to inflammation of thecord.
/square6Examples:  Transverse myelitis, traumatic injury.
Hemisection of the Spinal Cord (Brown-Séquard Syndrome)
/square6Half of the spinal cord is damaged horizontally.
For detailed clinical features see Brown-Sequardsyndrome.
/square6Examples:  Traumatic injuries, stab injuries.
Central Cord Lesions
/square6Disease process starts in the center of the spinal cord
and extends to the peripheral part of spinal cord.Characteristically, the decussating fibers of thespinothalamic tract anterior to the central canalcarrying pain and temperature sensation are
affected initially. This results in loss of pain and
temperature sensation with the preservation of finetouch and proprioception (dissociation of sensoryloss) ( see syringomyelia for a detailed description
of clinical features)
/square6Examples:  Syringomyelia, ependymoma.
Figure 5.15 Spinal cord cross-section

/square6Diseases of Nervous System353
5Based on the vertical level of lesion following clinical
patterns may be seen
/square6At or above C5:  Respiratory paralysis, quadriplegia.
/square6At C5–C6:  Paralysis of legs, wrists, and hands,
weakness of shoulder abduction and elbow flexion,Loss of biceps and brachioradialis reflex.
/square6Between C6 and C7: Paralysis of legs, wrists, and
hands, but shoulder movement and elbow flexionusually possible.
/square6Between C7 and C8:  Loss of triceps jerk reflex,
paralysis of legs and hands.
/square6At C8 to T1:  Horner syndrome (constricted pupil,
ptosis, facial anhidrosis), paralysis of legs.
/square6Between T1 and conus medullaris:  Paralysis of legs.
Q.Transverse myelitis.
/square6Transverse myelitis is a neurological disorder
caused by inflammation across the entire width of
the spinal cord. It may be infective or noninfective.It is a type of non-compressive myelopathy.
Etiology
/square6Vascular:  Spinal cord infarction due to spinal artery
thrombosis, vasculitis.
/square6Systemic inflammatory disorders:  SLE, sarcoidosis,
Behçet’s syndrome, Sjögren’s syndrome./square6Infectious:  Herpes zoster, HSV 1 and 2, EBV, CMV,
rabies virus, listeria monocytogenes, Lyme disease,syphilis.
/square6Postinfectious:  Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), cyto-
megalovirus (CMV), mycoplasma, influenza,
measles, varicella, rubeola, and mumps.
/square6Demyelinating diseases:  Multiple sclerosis, neuro-
myelitis optica.
/square6Idiopathic.
Clinical Features
/square6The onset of symptoms may be acute or subacute.Thoracic region is most often involved. Commonpresenting symptoms are pain in the back, limbweakness, sensory involvement, bowel and bladder
dysfunction.
Motor Disturbances
/square6All motor functions are lost below the level of
lesion. At the level of lesion there are lower motorneuron signs (paresis, atrophy, fasciculations, andareflexia) and below the level of lesion there areUMN type paralysis. Initially, especially with acutelesions, the paralysis is flaccid and areflexia because
of spinal shock, but later spastic paraplegia deve-
lops.Figure 5.16 Spinal cord syndromes


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5354 /square6There is loss of tendon reflexes in the acute stage
due to spinal shock. Subsequently, tendon reflexesbecome exaggerated and plantar response becomesextensor.
/square6Abdominal reflexes are absent below the level oflesion.
Sensory Disturbances
/square6All sensory modalities (soft touch, position sense,vibration, temperature, and pain) are impairedbelow the level of the lesion. A sensory level is pre-sent.
Autonomic Disturbances
/square6Bowel and bladder sphincter dysfunction withincontinence can occur with transverse myelitis.
Urgency of micturition is the usual bladder
symptom, with urinary retention a later problem.Incontinence of urine is a very late feature.Constipation is the most common bowel symptom.Initially, atonic and, later, spastic rectal and bladdersphincter dysfunction occur with lesions at any
spinal level.
/square6Orthostatic hypotension, loss of sweating, trophic
skin changes, impaired temperature control, sexualdysfunction (especially impotence) are other
features of autonomic dysfunction.
Investigations
/square6MRI of spinal cord should be done to rule out any
alternate pathology (abscess, mass, etc.).
/square6CSF cell count and pressure is usually normal butthere is increase in its protein content.
Treatment
/square6Care of skin, bladder and bowels, and physio-
therapy.
/square6Treatment of choice for idiopathic transverse
myelitis is intravenous administration of methyl-prednisolone.
/square6If a cause is identified, treatment should be directedtowards that.
Q.Brown-Séquard syndrome.
/square6The Brown-Séquard syndrome results from a lesion
involving only one side of the spinal cord. It isusually produced by extramedullary lesions.
Etiology
/square6Road traffic accidents
/square6Industrial and sports accidents
/square6Direct injury to the cord with high-velocity missiles
or a sharp instrument.
/square6Infarction of spinal cord
/square6Intradural tumors.Clinical Features
/square6Ipsilateral spastic weakness due to interruption of
the descending corticospinal tract below the levelof damage. Lower motor neuron signs and sensorydeficits at the level of the lesion due to damage toanterior horn cells and motor root.
/square6Ipsilateral loss of proprioception and vibrationbelow the level of the lesion due to interruption ofthe ascending fibers in the posterior columns.
/square6Contralateral loss of pain and temperature sensationdue to interruption of the crossed spinothalamictract. This sensory level is usually one or twosegments below the level of the lesion.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, diagnosis and
management of syringomyelia.
Q.Dissociated sensory loss.
/square6Syringomyelia refers to fluid-filled cavities within
the spinal cord. The cavity is called syrinx and is
usually found within the cervical or thoracic spinalcord.
/square6Syringobulbia means a cavity in the brainstem.
Etiology and Pathology
/square6Syrinxes usually result from lesions that partially
obstruct CSF flow which are as follows:
– Congenital abnormalities of the craniocervical
junction (Chiari type 1 malformation), brain(e.g. encephalocele) or spinal cord (e.g. myelo-
meningocele).
Figure 5.17 Clinical features of Brown-Séquard syndrome

/square6Diseases of Nervous System355
5– Scarring due to spinal cord trauma, myelitis,
chronic arachnoiditis due to tuberculosis and
other etiologies, necrotic spinal cord tumors.
Clinical Features
/square6Clinical features depend on the location of the cavity.
/square6The syrinx is most commonly encountered in thelower cervical region, extending into the centralgray matter and anterior commissure. The cystinterrupts the decussating spinothalamic fiberswhich carry pain and temperature sensation. Thisresults in classic dissociated sensory loss  where there
is loss of pain and temperature sensation withsparing of touch and vibration which are carriedby posterior column.
/square6Symptoms usually start on one side and then theother side gets involved.
/square6Extension of the cavity to the anterior hornsproduces segmental weakness, muscle atrophy andareflexia. Lateral extension results in an ipsilateralHorner syndrome (owing to the involvement of the
sympathetic system). As the lesion enlarges, cortico-
spinal tract gets involved and spasticity, weaknessof the legs, bladder and bowel dysfunction develop.
/square6Dorsal extension disrupts dorsal column function
(ipsilateral position sense and vibratory loss), and
with anterolateral extension, the spinothalamic tractis affected, producing loss of pain and temperaturebelow the spinal level of the lesion. Because thesacral fibers are located laterally in the spino-thalamic tract, and the disease process starts from
the center of the spinal cord, sacral fibers are spared
initially.
/square6Some patients develop facial numbness and sensoryloss from damage to the descending tract of the
trigeminal nerve (C2 level or above).
/square6If the syrinx extends into the brainstem (syringo-
bulbia), there is dysphagia, pharyngeal and palatalweakness, asymmetric weakness and atrophy of the
tongue, sensory loss involving primarily pain and
temperature sense in the distribution of the tri-geminal nerve, and nystagmus.
/square6Thoracic kyphoscoliosis is usually present due to
weakness of paraspinal muscles.
Investigations
MRI—can demonstrate the syrinx cavity.
Treatment
/square6There is no curative treatment. Treatment depends
on the cause.
/square6If the syrinx cavity is large, decompression of thecavity by syrinx-subarachnoid shunt may produce
some benefit.
Q.Describe the etiology
 , clinical features, differential
diagnosis, complications and management of
paraplegia.
/square6Paraplegia refers to paralysis of both lower limbs. Para-
paresis refers to partial weakness of both lower limbs.
Etiology
Spinal Cord Diseases
See page 352.
Other Causes
/square6Anterior horn cell diseases
/square6Cauda equina syndromes
/square6Peripheral neuropathiesFigure 5.18 Syringomyelia
Figure 5.19 Syringomyelia in the spinal cord


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5356 /square6Guillain-Barré syndrome
/square6Unpaired anterior cerebral artery ischemia
/square6Parasagittal meningioma
/square6Superior sagittal sinus thrombosis
Clinical Features
/square6Acute spinal cord lesions produce flaccid para-
plegia initially due to spinal shock. However, laterit becomes spastic. Lesions of peripheral nerves
(peripheral neuropathy, GB syndrome) result in
flaccid paraplegia.
/square6Paraplegia in extension is seen when only cortico-spinal tract is involved, because extrapyramidalsystem takes over resulting in excess tone of anti-gravity muscles.
/square6Paraplegia in flexion is seen when both cortico-spinal and extrapyramidal system is involved,because of increase in tone of flexors.
/square6Bowel and bladder disturbances and sensorysymptoms are common in spinal cord lesions.
/square6Additional clinical features may be present depend-ing on the underlying cause.
Investigations
/square6Plain X-ray of spine:  Can detect degenerative changes
of spine (spondylosis), vertebral fractures and anyother vertebral disease.
/square6MRI spine:  Can visualize in detail the spinal cord
and its coverings, spine and disc pathology.
/square6Appropriate tests to rule out underlying cause.
Complications
/square6Bedsore
/square6Limb contracture
/square6Deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism
/square6Osteoporosis
/square6Fecal impaction with intestinal obstruction
/square6Urinary infection.
Management of Paraplegia
General measures
/square6Patient needs both physical and mental support.Good nutritious diet should be provided. Anyintercurrent infection is potentially dangerous andshould be treated early.
Bladder care
/square6Continuous indwelling catheter is required initially.
However, intermittent catheterization is better to
prevent infection. Once the patient learns thetechnique of catheterization he can do it himself.Many develop reflex bladder emptying, helped byabdominal pressure. Free urinary drainage isessential to avoid stasis, subsequent infection and
calculi formation.
Bowel care
/square6Constipation and fecal impaction are common in
paraplegics. These should be avoided by stoolsofteners, laxatives or regular enemas. Digital
evacuation may be necessary if stools are hard andimpacted. Reflex rectal emptying develops later andpatient can pass stools himself.
Skin care
/square6Since a paraplegic patient is bedridden most of the
time, there is risk of developing pressure sores.Pressure sores (bedsore) are common over pressurepoints such as sacrum, iliac crests, greater tro-chanters, heels and malleoli. They can be prevented
by maintaining cleanliness and turning the patient
every 2 hours. Ripple mattresses and water bedsare very useful to prevent pressure sores. If pressuresores develop, plastic surgical repair should beconsidered. Pressure palsies (e.g. ulnar nerves andcommon peroneal) must be avoided.
Lower limbs
/square6Paralyzed lower limbs are prone to develop contrac-
tures and deep vein thrombosis which should beprevented by physiotherapy. Severe spasticity, withflexor or extensor spasms, may be helped by baclofen,diazepam, dantrolene, tizanidine or botulinum
toxin injections.
Treatment of the underlying cause
/square6Underlying cause should be identified and treated.
Rehabilitation
/square6Many patients with paraplegia can become partially
or fully independent. Specialist advice from arehabilitation unit is necessary.
Q.Describe the nerve supply of urinary bladder.
Describe various types of bladder dysfunction.
/square6The bladder is a hollow bag made of a syncytium
of smooth muscle with stretch receptors. There is
an internal urethral sphincter made of smooth
muscle and an external urethral sphincter which ismade of striated muscle.
Nerve Supply of Urinary Bladder
Parasympathetic Supply
/square6S2, S3 and S4 segments through the pelvic nerve.
/square6Innervate detrusor muscle and internal sphincter.
/square6Function:  Contraction of detrusor muscle and
inhibition of internal sphincter.
Sympathetic Supply
/square6T10 to L2 through the hypogastric plexus.
/square6Innervate detrusor muscle and internal sphincter.
/square6Function:  Inhibition of detrusor muscle and
contraction of internal sphincter.
Somatic Efferent
/square6S1, S2 and S3 segments through pudendal nerve.
/square6Innervate external sphincter.
/square6Function:  Voluntary contraction of external sphincter.

/square6Diseases of Nervous System357
5Afferents
/square6Arise from bladder wall and internal sphincter and
run through the above nerves.
/square6Function:  Carry the sensation of bladder distension.
Various Types of Bladder Dysfunction
/square6Any condition that impairs bladder afferent and
efferent nerve supply can cause neurogenic bladder.Causes may involve the CNS (e.g. stroke, spinalcord injury), peripheral nerves (e.g. diabeticperipheral neuropathy, vitamin B 
12 deficiency), or
both (e.g. Parkinson disease, multiple sclerosis,
syphilis).
/square6Mainly there are two broad types of bladder dys-
function due to the above causes.
Flaccid (Hypotonic) Neurogenic Bladder
/square6It occurs due to cauda equina and sacral segments(S2–4) damage. It also occurs in the initial stages(stage of spinal shock) of acute cord damage.
/square6Here, the bladder volume is large, pressure is low,
and contractions are absent resulting in urinary
retention. Overflow incontinence can occur whenthe bladder capacity is exceeded.
Spastic Bladder
/square6It results from brain damage or spinal cord damageabove T12.
/square6Bladder volume is typically normal or small, andinvoluntary contractions occur. Decreased bladdervolume results in increased frequency of micturi-tion. Involuntary contractions result in urgency and
incontinence of urine.
/square6Bladder contraction and external urinary sphincter
relaxation are typically uncoordinated (detrusor-sphincter dyssynergia) resulting in failure of
external sphincter to relax when bladder is
contracting which leads to incomplete emptying.Central Lesion
/square6Disease involving the superior frontal and anteriorcingulate gyri cause loss of control of micturition.When the lesion is more anterior, the patient is notworried or embarrassed by the incontinence due
to a disinhibition state.
Investigations
/square6Normal micturition can be studied by urodynamic
studies which involves constant recording ofintravesical and intraurethral pressure, and perinealfloor EMG, with fluoroscopic monitoring. Theseurodynamic studies facilitate the diagnosis ofneurogenic bladder dysfunction.
/square6MRI of the spinal cord can show any spinal cordlesions.
Treatment
/square6In urinary retention, bladder drainage by conti-nuous indwelling catheter may be necessary. Since,continuous indwelling catheter can cause infectionif kept for a long time, intermittent catheterizationmay be necessary to prevent infection. Prophylactic
antibiotics may be necessary. Parasympatho-
mimetic drugs like carbachol and bethanechol causecontraction of the detrusor and are useful in flaccidparalysis of the bladder.
/square6In spastic paralysis, anticholinergics such aspropantheline, which causes relaxation of the
detrusor, may be tried.
/square6Surgery is a last resort. It is indicated in patients
who cannot use continuous or intermittent bladderdrainage. Sphincterotomy (for men) converts thebladder into an open draining conduit. Sacral (S3and S4) rhizotomy converts a spastic into a flaccid
bladder. Urinary diversion may involve an ileal
conduit or ureterostomy.
Figure 5.20 Nerve supply of urinary bladder

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5358 Q.Mention the various forms of neurosyphilis.
Q.Describe the clinical features and management of
meningovascular syphilis.
Q.General paresis of the insane.
Q.Tabes dorsalis.
/square6The term “neurosyphilis” refers to infection of the
central nervous system (CNS) by Treponema
pallidum (T. pallidum) . Many patients are able to
clear the infection spontaneously or due to
antibiotic therapy. Nowadays neurosyphilis is
mainly seen in HIV patients who are not able toclear the infection. Neurosyphilis can occur at anytime after initial infection.
/square6Various forms of neurosyphilis are as follows.
Early forms
/square6Meningitis—involvement of the cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) and meninges.
/square6Meningovascular syphilis—involvement ofmeninges and vasculature
Late forms
/square6General paresis of the insane—involvement of brain
parenchyma.
/square6Tabes dorsalis—involvement of spinal cord
parenchyma.
Meningovascular Syphilis
/square6Just like any other bacterial meningitis, syphiliticmeningitis can cause an infectious arteritis of any
vessel in the subarachnoid space which results in
thrombosis of the vessel leading to ischemia, andinfarction of the brain.
/square6Patients may present as ischemic stroke. Clinicalfeatures depend on the vessel involved. Lesscommonly, anterior spinal artery can get involvedleading to spinal cord infarction. The middlecerebral artery and its branches are most commonlyaffected. Meningovascular syphilis may develop in
the first few months or years after the syphilis
infection. Associated meningitis may manifest asheadache, dizziness, or personality changes.
/square6CSF analysis shows increased cells with pre-dominant lymphocytes and increased proteinconcentration. CSF-VDRL is usually but not alwaysreactive. Angiography can demonstrate thenarrowed or blocked vessels and neuroimagingshows one or more areas of infarction.
General Paresis (General Paralysis of the Insane; PareticNeurosyphilis; Dementia Paralytica)
/square6This is a progressive dementing illness due toinvolvement of the brain parenchyma by syphilis.
/square6General paresis usually develops 10 to 25 years after
infection, but it can occur much earlier also./square6In the early stage, patients have forgetfulness and
personality change. There is progressive decline inmemory and judgment leading to severe dementia.There may be psychiatric symptoms such asdepression, mania, or psychosis.
/square6Neurologic findings include dysarthria, facial andlimb hypotonia, intention tremors of the face,tongue, and hands, and reflex abnormalities.
/square6CSF examination shows increased lymphocytes andprotein. The CSF-VDRL is reactive in virtually allpatients, and neuroimaging usually shows brainatrophy.
Tabes Dorsalis
/square6Tabes dorsalis (also called locomotor ataxia) is adisease of the posterior columns of the spinal cordand of the dorsal roots. It has the longest latent
period between primary infection and onset
(average of about 20 years). It is rare now due toavailability of antibiotic therapy.
/square6Patient presents with sensory ataxia and sensory
symptoms such as lancinating pains and paraes-
thesias. There may be depressed lower limbreflexes, impaired vibratory and position sensation,impaired touch and pain, and optic atrophy.
/square6Sometimes gastric crises, characterized by recurrentattacks of severe epigastric pain, nausea, andvomiting may be seen.
/square6Pupillary irregularities are common and include
Argyll Robertson pupil (accommodation reflex
present, light reflex absent).
/square6Other findings seen with tabes dorsalis includeabsent lower extremity reflexes.
Treatment of Neurosyphilis
/square6All forms of neurosyphilis are treated as follows.
Drugs of Choice
/square6Penicillin G 3 to 4 million units IV every four hoursor 24 million units per day continuous IV infusion
for 10 to 14 days.
Alternatives
/square6Drug of choice for neurosyphilis is aqueous
penicillin 3 to 4 million units IV q 4 h (best
penetrates the CNS but may be impractical) or
procaine penicillin G 2.4 million units IM once/dayplus 500 mg probenecid PO qid is recommended;both drugs are given for 10 to 14 days, followed bybenzathine penicillin 2.4 million units IM once aweek for 3 weeks. Alternative is ceftriaxone 2 g IV
once daily for 10 to 14 days.
/square6Because Treponema pallidum  cannot be cultured in
the laboratory, success of neurosyphilis treatmentshould be monitored by resolution of clinical
features and CSF abnormalities. CSF should be
examined at three to six months after treatment and

/square6Diseases of Nervous System359
5every six months thereafter until CSF white blood
cell (WBC) count is normal and CSF-VDRL isnonreactive. The CSF WBC count should decline atsix months after successful treatment, and all CSFabnormalities should resolve by two years aftertreatment. Failure to meet these criteria should
prompt retreatment.
Q.Charcot’s joint (neuropathic arthropathy).
/square6Charcot’s joint is chronic, progressive, destructive
arthropathy due to loss of sensation of a joint.
/square6It is seen in tabes dorsalis, syringomyelia, diabeticneuropathy and other sensory polyneuropathies.
/square6Hips, knees and ankles are most commonlyinvolved.
/square6Lack of proprioception and pain sensation in thejoints results in ligamentous laxity, increased rangeof joint movement, instability, and damage byminor trauma. Pain is minimal even though theremay be extensive joint destruction.
/square6Treatment involves rest to the joint and avoidanceof weight bearing in early stages. Biphosphonates
such as pamidronate and alendronate have been
shown to be helpful in the treatment of Charcot’sjoints. In late stages when there is loss of jointarchitecture and deformities, surgery and orthoticsupport may help. Underlying cause should betackled.
Q.What are the diseases affecting posterior columns?
Q.What are the sensations carried by posterior
columns? Mention the physical signs of posterior
column lesion.
Diseases Affecting Posterior Columns
/square6Subacute combined degeneration.
/square6Tabes dorsalis.
/square6Compressive and non-compressive myelopathies.
Sensations Carried by Posterior Columns
/square6Vibration
/square6Joint position sense (proprioception)
/square6Fine touch.
Physical Signs of Posterior Column Lesion
/square6Sensory ataxia.
/square6Positive Romberg sign.
/square6Impaired fine touch, vibration and joint position
sense.
Q.Romberg sign.
/square6Romberg sign is positive in sensory ataxias. It is
not a test to assess the cerebellar function.How to Elicit Romberg Sign?
/square6Ask the patient to stand with the feet together. Thenask the patient to close both the eyes. If the patientshows swaying or loses balance, then Romberg’s sign
is positive. ( Note:  If the patient cannot stand with
the feet together and eyes open, then a cerebellarlesion is present and Romberg test is not applicable.)
Physiological Basis of Romberg Sign
/square6To maintain equilibrium, a person requires intactjoint position sense, intact vision, and intactvestibular and cerebellar systems. The absence ofone can be compensated by the other. In posterior
column lesions, joint position sense is lost, but the
person maintains balance by visual compensation.When the eyes are closed, visual cue is removedand the person sways or loses balance.
Common Causes of Positive Romberg Test
/square6Vitamin B12 deficiency:  Subacute combined degenera-
tion of the cord
/square6Diabetic peripheral large fiber neuropathy
/square6Friedrich’s ataxia
/square6Tabes dorsalis.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, diagnosis and
management of subacute combined degeneration.
/square6Subacute combined degeneration is a nutritional
disorder of the CNS due to vit B12 deficiency. There
is degeneration of the dorsal and lateral spinal(corticospinal) columns, hence called combined
degeneration. Degeneration is due to a defect in
myelin formation of unknown mechanism.
Clinical Features
/square6It is subacute in onset.
/square6Posterior column degeneration produces pares-
thesias and ataxia associated with loss of vibration
and position sense. Romberg’s sign is positive.
/square6Corticospinal tract degeneration produces weak-
ness, spasticity, extensor plantar response, clonus,
paraplegia, and even fecal and urinary incontinence.
/square6Ankle jerk may be absent due to associated peri-
pheral neuropathy but knee jerk is brisk.
/square6Other neurologic findings include memory loss,
irritability, and dementia.
/square6There may be macrocytic anemia due to Vit B12
deficiency.
Investigations
/square6Serum Vit B12 level will be low.
/square6CBC usually shows megaloblastic anemia.
/square6MRI of the spinal cord and brain may show hyper-
intense lesions in the white matter.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5360 Treatment
/square6Inj Vit B12 (intramuscular) 1 mg every day for one
week, followed by 1 mg every week for 4 weeksand then, 1 mg every month for the remainder of
the patient’s life.
Q.Discuss the classification, etiology, clinical features,
diagnosis and management of motor neurondisease (MND).
Q.Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
Q.Progressive muscular atrophy (PMA).
/square6Motor neurone diseases (MND) are a group of
degenerative disorders selectively affecting upper
or lower motor neurons, or both. The condition isprogressive and has a fatal outcome.
/square6Symptoms vary in severity and include muscle
weakness and atrophy, fasciculations, emotional
lability, and respiratory muscle weakness.
/square6MND has worldwide distribution. Males areaffected more commonly and generally it starts
between 45 and 60 years.
Types of Motor Neuron Diseases
•Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) —combination of upper
and lower motor neuron signs.
•Primary lateral sclerosis (PLS) —predominantly upper motor
neuron signs.
•Progressive bulbar palsy —signs limited to bulbar muscles.
•Progressive muscular atrophy (spinal muscular atrophy) —
predominantly lower motor neuron signs.
/square6ALS is the commonest type of MND, affecting the
anterior horn cells (responsible for LMN signs) and
the corticospinal tract (responsible for UMN signs).Other motor neuron diseases involve only parti-cular subsets of motor neurons. Thus, progressivebulbar palsy and spinal muscular atrophy (SMA)involve the lower motor neurons of brainstem and
spinal cord respectively. Primary lateral sclerosis
(PLS) affects only upper motor neurons innervatingthe brainstem and spinal cord. The death of themotor neurons leads to atrophy of the musclesinnervated by them.
/square6In motor neuron disease, sensory system, cerebellumand other areas of the brain are not affected. Motorneurons supplying eye muscles are also not affected.
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS)
Etiology
/square6Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is the classicalprototype and the commonest type of MND. Mostof the ALS cases are sporadic. Some are familial. Evensporadic cases may have some genetic influence.Following are risk factors for the development of
ALS. Males and whites are affected more commonly.• Genetic factors
• Smoking• Old age
• Toxins: Lead, tin and mercury
• Electric shock• Radiation exposure
• Excess glutamate activity
Pathology
/square6The main pathology is death of anterior horn cells
of the spinal cord and cranial motor nuclei of thelower brainstem (except those that innervate ocular
muscles). The pyramidal tracts show degenerative
changes and there may be secondary demyelination.
Clinical Features
/square6Initial symptom is usually insidious onset ofweakness and clumsiness of one hand for skilledactivity which progresses and gross activity alsobecomes difficult.
/square6Slowly the opposite hand is involved and whole ofboth upper limbs may be affected.
/square6LMN signs such as wasting, flaccidity, loss of
tendon reflexes and fasciculations are seen along
with UMN signs such as spasticity and exaggeratedreflexes.
/square6Lower limb involvement may precede or follow
upper limb involvement. There is difficulty in
walking with spastic gait and pyramidal signs. Theknee and ankle jerks are exaggerated. Plantarresponse is extensor bilaterally.
/square6Involvement of cranial nerve nuclei (mainly IX, X,XI and XII nerve nuclei) causes difficulty inswallowing, nasal regurgitation and slurred speech.Tongue shows atrophy and fasciculations. UMNinvolvement results in pseudobulbar palsy withexaggerated jaw jerk.
/square6There is no sensory loss but subjective sensationslike numbness, cramps, neuralgic pain may becomplained of. Impotence occurs early in thedisease. There is no loss of sphincter control.
/square6The progression of the disease is variable. It can berapid and result in death within a year or it may beslow over many years. Death occurs due to respira-tory failure.
Treatment
/square6So far, there is no effective drug for the treatment
of MND.
/square6The drug riluzole has been approved for ALS
because it produces a modest lengthening ofsurvival. Riluzole blocks release of glutamic acid
and may slow the progression of disease by
disrupting glutamate-mediated neurotoxicity.There are many drugs currently under trial forMND.

/square6Diseases of Nervous System361
5/square6Edaravone is a free radical scavenger that is thought
to reduce oxidative stress and has proven to bebeneficial in early-stage ALS.
/square6Stem cell therapy and immunomodulation therapies
are under trial.
/square6In the absence of specific therapy for MND, rehabili-
tation measures are helpful. Foot-drop splintsfacilitate walking and finger extension splints can
potentiate grip. If there is difficulty in chewing and
swallowing, gastrostomy is helpful for restoringnutrition and hydration.
Progressive Muscular Atrophy (Spinal Muscular Atrophy)
/square6Spinal muscular atrophies (SMA) include severaltypes of hereditary disorders characterized byskeletal muscle wasting due to progressivedegeneration of anterior horn cells in the spinal cord
and of motor nuclei in the brainstem.
/square6SMA can begin in utero , during infancy, in child-
hood, or in adulthood.
Etiology
/square6SMA usually result from autosomal recessivemutations of a single gene locus on the short arm
of chromosome 5. In addition to this, many other
genetic defects have been demonstrated. There aremany types of SMAs, common types are infantileSMA (Werdnig-Hoffmann disease) and adolescentSMA (Kugelberg-Welander disease).
Pathology
/square6There is degeneration of anterior horn cells of spinalcord and cranial nerve nuclei with atrophy and
wasting of corresponding skeletal muscles.
Clinical Features
/square6SMA presents predominantly with LMN signs. It
can start any time. There is flaccid weakness, hypo-tonia, decreased or absent deep tendon reflexes,
fasciculations, and muscle atrophy. Young childrenmay not be able to walk. Death occurs due to respira-tory muscle weakness and respiratory failure.
/square6There is no sensory involvement.
Diagnosis
/square6Diagnosis of SMA is made by genetic testing in apatient with appropriate clinical features. Electro-
myogram and muscle biopsy reveal evidence ofdenervation but are unnecessary if a moleculardiagnosis is established.
Treatment
/square6No treatment is currently available. Patients maybenefit from physiotherapy, and other supportive
care.
/square6Trials with ciliary neurotrophic factor, brain-
derived neurotrophic factor, gabapentin, andriluzole are going on.
Q.Discuss the classification, etiology, clinical features,
diagnosis and management of peripheral neuropathy.
Q.Mention the causes of polyneuropathies. Discuss
the clinical features, diagnosis and management
of polyneuropathies.
/square6The peripheral nervous system extends from theanterior horn cell or the sensory ganglion up to theneuromuscular junction or the receptors.
/square6Peripheral neuropathy is a general term and refersto any disorder affecting peripheral nervoussystem.
/square6Polyneuropathy is a specific term which refers to ageneralized, symmetrical process affecting manyperipheral nerves, with the distal nerves affectedmore prominently. Polyneuropathy is a type ofperipheral neuropathy.
TABLE 5.19: Classification of peripheral neuropathies
Type Features Examples
Mononeuropathy Pathological process affecting a single nerve Trauma, tumor, carpal tunnel syndrome
affecting median nerve, Saturday night
palsy
Mononeuritis multiplex (multiple Affects 2 or more discrete nerves in separate Leprosy, diabetes, sarcoidosis, HIV, poly-
mononeuropathy, or multifocal areas arteritis nodosa
neuropathy)
Polyneuropathy Refers to diffuse, symmetrical disease, usually Guillain-Barré syndrome, diabetic peri-
beginning peripherally. They are classified pheral neuropathy, Vit B12 deficiency
broadly into demyelinating and axonal types.
The polyneuropathies can be acute or chronic,
motor or sensory or sensorimotor (i.e. mixed)and autonomic
Monoradiculopathy Single spinal root is affected Disc prolapse, trauma, tumor
Polyradiculopathy Many spinal roots are affected Spondylosis, arachnoiditis, GB syndrome
Plexopathy Brachial or lumbosacral plexus are affected Diabetes, trauma, tumors

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5362 Polyneuropathy
Causes of Polyneuropathy
•Metabolic : Diabetes mellitus, amyloidosis, porphyria,
paraproteinemia, hypothyroidism
•Toxic:  Alcohol, lead, arsenic, thallium
•Drugs:  Vincristine, INH, hydralazine, dapsone, amiodarone
•Infections:  Leprosy, diphtheria, HIV, Lyme disease
•Collagen disorders:  SLE, polyarteritis nodosa, rheumatoid
arthritis
•Vitamin deficiencies:  B1, B6, B12
•Paraneoplastic:  Carcinoma bronchus
•Genetic:  Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
•Autoimmune:  Guillain–Barré syndrome (AIDP)
•Idiopathic
Clinical Features
/square6In polyneuropathy, injury tends to be related to
axon length; thus, longer axons are affected first,resulting in symptoms that begin in the lowerextremities. Sensory symptoms usually precedemotor symptoms.
/square6Patients present with slowly progressive sensoryloss and dysesthesias such as numbness, a burningsensation and pain in the feet, and mild gaitabnormalities (due to proprioceptive loss). As the
syndrome progresses, mild weakness of the lower
limbs and hand symptoms may begin, resulting inthe classic “glove and stocking” sensory loss. Thenumbness may continue to extend proximally insevere cases, affecting the intercostal nerves.
/square6GBS affects predominantly motor nerve fibers; thus,weakness rather than sensory loss is seen.
/square6Examination usually reveals distal loss of sensation
to pin prick, light touch, vibration, cold, and
proprioception. Reflexes are hypoactive or absentdistally, usually at the ankles initially. Muscle weak-ness may be present in advanced neuropathies.
Investigations
/square6Electrodiagnostic testing:  Electromyography/nerve
conduction studies (EMG/NCS) can determinewhether it is axonal or demyelinating in character.
Demyelinating disorders are characterized by slow
nerve conduction velocity, whereas axonal neuro-pathies are characterized by reduced amplitude ofaction potentials with relative preservation of thenerve conduction velocity.
/square6Nerve biopsy:  Nerve biopsy is occasionally useful
for diagnosing the underlying etiology of poly-neuropathy such as amyloid. The sural nerve at theankle is the preferred site for cutaneous nerve biopsy.
/square6Other tests:  A standard laboratory “screen” in
patients with polyneuropathy includes a completeblood count, ESR, TSH, serum protein electro-phoresis, blood glucose, vitamin B
12 concentration,
antinuclear antibody, and urinalysis. Additionaltesting may include lumbar puncture, genetic
testing, and muscle or nerve biopsy.
Treatment
/square6The aim of treatment is correcting the underlyingcause and control of symptoms.
/square6Treatment of the underlying cause —proper control of
diabetes, reducing exposures to toxins, withdrawingthe causative drug, etc.
/square6Treatment of symptoms and prevention of complica-tions —gabapentin, tricyclic antidepressants, and
carbamazepine can be used to control neuropathicsymptoms such as pricking pain and burning
sensation. Physiotherapy, use of ankle-foot
orthoses, splints, and walking assistance devicescan significantly improve lifestyle in the face ofsignificant disability. Proper foot and nail care isimportant to prevent ulcer formation.
Q.Describe the etiology, clinical features, diagnosis
and management of Guillain-Barré syndrome (acute
inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy: AIDP).
/square6The Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) is an acutemonophasic illness causing a rapidly progressivepolyneuropathy with weakness or paralysis.
Etiology and Pathogenesis
/square6Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) results from animmune response to a preceding infection that
cross-reacts with peripheral nerve components
because of molecular mimicry.
/square6The immune response can be directed towards themyelin or the axon of peripheral nerve, resulting
in demyelinating and axonal forms of GBS.
/square6Many infections can trigger GBS. Commonly
implicated infections are Campylobacter jejuni
infection, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, and
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). Other
triggering events are immunization (influenza,meningococcal, etc.), surgery, trauma, and bone-marrow transplantation.
/square6Nerve damage is due to activated T cells and circu-lating antibodies such as antimyelin antibodies.
Subtypes of Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS)
Acute inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy(AIDP)
/square6Demyelinating type. Recovery is rapid.
Acute motor axonal neuropathy (AMAN)
/square6Axonal type. There is no sensory nerve involvement
and no peripheral nerve demyelination. Recoveryis rapid.
Acute motor sensory axonal neuropathy (AMSAN)
/square6Axonal type. Both sensory and motor fibers are
affected and recovery is slow.

/square6Diseases of Nervous System363
5Miller-Fisher syndrome (MFS)
/square6Rare variant of GBS. Demyelinating type. Classically
presents as a triad of ataxia, areflexia, andophthalmoplegia. Patients may also have mild limb
weakness, ptosis, facial palsy, or bulbar palsy.
Clinical Features
/square6The cardinal features of GBS are progressive, symme-
tric LMN type muscle weakness (flaccid paralysis)and areflexia (absent deep tendon reflexes).
/square6Weakness usually starts in the lower limbs, and
then ascends up to involve trunk and upper limbs
(ascending paralysis). Weakness can vary from mildweakness of legs to complete paralysis of allextremity, facial, respiratory, and bulbar muscles.However, in some patients weakness can begin inthe arms or facial muscles and then descend down
to involve trunk and lower limbs (descending
paralysis).
/square6Severe respiratory muscle weakness may lead torespiratory failure and requires ventilator support.
/square6Facial (LMN type) and oculomotor nerve involve-ment occur in some patients. Bilateral facial palsyalso can occur.
/square6Sensory symptoms such as paresthesias occur inthe hands and feet in most of the patients, but usuallythere are no objective sensory deficits. There is oftenprominent severe pain in the lower back.
/square6Autonomic neuropathy occurs in majority of patientsand manifests as tachycardia, urinary retention,fluctuating BP, orthostatic hypotension, brady-cardia, arrhythmias, ileus, and loss of sweating.
/square6GBS usually progresses over a period of about twoweeks and recovery starts after about a month.
Investigations
/square6Nerve conduction studies (NCS) and electromyography(EMG) are used to confirm the diagnosis and also
to know the type of GBS. Abnormalities in NCS thatare consistent with demyelination are delayed distal
latencies, slowed nerve conduction velocities,conduction block, etc. In case of axonal damage,
needle EMG will show decreased recruitment andrapid firing motor units in weak muscles.
/square6CSF analysis: Protein is elevated with a normal WBC
count. This is known as albuminocytologic dissocia-
tion, and is present in most patients one week afterthe onset of symptoms. However, cell count maybe increased in patients with HIV infection.
/square6Antibodies:  Against nerve components can be
detected in the blood of GBS patients. However,antibody testing is not routinely used.
Treatment
/square6Plasmapheresis— removes the circulating antibodies
and helps in fast recovery. 4 sittings of plasma-pheresis are recommended.
/square6Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG)— probably acts
by neutralizing circulating antibodies and immuno-modulation. IVIG is given in a dose of 0.4 g/kgdaily for 6 days.
/square6Both plasmapheresis and IV immunoglobulins haveequal efficacy and combining both of them is notbetter than any one given alone.
/square6Steroids— studies have shown that steroids do not
provide any benefit in GBS.
/square6Supportive therapy— bowel and bladder care, ade-
quate nutrition, monitoring for respiratory failure and
providing ventilatory support if required, cardiac
monitoring, and physiotherapy are all important.
Q.Causes of peripheral neuropathies with significant
autonomic neuropathy.
• Diabetes mellitus
• Hansen’s disease• Acute intermittent porphyria• Alcoholism• Guillain-Barré syndrome• Amyloidosis• Inherited: Riley-Day syndrome, Refsum’s disease• Toxic neuropathies: Thallium, acrylamide
Q.Differentiation between demyelinating neuropathy and axonal neuropathy.
TABLE 5.20: Differentiation between demyelinating and axonal neuropathy
Features Demyelinating neuropathy Axonal neuropathy
Onset Usually acute Insidious
Sensory loss Minimal Significant (glove and stocking type)
Muscle wasting No Yes
Fasciculations No Yes
Reflexes Loss of all deep tendon reflexes Loss of only distal reflexes such as ankle
Recovery Rapid and usually complete Slow with residual deficit
CSF protein Raised Normal
Nerve conduction velocity Very slow Normal or slightly slow
Amplitude of action potential Normal Reduced

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5364 Q.Carpal tunnel syndrome.
/square6Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) is entrapment
neuropathy of median nerve in carpal tunnel of the
wrist.
/square6This is the most common nerve entrapment
disorder. Median nerve dysfunction occurs due topressure on it within the carpal tunnel.
Causes
• Idiopathic
• Colles’ fracture or other wrist trauma• Hypothyroidism• Diabetes mellitus• Pregnancy (third trimester)• Obesity• Rheumatoid arthritis (with wrist involvement)• Acromegaly• Amyloidosis• Renal dialysis patients
Clinical Features
/square6Pain and paresthesia in the thumb, first two fingers,
and the radial-half of the ring finger (the distribu-tion of the median nerve). Pain may radiateproximally into the forearm. Many patients
experience pain at night and are awakened by
abnormal sensations.
/square6Physical examination may reveal weakness ofthenar muscles and flattening of the thenareminence. There may be sensory loss in the palm
and radial three-and-a-half fingers.
/square6Tinel’s sign and Phalen’s tests are often positive.
Tinel’s sign is elicited by tapping the flexor aspectof the wrist: This causes tingling and pain. In a
positive Phalen’s test, symptoms are reproduced
on maximal wrist flexion for 1 minute.
/square6Nerve conduction studies (NCS) can show delayedconduction through median nerve at the wrist.Treatment
/square6For mild cases, conservative measures such as, wristsplint at night, oral or local steroid injection, physio-therapy, and yoga can give relief. In pregnancy
(fluid retention), it is often self-limiting.
/square6Surgical decompression of the carpel tunnel is
required for severe cases.
Q.Meralgia paresthetica.
/square6Meralgia paresthetica is the term used to describe
the clinical syndrome of pain and paresthesia in the
anterolateral thigh due to compression of lateralfemoral cutaneous nerve of thigh as it courses underinguinal ligament.
Etiology
/square6Entrapment and compression of the lateral femoralcutaneous nerve can occur due to following reasons.
• Obesity
• Tight garments around the waist• Scar tissue near the lateral aspect of the inguinal ligament• Pregnancy• Diabetes• Seatbelt injuries
Clinical Features
/square6Tingling, numbness and burning pain over the
anterolateral thigh is the classic presentation.
/square6The discomfort is often worsened by activitieswhich increase intra-abdominal pressure such ascoughing and Valsalva maneuvers.
/square6There may be sensory loss in the area of lateralfemoral cutaneous nerve.
Treatment
/square6Meralgia paresthetica is a self-limited, benigncondition. Reassure the patient that it is not aserious problem. Advice the patient to lose weight
if obese and to avoid tight garments and belt.
/square6In patients with persistent pain in spite of all these
measures, drugs like carbamazepine or phenytoin,or gabapentin can be helpful in reducing neuro-
pathic pain.
/square6Local corticosteroid injections can be used occasio-
nally to control symptoms.
/square6Rarely, surgery is necessary. Decompression of thenerve (sectioning the inferior slip of the attachmentof the inguinal ligament to the anterior superior iliacspine) may provide long lasting relief in some.
Q.Mention the diseases affecting neuromuscular
junction.
Q.Describe the etiology, pathophysiology, clinical
features, investigations and management of
myasthenia gravis. Figure 5.21 Distribution of pain in carpal tunnel syndrome


/square6Diseases of Nervous System365
5Q.Cholinergic crisis.
Q.Myasthenic crisis.
Diseases affecting neuromuscular junction are:
Autoimmune
• Myasthenia gravis• Eaton-Lambert syndrome
Toxic
• Botulism• Drug induced• Organophosphate poisoning
Congenital
• Congenital myasthenic syndrome• Familial limb girdle myasthenia
Myasthenia Gravis
/square6Myasthenia gravis is an immunologically mediated
disorder affecting neuromuscular transmission. Itis characterized by fluctuating muscle weaknessworsened by repetitive use, and improved byresting.
/square6It is the most common disorder affecting the neuro-muscular junction (NMJ) of the skeletal muscles.
Etiology and Pathology
/square6The basic abnormality in myasthenia gravis is atthe neuromuscular junction. Muscle weakness isdue to an antibody-mediated, T cell dependentimmunological attack directed at postsynaptic
acetylcholine receptors. Antibodies bind to acetyl-
choline receptors and prevent acetylcholine actionleading to weakness.
/square6There is a strong association between HLA B8
antigen and myasthenia gravis.
/square6Thymus plays an unknown role in the patho-
genesis. There is an increased incidence ofmyasthenia gravis in patients with thymoma.
Clinical Features
/square6The disease occurs at all ages. Usually it starts between
10 – 70 years of age. Onset may be sudden or gradual./square6It is two times more common in women.
/square6The characteristic feature of weakness in myas-
thenia gravis is its fluctuation. Muscle strength
decreases with activity and improves with rest.
Patients complain of easy fatigability. This can bedemonstrated by asking the patient to look up
without closing the eyes for a minute, count loudly
from 1 to 100, and hold the arms in a horizontalposition for a minute. Muscle wasting does not
occur. Tendon reflexes are preserved. Smooth
muscles are not involved.
/square6The extraocular muscles get involved first in most
cases because of which patient complains of
diplopia. Weakness of levator palpebrae superiorisleads to ptosis.
/square6Involvement of facial muscles results in difficultyin eye closure, inability to whistle and a distortedsmile. There is difficulty in chewing tough foods.
Weakness of the pterygoids results in difficulty in
closing the mouth, and the jaw may hang.Weakness of bulbar muscles results in difficulty in
swallowing and speaking. Voice becomes low and
fades away as the patient continues to speak.
/square6In the limbs proximal muscles are commonly
involved than distal ones. This results in difficulty
in raising the arms above the shoulders, difficultyin getting up from squatting position or climbing
stairs.
/square6Involvement of intercostal muscles and diaphragm
leads to respiratory difficulty.
/square6There may be other autoimmune diseases such asrheumatoid arthritis, pernicious anemia, systemiclupus erythematosus, etc.
Diagnosis
/square6Fluctuating weakness is characteristic of myas-
thenia gravis. Weakness increases on exertion and
improves on resting. The combination of ptosis,ophthalmoplegia with weakness of orbicularis oculiand normal pupils is virtually diagnostic.
Figure 5.22 Normal NMJ (left) and abnormal NMJ in myasthenia gravis (right)

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5366 Investigations
Anticholinesterase tests
/square6Drugs which inhibit acetylcholinesterase can
increase the levels of acetylcholine at the neuro-
muscular junction and improve muscle weakness.
Such drugs include edrophonium and neostigmine.
/square6Neostigmine test : 1 mg of neostigmine is given
intramuscularly or subcutaneously. Muscle
weakness improves in 15–20 minutes and reaches
its peak in 30 minutes. 1 ampoule atropine (0.6 mg)
can be given before injecting neostigmine to prevent
muscarinic side effects and cardiac complications
of neostigmine.
/square6Edrophonium (Tensilon) test:  Edrophonium is a short-
acting anticholinesterase drug. 10 mg is drawn into
a syringe. Initially 2 mg is injected IV and if there
are no side effects the balance 8 mg is given after
30 seconds. Muscle weakness improves within a
minute and the effect lasts for 5–10 minutes. Atropine
can be given before injecting edrophonium to
prevent side effects.
Electromyography
/square6Supramaximal stimulation of a motor nerve at 2 to
3 Hz results in decrement of the amplitude of the
evoked muscle action potential from the first to the
fifth response. The test is positive in nearly all
patients. The abnormality, i.e. decremental
response, is reversed by neostigmine.
Serologic tests
/square6The demonstration in serum of antibodies against
Ach receptors is a sensitive diagnostic test. Patients
with pure ocular myasthenia may not have Ach
receptor antibodies.
Other tests
/square6A chest X-ray should be taken to rule out any
associated thymoma. Thymic tumor would be seen
as an anterior mediastinal mass. CT-scan is more
sensitive for detecting thymic enlargements.
/square6Thyroid function tests should be done as 10% ofcases have associated hyperthyroidism.
Treatment
Augmentation of neuromuscular transmission
/square6Anticholinesterases are the most commonly used
drugs. These are pyridostigmine and neostigmine.
Pyridostigmine has fewer muscarinic side effects
and is therefore more widely used. In patients who
do not respond adequately to anticholinesterases,
other forms of therapy should be added.
Immune suppression
/square6Alternate-day prednisolone treatment induces
remission or significantly improves the disease
(dose 1 mg/kg body weight). After the improve-
ment reaches a plateau, the dose must be lowered
gradually over several months to establish theminimum maintenance dose./square6Azathioprine in doses of 2 to 3 mg/kg/day also
induces remissions or provides improvement.Azathioprine along with prednisolone reduces thedose of prednisone and is associated with fewertreatment failures, longer remissions, and fewerside effects than either drug alone. Cyclosporine
or mycophenolate mofetil can be used in patients
who are refractory to prednisolone and azathio-prine.
Other treatments
/square6Plasmapheresis is indicated in severe generalized
or fulminating myasthenia gravis that is refractoryto other forms of treatment. Intravenous immuno-globulin therapy is also useful in severe myasthenia
gravis.
/square6Thymectomy increases the remission rate and
improves the clinical course of myasthenia gravis.
Cholinergic and Myasthenic Crisis
/square6Cholinergic crisis  is due to over treatment with
anticholinesterase drugs (pyridostigmine and
neostigmine). There is increased availability of Ach
leading to persistent depolarization of neuro-muscular junction and hence weakness. Typicallyweakness worsens despite giving increasingamounts of anticholinesterase drugs. Cholinergiccrises are associated with muscarinic effects, such
as abdominal cramps, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea,
miosis, lacrimation, increase in bronchial secretions,diaphoresis, and bradycardia.
/square6Myasthenic crisis  is due to severe worsening of myas-
thenia gravis. There are no muscarinic symptoms.
Injection of 2 mg edrophonium (tensilon) givenintravenously improves weakness in myestheniccrisis whereas weakness worsens if it is cholinergiccrisis. However, in practice, the two types of crisesmay be difficult to distinguish. Both types of crisis
have difficulty with respiration, feeding, or handl-
ing of secretions and are best treated by drugwithdrawal, endotracheal intubation or tracheo-stomy, ventilator support and IV fluids.
Q.Eaton-Lambert myasthenic syndrome.
/square6Eaton-Lambert myasthenic syndrome is an auto-
immune disease where antibodies destroy calciumchannels at the motor nerve terminal. This leads todecreased presynaptic release of acetylcholine at theneuromuscular junction causing muscle weakness.
/square6It is usually associated with small cell carcinomaof the lung.
/square6It is more common in males and commonly occurs
after the age of 50 years.
/square6Patient complains of weakness and fatigabilty more
often in the legs with relative sparing of extraocularand bulbar muscles. Weakness may improve after
a few seconds of activity (opposite of myasthenia

/square6Diseases of Nervous System367
5gravis which worsens after activity). Autonomic
symptoms may occur. Deep tendon reflexes aredepressed or absent.
/square6EMG shows incremental response to repetitive
stimulation.
/square6Treatment consists of removal of tumor if detected,
immunosuppression, and enhancement of neuro-muscular transmission by guanidine and 3, 4
diaminopyridine.
Q.What is myopathy? Classify myopathies.
/square6The term myopathy refers to muscle diseases in
which there is a primary structural or functionalimpairment of muscle.
/square6Myopathies therefore do not include diseases of thecentral nervous system (CNS), lower motor neurons(motor neuron disease), peripheral nerves, orneuromuscular junction which have secondaryeffects on muscles.
Classification of Myopathies
Hereditary
•Muscular dystrophies
• Congenital myopathies• Channelopathies (periodic paralysis)• Metabolic myopathies
• Mitochondrial myopathies
Acquired• Autoimmune or inflammatory myopathies (dermatomyositis,
polymyositis)
• Infectious myopathies
• Endocrine myopathies• Myopathies due to systemic illness• Drug induced/toxic myopathies
Q.What are muscular dystrophies? Enumerate muscular
dystrophies. Describe the etiology, clinical features
and management of Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy.
/square6Muscular dystrophies are inherited myopathiescharacterized by progressive muscle weakness and
degeneration with subsequent replacement by
fibrous and fatty tissue.
Types of Muscular Dystrophies
X-linked muscular dystrophy
• Duchenne
• Becker
• Emery-Dreifuss
Autosomal dominant
• Facioscapulohumeral• Oculopharyngeal• Myotonic
Autosomal dominant/recessive
• Limb-girdle
Sporadic
• CongenitalDuchenne Muscular Dystrophy
/square6Duchenne-type muscular dystrophy is an X-linked
recessive disorder resulting from mutations ofdystrophin gene located at Xp21.
/square6The incidence of Duchenne-type muscular dys-trophy is 1 in 3500 male births.
Pathogenesis
/square6Dystrophin is a subsarcolemmal cytoskeletal proteinwhich provides support to the muscle membraneduring contraction.
/square6Dystrophin deficiency weakens the sarcolemma,permitting the influx of calcium-rich extracellularfluid, which then activates intracellular proteasesand complement, leading to fiber necrosis.
Clinical Features
/square6Duchenne dystrophy presents as early as age 2 to
3 years.
/square6Proximal muscles are affected more severely (limb-
girdle pattern).
/square6The affected child has difficulty running, jumping,and walking up steps. When arising from the floor,affected boys may use hand support to push them-selves to an upright position (Gower’s sign).
/square6Calf muscles may appear hypertrophied due toreplacement of muscle fibres by fat (pseudohyper-trophy).
/square6The disease is progressive and the child is usuallywheelchair bound by the age of twelve.
/square6Paraspinal muscle weakness leads to progressivekyphoscoliosis.
/square6Respiratory function gradually declines. Mostpatients die of respiratory complications in their 20s.
/square6Cardiac muscle is also affected leading to dilatedcardiomyopathy and conduction defects.
/square6The smooth muscle of the gastrointestinal tract is alsoinvolved, and intestinal pseudo-obstruction occurs.
/square6Children also frequently have varying degrees ofmental retardation.
Investigations
/square6Dystrophin gene defect can be detected by DNAanalysis. Muscle biopsy can show dystrophin defi-
ciency, muscle fibre degeneration and replacement
with connective tissue and fat.
/square6Serum creatine kinase (CK) levels may be elevatedbut decrease when there is severe loss of muscle mass.
/square6Electromyogram (EMG) shows fibrillation poten-tials and myopathic motor units.
Treatment
/square6Corticosteroids are the mainstay of treatment forDuchenne-type muscular dystrophy. Prednisolone
0.75 mg/kg/day can improve muscle strength and
delay the progression into a wheelchair bound state.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5368 Prednisone also delays respiratory compromise, but
it cannot prevent deterioration and death.
/square6Gene therapy for muscular dystrophies is currentlyunder evaluation.
/square6Stem cell therapy is also under investigation.
Becker Muscular Dystrophy
/square6The pathogenesis, investigations and treatment ofBecker muscular dystrophy is same as that ofDuchenne muscular dystrophy. Becker muscular
dystrophy is a mild form compared to Duchenneand typically becomes symptomatic much later.Ambulation is usually preserved until at least
age 15, and many children remain ambulatory into
adulthood. Most affected children survive into their30s and 40s.
Q.Causes of wasting of small muscles of hand.
/square6Spinal cord lesions:  Motor neuron disease, syringo-
myelia, intramedullary tumors, C8, T1 lesions(cervical spondylosis, trauma)
/square6Medial cord lesions of brachial plexus:  Pancoast tumor,
metastases, trauma, thoracic outlet syndrome.
/square6Median nerve lesions:  Trauma, carpal tunnel
syndrome, vasculitis.
/square6Ulnar nerve lesions:  Trauma, entrapment, leprosy,
vasculitis.
/square6Muscle disease:  Focal amyotrophy.
Q. Wernicke’s encephalopathy.
/square6Wernicke’s encephalopathy (WE) is a common, acute
neurologic disorder caused by thiamine deficiency.
Etiology
/square6Wernicke’s encephalopathy usually occurs in
chronic alcoholics. Excessive alcohol intake
interferes with thiamine absorption from the GItract and hepatic storage of thiamine.
/square6Wernicke’s encephalopathy may also result from
other conditions that cause prolonged undernutri-
tion or vitamin deficiency (e.g. recurrent dialysis,hyperemesis, starvation, gastric plication, cancer,AIDS).
/square6Loading carbohydrates in patients with thiamin defi-ciency (i.e. refeeding after starvation or giving IVdextrose-containing solutions to high-risk patients)can trigger Wernicke’s encephalopathy becauseremaining thiamine gets used up for carbohydratemetabolism and acute deficiency is precipitated.
Pathology
/square6Pathologically there is loss of neuronal processes,gliosis, and petechial hemorrhages in the medial
thalamus and hypothalamus, midbrain periaque-ductal gray matter, floor of the fourth ventricle andcerebellum.Clinical Features
/square6Clinical features start suddenly.
/square6It is manifested by a clinical triad of encephalo-pathy, ocular dysfunction, and ataxia.
/square6Encephalopathy manifests as disorientation,indifference, inattention, drowsiness, or stupor. If
patients are not treated, stupor may progress to
coma and death.
/square6Ocular dysfunction causes horizontal and verticalnystagmus and partial ophthalmoplegias (e.g.
lateral rectus palsy, conjugate gaze palsies).
/square6Ataxia results from vestibular disturbance and
cerebellar dysfunction. Gait is wide-based and slow,with short steps.
Diagnosis
/square6Diagnosis is clinical and should be suspected inchronic alcoholics and malnourished patients.
/square6There is decreased level of erythrocyte transketo-lase. Thiamin levels are not routinely measured.
/square6Alternative pathologies should be ruled out by
appropriate investigations such as CT brain, CSF
studies, and blood investigations.
Treatment
/square6If Wernicke’s encephalopathy is suspected, it
should be treated immediately with parenteral
thiamine 100 mg IV or IM, continued daily for atleast 3 to 5 days.
/square6Mg is a necessary cofactor in thiamin-dependent
metabolism, and hypomagnesemia should be
corrected using Mg sulfate 1 to 2 g IM or IV q 6 to 8 h.
/square6Supportive treatment includes hydration, correctionof electrolyte imbalances, and general nutritional
therapy, including multivitamins.
Q.Korsakoff psychosis.
/square6Korsakoff’s psychosis is a late complication of
persistent Wernicke’s encephalopathy and results inmemory deficits, confusion, and behavioral changes.
/square6Almost 80% of untreated patients with Wernicke’s
encephalopathy develop Korsakoff’s psychosis.
Other triggers include head injury, subarachnoidhemorrhage, and thalamic lesions.
Clinical Features
/square6Immediate memory is severely affected; retrogradeand anterograde amnesia occurs in varying degrees.Remote memory is less affected. Disorientation totime is common. Emotional changes are common;they include apathy, blandness, or mild euphoria
with little or no response to events, even frightening
ones. Spontaneity and initiative may be decreased.
/square6Confabulation is often a striking feature. Patientsunconsciously fabricate imaginary or confused
accounts of events they cannot recall.

/square6Diseases of Nervous System369
5/square6Features of both Wernicke’s encephalopathy and
Korsakoff’s psychosis can coexist and is called
Wernicke-Korsakoff’s syndrome.
Diagnosis
/square6Diagnosis is based on typical symptoms in patientswith a history of alcohol abuse. Other causes of
symptoms (e.g. CNS injury or infection) must beruled out by appropriate investigations such as
brain imaging and CSF studies.
Treatment
/square6Treatment consists of thiamine and adequatehydration.
Q.Define dementia. Enumerate the causes of dementia.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of dementia.
Or
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of Alzheimer’s disease.
/square6Dementia is defined as an acquired deterioration
in cognitive abilities that impairs the performance
of activities of daily living. Memory is the mostcommon cognitive ability affected.
Causes of Dementia
Degenerative diseases
• Alzheimer’s disease
• Dementia with Lewy bodies
• Frontotemporal dementia• Huntington’s disease
• Parkinson’s disease
Structural brain problems
• Multi infarct dementia
• Cerebral vasculitis
• Subdural hematoma• Tumors
• Normal pressure hydrocephalus
Metabolic
• Uremia
• Liver failure
Toxic
• Alcohol
• Lead, mercury poisoning
Vitamin deficiency• Vit B
12 deficiency, thiamine deficiency, nicotinic acid (pellagra)
Traumatic
• Punch drunk syndrome (boxers)Infections
• Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
• HIV infection• Neurosyphilis
Endocrine
• Hypothyroidism• Hyperparathyroidsm
• Adrenal insufficiency
• Cushing syndrome/square6Degenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease
cause progressive irreversible dementia.
/square6Some causes of dementias are reversible (reversibledementias). These are Vit B
12 deficiency, thiamine
deficiency, nicotinic acid deficiency (pellagra),
hypothyroidism, chronic brain infections (syphilis,HIV). Normal-pressure hydrocephalus, subduralhematoma, etc.
Alzheimer’s Disease
/square6Alzheimer’s disease is a progressive neurologic dis-order which results in global cognitive impairment,personality changes, and functional impairments.It was first recognized by German psychiatrist AloisAlzheimer.
/square6Alzheimer’s disease is the most common cause ofdementia in the elderly. It accounts for 60 to 80% ofdementias in the elderly. The disease is twice ascommon among women as among men, partlybecause women have a longer life expectancy.
Etiology and Pathogenesis
/square6Most cases are sporadic, with late onset ( ≥65 yr.)
and unclear etiology. However, about 5 to 15% of
cases are familial (related to specific geneticmutations) and can have an early (presenile) onset(<65 yrs.).
/square6Healthy neurons have an internal support structurepartly made up of structures called microtubules.These microtubules transport nutrients andmolecules from the neuronal body to the ends ofthe axon and back. A special kind of protein, tau,binds to the microtubules and stabilizes them.
/square6In Alzheimer’s disease, tau is changed chemically.It begins to pair with other threads of tau, to formneurofibrillary tangles. When this happens, themicrotubules disintegrate, collapsing the neuron’s
transport system resulting in impaired communica-
tion between neurons and later death of the cells.
/square6At least 5 distinct genetic loci, located on chromo-somes 1, 12, 14, 19, and 21, influence initiation and
progression of Alzheimer disease. Mutations in
genes for the amyloid precursor protein causesimpaired processing of amyloid precursor protein,leading to deposition of β-amyloid. β-amyloid may
lead to neuronal death and formation of neuro-fibrillary tangles and senile plaques, which consist
of degenerated axonal or dendritic processes,
astrocytes, and glial cells around an amyloid core.
/square6Other genetic determinants include the apolipo-protein (apo) E alleles. Apo E proteins influence
β-amyloid deposition, cytoskeletal integrity, and
efficiency of neuronal repair.
/square6The cholinergic system is involved in memoryfunction, and cholinergic deficiency has been
implicated in the cognitive decline and behavioral
changes of Alzheimer disease.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5370 Clinical Features
/square6Patient presents with progressive memory loss and
decline of other higher mental functions.
/square6Decline in language function manifests as difficulty
in naming and understanding what others are
speaking.
/square6Patient may also have apraxia (inability to carry outskilled motor activities), inability to recognize
objects, places or people.
/square6There may be behavioral changes such as agitation,
aggression, wandering and persecutory delusions,loss of insight and depression. Loss of inhibition
may lead to inappropriate social behavior.
/square6In advanced stages, patients cannot walk, feed
themselves, or do any other activities of daily living;they may become incontinent. Recent and remote
memory is completely lost. Patients may be unable
to swallow. They are at risk of undernutrition,pneumonia (especially due to aspiration), and
pressure ulcers. At this stage, they are completely
dependent on others and placement in a long-termcare facility may be required. Additional clinical
features may be present depending on the under-
lying cause.
/square6Mini-mental status examination (MMSE) helps toconfirm the presence of cognitive impairment and
to follow the progression of dementia. Neuro-
psychologic testing should be done when historyand bedside mental status testing are not conclusive.
/square6In advanced stages, the person is mute, lies on bed
and succumbs to intercurrent infections.
Investigations
Blood tests
/square6Full blood count, ESR, urea and electrolytes, blood
glucose, liver function tests, serum calcium, vitamin
B12, folate, thyroid function tests, HIV serology.
Imaging
/square6CT scan, MRI.
Others
/square6EEG, CSF examination, brain biopsy.
Management of Dementia
/square6Management is mainly supportive. Physical, mental
and moral support should be provided to the patient
by family members and care givers. The burden of
illness falls frequently on family members.
/square6Treatment with antioxidants (mainly vitamin E)may help slow the decline of cognitive functions.
/square6The cholinesterase inhibitors donepezil, rivastig-
mine, and galantamine are somewhat effective in
improving cognitive function. These drugs inhibitacetylcholinesterase, increasing the acetylcholine
level in the brain.
/square6Memantine, an NMDA ( N-methyl-d-aspartate)
antagonist, may help slow the loss of cognitivefunction in patients with moderate to severedementia and may be synergistic when used with
a cholinesterase inhibitor. Ginkgo biloba, a plant
extract, has also been shown to be useful.
/square6Other drugs (e.g. antipsychotics) have been used
to control behavior disorders. Patients with dementiaand signs of depression should be treated with non-
anticholinergic antidepressants, preferably SSRIs.
/square6Treatment of underlying cause.
Q.Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD).
/square6Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) is the most common
prion disease in human beings.
/square6Most cases are sporadic, and acquired by eating meat
from cattle with bovine spongiform encephalo-pathy (mad cow disease) or inoculation (e.g. after
cadaveric corneal or dural transplants, use of stereo-
tactic intracerebral electrodes, or use of growthhormone prepared from human pituitary glands).
It usually affects middle-aged to elderly people.
Pathology
/square6Pathologically, there is spongiform change, neuronal
loss, and accumulation of the abnormal prionprotein in the brain.
Clinical Features
/square6CJD is diagnosed when there is rapidly progressive
dementia associated with any two of the following
features.
– Myoclonus– Akineticmutism– Pyramidal/extrapyramidal signs– Visual disturbance/cerebellar signs
/square6Death occurs after a mean of 4–6 months.
Diagnosis
/square6CJD should be suspected in elderly patients with
rapidly progressive dementia, especially if accom-
panied by myoclonus or ataxia.
/square6MRI can show evolving patchy areas of hyper-intensity in the cortical ribbon, which strongly
suggest CJD.
/square6CSF analysis shows presence of proteins 14-3-3,
brain-specific enolase, and tau.
/square6EEG shows characteristic periodic sharp waves inadvanced disease.
Treatment
/square6There is no known treatment.
Q.Define hydrocephalus. Discuss the etiology, patho-
genesis, investigations and management of
hydrocephalus.
/square6Hydrocephalus is accumulation of excessive
amounts of CSF, causing cerebral ventricular
enlargement and increased intracranial pressure.

/square6Diseases of Nervous System371
5/square6The increased pressure distinguishes hydro-
cephalus from atrophy, where there is dilatation ofventricular system due to loss of brain tissuewithout increased CSF pressure.
/square6It can be either congenital or acquired from eventsduring or after birth.
Etiology
Hydrocephalus can result from:
/square6Obstruction of CSF flow (obstructive hydrocephalus)
/square6Impaired resorption of CSF in the subarachnoidspace (communicating hydrocephalus).
Causes of Hydrocephalus
Obstruction
• Chiari-type 2 malformation
• Aqueductal stenosis
• Dandy-Walker malformation• Tumors
• Colloid cyst
• Cerebellar abscess• Cerebellar or brainstem hematoma
Impaired resorption
• Bacterial meningitis (especially tuberculosis)• Sarcoidosis
• Subarachnoid hemorrhage
Clinical Features
/square6The signs and symptoms of hydrocephalus are due
to raised intracranial pressure (ICP) and dilatationof the ventricles.
/square6Small children may have increased head circum-ference.
/square6Affected patients may have changes in theirpersonality and behavior such as irritability,indifference, and loss of interest.
/square6Headache, nausea, vomiting, bradycardia, andhypertension may be present due to raised ICP.Compression of the third or sixth cranial nerve mayresult in extraocular muscle paresis leading todiplopia.
/square6Fundoscopic examination may reveal papilledema.
Investigations
CT or MRI scan head
/square6It shows dilated ventricles and any associated CNSmalformations or tumors.
Lumbar puncture
/square6Useful to rule out an infection causing adhesive
arachnoiditis or ependymitis. However, it iscontraindicated if there is a space-occupying lesionsuch as an intracranial tumor or a brain abscess,because of the risk of cerebral herniation.
Treatment
Medical therapy
/square6It includes the use of diuretics (furose mide and
acetazolamide) and serial lumbar punctures. These
are less effective than surgical therapy.Surgical therapy
/square6Diversion of the CSF by means of a shunt procedure
between the ventricular system and the peritonealcavity or right atrium may result in prompt reliefof symptoms in obstructive or communicatinghydrocephalus.
Q.Normal pressure hydrocephalus (NPH).
/square6Normal pressure hydrocephalus (NPH) refers to a
condition of pathologically enlarged ventricles withnormal CSF pressure. It is thought to result from adefect in CSF resorption in arachnoid granulations.
Clinical Features
/square6NPH is associated with a classic triad of dementia,gait disturbance, and urinary incontinence.
/square6It is most common in adults over the age of 60 yearsand affects both sexes equally.
/square6It improves after removing some CSF by lumbarpuncture.
Treatment
/square6Treatment involves repeated lumbar puncture toremove CSF or ventriculoperitoneal shunt operation.
Q.Acute confusional state (delirium).
/square6Delirium is an acute, transient, usually reversible,
fluctuating disturbance in attention, cognition, andconsciousness level.
/square6Delirium is sometimes called acute confusionalstate or toxic or metabolic encephalopathy.
/square6Causes of delirium include almost any disorder or
drug.
TABLE 5.21: Causes of delirium
Brain disorders
• CNS infections (meningitis,
encephalitis, cerebral abscess,
subdural empyema)
• Intracerebral hemorrhage• Subdural hematoma
• Subarachnoid hemorrhage
• Cerebral venous thrombosis• Head injury (cerebral
contusions)
• Post-ictal state
Infections
• Chest infection
• Urinary tract infection• Septicemia
Endocrine disorders
• Hypo- /hyperthyroidism• Adrenal disease
• Hyper- /hypoglycemia
Electrolyte imbalance
• Hyper- /hypocalcemia
• HyponatremiaSystemic organ failure
• Cardiac failure• Liver failure: Acute, chronic
• Respiratory failure (hyper-
carbia and hypoxemia)
• Renal failure: Acute, chronic
Toxins
• Alcohol intoxication/with-
drawal
• Carbon monoxide
• Methanol
• Insecticides
Drugs
• Narcotics
• Cocaine• Antichilinergics
Neoplastic
• Primary and secondary brain
tumors
Physical disorders
• Burns• Electrocution
• Hyperthermia
• Hypothermia

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5372 Pathophysiology
/square6Exact mechanism of delirium is not fully under-
stood but may involve impairment of cerebral
oxidative metabolism, neurotransmitter abnorma-lities, and generation of cytokines. Stress of anykind increases sympathetic activity and decreasesparasympathetic activity, impairing cholinergicfunction and thus contributing to delirium. The
elderly are particularly vulnerable to reduced
cholinergic transmission, increasing their risk ofdelirium. Regardless of the cause, the cerebralhemispheres or arousal mechanisms of thethalamus and brainstem reticular activating systembecome impaired.
Clinical Features
/square6Delirium may occur at any age but is more commonamong the elderly. Most cases of delirium occurduring hospitalization. When delirium occurs in
younger people, it is usually due to drug use or a
life-threatening systemic disorder.
/square6Delirium is characterized primarily by clouding ofconsciousness, and difficulty maintaining orshifting attention (inattention). Consciousness levelfluctuates; patients are disoriented to time and
sometimes to place or person. There may be
illusions, hallucinations and delusions. Speech isoften disordered, with prominent slurring, rapidity,neologisms, and aphasic errors.
/square6Symptoms fluctuate over minutes to hours; theymay lessen during the day and worsen at night.
/square6Patients may become irritable, agitated, hyper-active, and hyperalert, or they may become quiet,withdrawn, and lethargic. Elderly people withdelirium tend to become quiet and withdrawnwhich may be mistaken for depression. Somepatients alternate between the two. Other symp-
toms and signs depend on the cause.
Investigations
/square6Full blood count, ESR
/square6Urea, creatinine
/square6Electrolytes
/square6Glucose
/square6Calcium, magnesium
/square6Liver function tests
/square6Brain imaging (CT and/or MRI)
/square6Lumbar puncture
/square6EEG
/square6Arterial blood gases
/square6ECG
/square6Infection screen (blood cultures, chest X-ray, urine
culture).Management
/square6Identify and correct the underlying cause.
/square6Confused patients should be nursed in a well-lit room.
/square6Maintain adequate hydration and nutrition, treat
pain, discomfort, prevent bedsores and minimizethe risk of aspiration pneumonitis.
/square6Low-dose haloperidol (0.5 to 1.0 mg orally, intra-venously or intramuscularly) can be used to controlagitation or psychotic symptoms.
/square6Newer antipsychotic agents, quetiapine, risperi-done, and olanzapine have similar efficacy tohaloperidol with fewer extrapyramidal side effects.
/square6Benzodiazepines (e.g. lorazepam 0.5 to 1.0 mg) canbe used in delirium due to withdrawal of sedative
drug and alcohol. Benzodiazepines are likely to
worsen confusion if used in delirium due to othercauses.
Q.Enumerate the causes of intracranial space
occupying lesions. Discuss the clinical features,
investigations and their management.
Causes of Intracranial Space Occupying Lesions (SOL)
/square6Hematomas:  Subdural hematoma, extradural hema-
toma, intracerebral hematoma.
/square6Vascular:  Large aneurysms, hemangiomas.
/square6Infective:  Cerebral abscess, tuberculoma (commonest
SOL in developing countries), cysticercosis, toxo-plasma, echinococcosis (hydatid cysts).
/square6Inflammatory:  Sarcoid mass.
/square6Neoplastic:  Meningioma, astrocytoma, glioma,
ependymoma, medulloblastoma, metastatic brain
tumors.
/square6Others:  Embryonic dysplastic lesions (e.g. cranio-
pharyngiomas, hamartomas), arachnoid cyst,colloid cyst (in the ventricles).
Clinical Features
/square6Signs and symptoms depend on the site of thelesion, its nature and its rate of expansion.
/square6Frontal lobe lesion causes personality change,urinary incontinence, impaired smell, contralateral
hemiparesis and frontal release signs. Non-
dominant parietal lobe lesion causes contralateralcortical sensory loss, and hemiparesis. Dominantparietal lobe lesion causes similar signs plus motoraphasia. Temporal lesion causes sensory aphasia(only dominant side), impaired verbal memory,
contralateral homonymous upper quadrantanopia,
and complex hallucinations (smell, sound, etc).Occipital lobe lesion causes visual inattention,visual loss, and homonymous hemianopia (withmacular sparing).
/square6Cerebellopontine angle lesions can cause deafness,
tinnitus, vertigo and facial palsy.

/square6Diseases of Nervous System373
5/square6Seizures occur in supratentorial lesions.
/square6Raised intracranial pressure due to lesion causes
headache, impairment of conscious level, papillo-
edema, vomiting, bradycardia, and hypertension.
Rapidly growing mass lesions are more likely to
produce these effects.
/square6The rise in intracranial pressure may not be uniform
and cause displacement of parts of the brain
between its various compartments. Temporal lobes
herniation through the tentorium due to a large
hemisphere mass may cause ‘temporal coning’
which stretches the 3rd and/or 6th cranial nerves
leading to ipsilateral pupilary dilatation and lateral
rectus palsy. Pressure on the contralateral cerebral
peduncle may cause hemiparesis. Herniation of
cerebellar tonsils through the foramen magnum
may compress the brainstem and lead to decere-
brate posturing and death.
Investigations
/square6CT scan: It shows the site, size, nature and effects
of the mass lesion. The nature of the lesion can be
made out by CT scan most of the time.
/square6Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI): More sensitive
in picking up early gliomas and posterior fossa
lesions than CT-scan.
/square6CT or MR angiography: Can pick up aneurysms
and AV malformations.
/square6PET scan: Can differentiate malignant from benign
lesions.
/square6Brain biopsy: Stereotactic brain biopsy is the gold
standard to determine the nature of lesions.
However, biopsy may not be possible with lesions
in certain locations.
Management
General Measures
/square6Control of raised ICP (mannitol, diuretics).
/square6Seizure prophylaxis (phenytoin, carbamazepine).
Specific Measures
/square6Surgical removal of nonmalignant lesions.
/square6Surgical removal, chemotherapy and radiotherapyfor malignant lesions.
/square6Appropriate antimicrobial therapy for infectivelesions.
Q.Classify brain tumors. What are the clinical features,
investigations and management of brain tumors?
Classification of Brain Tumors
Primary Brain Tumors
/square6These tumors arise in the brain itself. These are
further classified as,
/square6Gliomas:  Astrocytic tumors (astrocytomas, anaplastic
astrocytomas, glioblastomas), oligodendroglialtumors, mixed gliomas, ependymal tumors./square6Medulloblastomas (small, round cell embryonal
tumors).
/square6Meningiomas.
Secondary Brain Tumors
/square6These tumours arise somewhere else and involvebrain as a metastatic site. These are the most commontype of brain tumors.
Clinical Presentation
/square6Headache (diffuse or localized)
/square6Seizures
/square6Nausea and vomiting (due to increased ICT)
/square6Loss of consciousness (due to sudden raise in ICTwhich may cut off the brain blood supply)
/square6Cognitive dysfunction (memory problems andmood or personality change)
/square6Focal neurological deficits such as motor weakness
(UMN type), sensory loss (cortical sensory deficits),
aphasia, visual spatial dysfunction; etc. dependingon the location of tumor.
Investigations
/square6CT scan
/square6MRI scan
/square6Perfusion MR imaging
/square6PET scans
/square6Biopsy of the tumor.
Treatment
/square6Surgical resection is an option for peripherallysituated tumors such as meningioma and acoustic
neuroma.
/square6If there is obstructive hydrocephalus causing
significant symptoms surgical shunting procedureshelp.
/square6Radiation therapy or combined radiation pluschemotherapy is helpful in malignant gliomas.
/square6Corticosteroids and mannitol help reduce cerebraledema and are usually started before surgery.
/square6Anticonvulsants (phenytoin, sodium valproate,carbamazepine, levetiracetam) are prescribed toprevent any seizure attacks.
/square6Palliative care should be given to those with
incurable disease.
Q.Cerebellopontine angle tumors.
Or
Q.Acoustic neuroma.
/square6Cerebellopontine angle (CP angle) is a shallow
triangle lying between the cerebellum, the lateral
pons and the petrous bone.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
5374 Tumors found in CP Angle
• Acoustic neuroma (more than 80%) schwannomas)
• Meningioma• Cholesteatoma• Hemangioblastoma• Metastatic tumors• Potine glioma• Medulloblastomas• Astrocytoma• 5th, 7th, and 9th nerve neuromas• Lipomas• Nasopharyngeal carcinoma invasion• Lymphoma• Arachnoid cysts• Aneurysms
Acoustic Neuromas (Vestibular Schwannomas)
/square6These tumors arise from the Schwann cells of 8th
cranial nerve. They account for approximately80 to 90% of CP angle tumors.
/square6The median age at diagnosis is 50.
/square6Risk factors for development of acoustic neuromaare loud noise, neurofibromatosis type 1 and 2, andradiofrequency energy due to cell phone (contro-versial).
Clinical Features of CP Angle Tumors
/square6Involvement of 7th, 8th, and ophthalmic branch of
5th nerve with or without ipsilateral cerebellar signs
is the classical presentation of CP angle tumor./square6Presenting features include ipsilateral hearing loss,tinnitus, vertigo, and unsteadiness (due to 8th nerveinvolvement.
/square6Facial numbness and hypoesthesia occur due to 5th
nerve involvement.
/square6Facial weakness and taste disturbances occur due
to 7th nerve involvement.
/square6Cerebellar involvement also causes unsteadinessand ataxia.
/square6Very large tumor can press on the brainstem,
obstruct CSF flow and lead to raised ICT and
hydrocephalus. Lower cranial nerves (9, 10, 11, 12)can get involved and lead to dysarthria, dysphagia,aspiration, hoarseness and dysarthria.
Investigations
/square6Contrast CT or MRI scan.
/square6Audiometry:  Shows sensorineural hearing loss.
Treatment
/square6Surgical resection.
/square6Stereotactic radiosurgery—utilizes multiple
convergent beams to deliver a high single dose ofradiation to a lesion minimizing injury to adjacentstructures.
/square6Stereotactic radiotherapy—utilizes focused dosesof radiation given over a series of treatmentsessions.
/square6Proton beam therapy—provides maximal localtumor control with minimal cranial nerve injuries.

6
375Q.What are the common presenting symptoms/signs
of a hematological disorder?
General Signs and Symptoms
/square6Fatigue, malaise, and lassitude are seen in patients with
moderate to severe anemia. Can also be seen in
hematologic malignancies.
/square6Weight loss is seen in malignancies, HIV and tuber-
culosis which can also cause anemia.
/square6Fever is seen inaggressive lymphomas or acute
leukemias.
Nervous System Complaints
/square6Headache is seen in severe anemia or polycythemia.
Invasion or compression of the brain by leukemia
or lymphoma may also cause headache. Hemorr-
hage into the brain or subarachnoid space in
patients with thrombocytopenia or other bleeding
disorders may cause sudden, severe headache.
/square6Paresthesias  may occur because of peripheral
neuropathy in pernicious anemia or secondary to
hematologic malignancy or amyloidosis.
/square6Confusion may occur with severe anemia, hyper-
calcemia (e.g. myeloma), and Vit B12 deficiency.
/square6Impairment of consciousness  may be a result of
increased intracranial pressure secondary to
hemorrhage or leukemia or lymphoma in the
central nervous system.
Eyes
/square6Conjunctival plethora  is seen in polycythemia and
pallor in anemia.
/square6Blindness may result from retinal hemorrhages
secondary to severe anemia and thrombocytopenia.
ENT
/square6Vertigo, tinnitus, and “roaring ” in the ears may occur
with marked anemia and polycythemiaDiseases of Blood
/square6Epistaxis  may occur in patients with thrombocyto-
penia and von Willebrand disease.
Oral Cavity
/square6Pale and bald tongue  in anemia , red beefy tongue  in
Vit B12 deficiency.
/square6Macroglossia  occurs in amyloidosis.
/square6Petechiae and bleeding gums  may occur with bleeding
disorders.
/square6Gum hypertrophy  due to infiltration of the gingiva
with leukemic cells is seen in acute monocytic
leukemia (AML).
Lymph Nodes
/square6Lymphadenopathy is seen inlymphoma, blast crisis
of CML and CLL.
Chest and Heart
/square6Exertional dyspnea and palpitations  are seen in
anemia.
/square6Congestive heart failure  can occur in severe anemia.
/square6Chest pain  may arise from involvement of the ribs
or sternum with lymphoma or multiple myeloma.
/square6Tenderness of the sternum  may be seen in chronic
myelogenous or acute leukemia.
Gastrointestinal System
/square6Dysphagia  may occur due to iron deficiency
(Plummer-Vinson disease).
/square6Abdominal fullness, premature satiety, belching,  or
discomfort  may occur because of massive spleno-
megaly.
/square6Abdominal pain  may occur in abdominal crises of
sickle cell disease, or acute intermittent porphyria.
/square6Gastrointestinal bleeding  related to thrombocyto-
penia or other bleeding disorder may be occult but
often is manifest as hematemesis  or melena.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
6376 Genitourinary and Reproductive Systems
/square6Priapism (painful penile erection) may occur in
leukemia or sickle cell disease.
/square6Hematuria  may be a manifestation of hemophilia A
or B. Red urine  may also occur with intravascular
hemolysis (hemoglobinuria), myoglobinuria, or
porphyrinuria.
/square6Menorrhagia  is seen in thrombocytopenia and other
bleeding disorders.
Musculoskeletal System
/square6Back pain  is seen in hemolytic transfusion reactions,
involvement of bone or the nervous system in acuteleukemia or lymphoma and myeloma.
/square6Arthritis  or arthralgia  may occur with gout secon-
dary to increased uric acid production.
/square6Bone pain  may occur with bone involvement by the
hematologic malignancies, sickle cell anemia, andmyelofibrosis. In patients with Hodgkin lymphoma,ingestion of alcohol may induce pain at the site ofany lesion, including those in bone.
/square6Muscle and joint hematomas are seen in hemophilia.
Skin and Nails
/square6Pallor  is seen in anemia.
/square6Platynychia  (flat nails) and koilonychia  (spoon shaped
nails) are seen in iron deficiency anemia.
/square6Jaundice  may be present in pernicious anemia or
hemolytic anemia. Jaundice may also occur inpatients with hematologic malignancies as a resultof liver involvement or biliary tract obstruction.
/square6Cyanosis  occurs with methemoglobinemia, sulf-
hemoglobinemia and polycythemia.
/square6Itching  may occur in Hodgkin lymphoma and
polycythemia vera.
/square6Petechiae  and ecchymoses  are seen in patients with
thrombocytopenia, platelet function abnormalitiesand von Willebrand disease.
/square6Infiltrative lesions  may occur in the leukemias
(leukemia cutis) and lymphomas (lymphoma cutis)and are sometimes the presenting complaint.
/square6Leg ulcers  are common in sickle cell anemia.
Q.What are the common laboratory abnormalities of
hematological diseases?
• Anemia (low Hb)
• Polycythemia (high Hb)
• Leukopenia (low white cell count)
• Leukocytosis (high white cell count)• Thrombocytopenia (low platelet count)
• Thrombocytosis (high platelet count)
• Pancytopenia (all three blood cells low)• Abnormal coagulation parametersQ.Describe the various abnormalities that can be seen
in peripheral blood smear.
Q.Importance of blood smear examination.
/square6Examination of the peripheral blood smear is an
inexpensive but powerful diagnostic tool. It pro-vides important clues in the diagnosis of anemias
and various disorders of leukocytes and platelets.
RBC Abnormalities
Microcytosis
/square6Reduced RBC size, MCV <76 fl.
/square6Seen in iron deficiency, thalassemia and sidero-
blastic anemia.
Macrocytosis
/square6Increased RBC size, MCV >100 fl.
/square6Seen in vitamin B12/folate deficiency, liver disease,
alcohol intake, hypothyroidism and drugs (e.g.
zidovudine).
Target Cells
/square6Central area of hemoglobinisation, surrounded by
a ring of pallor and an outer area of hemoglobin.
/square6Seen in liver disease, thalassemia, postsplenectomyand hemoglobin C disease.
Spherocytes
/square6These are spherical shaped RBCs with no area of
central pallor.
/square6Seen in hereditary spherocytosis, autoimmune
hemolysis, and postsplenectomy.
Fragmented RBCs (Schistocytes, Helmet Cells)
/square6These are seen in disseminated intravascular coagu-lation (DIC), hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS)/thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP).
Nucleated Red Blood Cells (Normoblasts)
/square6These are immature RBCs prematurely released
into the circulation.
/square6Seen in marrow infiltration, severe hemolysis,
myelofibrosis and acute hemorrhage.
Howell-Jolly Bodies
/square6These are small round nuclear remnants which arenormally removed by the spleen.
/square6Seen in hyposplenism and postsplenectomy.
Heinz Bodies
/square6Heinz bodies are aggregates of denatured hemo-globin and are not normally found red cells.
/square6They are found in glucose-6-phosphate dehydro-genase deficiency and thalassemias.
/square6Heinz bodies are not visible on routine staining,
but become visible on a supravital dye such as
crystal violet.

/square6Diseases of Blood377
6Polychromasia
/square6This refers to the presence of young RBCs and
reticulocytes which are prematurely released intothe circulation.
/square6Seen in hemolysis, acute hemorrhage, and increasedred cell turnover.
Basophilic Stippling
/square6This refers to the presence of blue granules in thecytoplasm of RBCs, which represent ribosomalprecipitates.
/square6They are most often seen in the thalassemias,alcohol abuse, lead and heavy metal poisoning.
WBC Abnormalities
/square6Cytoplasmic vacuolization of granulocytes is seenin patients with bacteremia or other severe infec-tions. Toxic granulation is found in infections and
metabolic derangements.
/square6Hypersegmented neutrophils are seen in vitamin
B12 or folic acid deficiency
/square6A high percentage of reactive lymphocytes may beseen in viral illnesses such as infectious mono-nucleosis, viral hepatitis, cytomegalovirus infection,HIV infection, etc.
/square6Blasts, which are immature cells with large nuclei,nucleoli, and a scant rim of dark blue cytoplasmare found in leukemias.
/square6Cells with Auer rods (a rod-like conglomeration ofgranules in the cytoplasm) within a blast cell arepathognomonic of acute myelogenous leukemia(AML).
/square6Small lymphoid cells with cleaved nuclei may beseen in patients with follicular lymphoma.
/square6Lymphoid cells with “hairy” cytoplasm may beseen in hairy cell leukemia./square6Lymphoid cells with hyperlobulated nuclei may beseen in patients with adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma.
/square6Atypical lymphoid cells with “cerebriform” nuclei
(Sezary cells) may be seen in patients with
cutaneous T cell lymphoma.
Platelet Abnormalties
/square6Giant platelets are seen in ITP, disseminated intra-vascular coagulation, myeloproliferative disorders,and megaloblastic anemias. Microthrombocytes arefound in the Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome.
Q.Define anemia.
Q.Enumerate the causes and classification of anemia.
/square6Anemia is defined as a reduction in the number of
circulating RBCs.
/square6Anemia can be classified based on the underlyingcause or morphology of RBCs (Table 6.1).
Figure 6.1 Different types of RBC morphology
TABLE 6.1: Classification of anemia
I. Based on underlying process
Decreased RBC production
• Iron, vitamin B12, or folate deficiency
• Bone marrow disorders (e.g. aplastic anemia, pure RBC
aplasia, myelodysplasia, tumor infiltration)
• Bone marrow suppression (e.g. drugs, chemotherapy,
irradiation)
• Low levels of trophic hormones which stimulate RBC produc-
tion, such as erythropoietin (e.g. chronic renal failure),
thyroid hormone (e.g. hypothyroidism), and androgens (e.g.
hypogonadism)
• Anemia of chronic disease/inflammation
Increased RBC destruction
• Inherited hemolytic anemias (e.g. hereditary spherocytosis,
sickle cell disease, thalassemia major, PNH)
• Acquired hemolytic anemias (e.g. Coombs’ positive
autoimmune hemolytic anemia, hemolytic uremic syndrome,
malaria, hypersplenism)
Blood loss
• Acute blood loss (e.g. trauma, hematemesis, hemoptysis)• Chronic blood loss (e.g. slowly bleeding ulcer or carcinoma)
• Induced bleeding (e.g. repeated diagnostic testing, hemo-
dialysis losses, excessive blood donation)
II. Based on the morphology of RBC
Microcytic anemia (MCV below 80 fL)
• Iron deficiency
• Anemia of chronic disease• Thalassemia• Copper, Vit C, and pyridoxine deficiency
Macrocytic anemia (MCV above 100 fL)
• Vit B
12 and folate deficiency
• Drugs interfering with nucleic acid synthesis (zidovudine
and hydroxyurea)
• Abnormal RBC maturation (e.g. myelodysplastic syndrome,
acute leukemia, LGL leukemia, alcohol abuse, liver disease,
and hypothyroidism)
Normocytic anemia (MCV normal, i.e. between 80 and 100 fL)
• Acute blood loss

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
6378 Q.Iron metabolism in the body.
/square6Iron is vital for all living organisms because it is
essential for multiple metabolic processes, includ-
ing oxygen transport, DNA synthesis, and electron
transport. Iron (Fe) is an important component ofhemoglobin, myoglobin, and many enzymes in thebody.
Normal Iron Requirements
/square6Daily requirement of iron ranges from 1 to 3 mg,and is more during periods of growth, menstrua-tion, pregnancy and lactation.
Iron Intake and Absorption
/square6Red meat, liver, egg yolk, blood and bone marrow
are rich sources of iron. For a vegetarian, sources
of iron are green leafy vegetables, dry fruits andjaggery. Milk is a poor source of iron (0.8 mg/L).Iron is present in the outer layers of cereals andhence, polished rice contains less iron thanunpolished rice. Cooking utensils of iron may
contribute to the iron content of food.
/square6Non-vegetarian diets contain hem iron which is
absorbed better because it is not affected by variousintraluminal factors which affect the bioavailability
of iron. Iron in egg is complexed with phosphates
and is poorly absorbed. In vegetarian food, iron isin the ferric form and is converted into ferrous formbefore absorption.
/square6Gastric acid and ascorbic acid (Vit C) help in this
process by maintaining iron in reduced and soluble
form. Phytates, phosphates and oxalates interferewith iron absorption by forming insoluble complexeswith iron.
/square6Iron absorption mainly occurs in duodenum. Twosteps are involved in the absorption of iron: Entryof iron from the intestinal lumen into the mucosalcell, and its passage from the mucosal cell into the
plasma. Iron absorption is increased with decreasediron stores and during pregnancy. Plasma iron isbound to transferrin.
Distribution of Iron in the Body
/square6An average adult male has about 4 g and an adultfemale about 3 g of iron in the body. 70% of this isin the form of hemoglobin. Iron is stored in the cells
of the reticuloendothelial system mainly in the liver,
spleen and bone marrow.
/square6Storage iron is in two forms:  Ferritin and hemosiderin.
Iron in ferritin is in the form of ferric hydroxy-
phosphate and in hemosiderin in the form of ferric
oxide.
/square6When hemoglobin formation exceeds its destruc-tion, iron is mobilized from the stores, whereas
when hemoglobin production is less than the
destruction or when iron is absorbed in excess ofrequirement, iron is deposited in the stores.
Iron Excretion
/square6Iron is lost by desquamation of epithelium of gut,genitourinary tract and the skin. An adult male loses
1 mg of iron daily this way. A menstruating femaleloses about 2 mg of iron daily. A small amount of
iron is lost in the milk during lactation.
Q.Enumerate the causes of microcytic anemia. Discuss
the etiology, clinical features, investigations andmanagement of iron deficiency anemia.
Q.Pica.
Q.Plummer-Vinson syndrome (Paterson-Kelly
syndrome).
Q.Oral iron therapy.
Q.Parenteral iron therapy.
Causes of Microcytic Anemia (MCV below 80 fl)
• Iron deficiency
• Anemia of chronic disease• Sideroblastic anemia
• Thalassemias
• Copper, Vit C, and pyridoxine deficiency
Iron Deficiency Anemia
/square6Iron deficiency is the most common cause of
microcytic anemia. Other than hemoglobin,iron is also a part of many enzymes in the body
which are vital for tissue respiration and organ
function.
/square6Iron is the commonest deficiency disease all overthe world. It is widely prevalent in India and is
more common in pregnant women.
Figure 6.2 Iron metabolism


/square6Diseases of Blood379
6Causes of Iron Deficiency
Decreased iron intake or absorption
• Inadequate diet• Malabsorption (celiac sprue, Crohn’s disease, post-
gastrectomy)
• Acute or chronic inflammation
Increased demand for iron
• Rapid growth in infancy or adolescence• Pregnancy• Erythropoietin therapy
Increased iron loss
• Acute blood loss (blood donation, trauma)• Chronic blood loss (peptic ulcer, GI malignancy, hookworm
infestation, menses)
Clinical Features
/square6Clinical features include those due to anemia and
those due to underlying disease causing iron defi-
ciency.
Symptoms
/square6Insidious onset of fatigue and exertional dyspnea.
/square6Palpitations, tinnitus and headache due to hyper-dynamic circulation.
/square6Dysphagia which is more for solids than for liquidsdue to formation of mucosal webs at the pharyngo-esophageal junction (Plummer-Vinson syndrome).
/square6Amenorrhea or menorrhagia, excess hair loss andPica due to iron deficiency.
/square6Geophagia is common in children and pregnantwomen. Pagophagia (excessive eating of ice) maybe seen, especially in women. All forms of pica arerelieved by iron therapy even before the anemia iscorrected.
/square6Iron deficiency also causes functional impairment ofvarious tissues such as the myocardium, peripheralnerves, jejunum, cerebral cortex, kidneys and liver.
Signs
/square6Glossitis and angular stomatitis may be present.Papillary atrophy of the tongue makes it appearsmooth and pale (bald tongue)./square6Flattening and concavity of the nails are called
platynychia and koilonychia respectively, and areseen earlier in toe nails than in finger nails.
/square6Mild hepatosplenomegaly may be present.
/square6The triad of dysphagia due to esophageal webs,koilonychia and splenomegaly in a patient with irondeficiency anemia is known as the Plummer-Vinson
or Patterson-Kelly syndrome . Webs and dysphagia
do not respond to iron therapy. Dysphagia istreated by passage of bougei and dilatation. These
webs are premalignant.
Investigations
/square6Investigations are required to confirm the diagnosis
of iron deficiency and to determine its cause.
/square6Complete blood picture—RBC count, hemoglobin,hematocrit, MCV, MCH and MCHC are all
decreased in iron deficiency anemia.
/square6Peripheral blood smear—it shows microcytic hypo-chromic RBCs. There may be other morphological
abnormalities such as poikilocytosis and presenceof target cells. Reticulocyte count is normal unless
the patient had a recent acute blood loss, or has
received hematinics.
/square6Serum iron is decreased, TIBC is increased, trans-ferrin saturation is low, and serum ferritin is lessthan 10 μg/L.
/square6Bone marrow—it shows micronormoblasts. Iron
stores are absent or markedly reduced.
/square6Investigations to identify the cause of iron defi-ciency—stool for occult blood and helminthiasis,
upper GI scopy to rule out peptic ulcer or malig-
nancy, etc., depending on the clinical presentation.
Treatment
/square6Treatment involves replacement of iron and
correction of the cause of iron deficiency. Iron can
be given orally or parenterally.
Oral Iron Therapy
/square6Oral iron therapy is safer and cheaper thanparenteral, and is preferred.
/square6Iron is best given as a single dose at bedtime.
Figure 6.3 Peripheral smear in iron deficiency


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
6380 /square6There are many iron salts available such as ferrous
fumarate, ferrous sulfate and ferrous gluconate.There is no significant difference in the absorptionof these salts. Oral iron is better tolerated if given
after food, but may be absorbed less efficiently.
/square6Iron is better absorbed in the ferrous form than
in the ferric. Iron absorption is increased bysimultaneous administration of ascorbic acid and
decreased by antacids, certain antibiotics (e.g.
quinolones, tetracycline), dietary fiber, tea, coffee,eggs, or milk.
/square6Hemoglobin level will normalize in about 6–8 weeks
of iron therapy. However, iron therapy has to be
continued for a total of 6 months to ensure repletionof the body iron stores.
/square6Adverse effects of oral iron include nausea, vomit-
ing, epigastric discomfort, constipation or diarrhea.
They are dose-related, and can be reduced bygradually increasing the dose and giving it aftermeals.
Parenteral Iron Therapy
/square6Indications:  It is indicated in patients who cannot
tolerate oral iron and in pregnant women whopresent with severe anemia very late in pregnancy.
Patients with gastrointestinal diseases such
as peptic ulcer and ulcerative colitis are likely tobe aggravated by oral iron and need parenteraliron.
/square6Parenteral preparations:  There are many parenteral
iron preparations available. These are iron dextran(can be given either IM or IV), ferric gluconatecomplex and iron sucrose (only for IV use). Injection
should be given after a test dose because there is a
small risk of anaphylaxis. Intramuscular ironshould be given by the ‘Z’ track technique toprevent staining of the skin at the injection site.However, IM injection is not commonly used now-a-days due to injection site pain and skin staining.
· Iron can be given as single dose IV infusion. For
giving total dose iron therapy, the dose of iron can
be calculated by the formula [(2.38 × W × D) + 1000],
where W is body weight in kg and D is the hemo-globin deficit in g/dl (15-patient’s hemoglobin).The value obtained is the required quantity of ironin mg. The addition of 1000 mg is provision for thebody iron stores.
/square6Side effects:  Both local and systemic side effects can
occur following use of iron dextran. Local reactions
include pain, muscle necrosis, and phlebitis in
adjacent vessels. Anaphylactic reactions also canoccur with all the preparations but less with ferricgluconate complex and iron sucrose than irondextran. Other systemic effects include fever,urticaria, joint pains, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea,
abdominal pain, backache, bodyache, chest pain,
angioneurotic edema, and hypotension.Treatment of Cause of Iron Deficiency
/square6For example, treatment of hookworm infestation,piles, peptic ulcer disease and any other bleedinglesions.
Q.Enumerate the causes of macrocytosis.
Abnormal nucleic acid metabolism of erythroid precursors
• Vitamin B12 (cobalamin) deficiency
• Folate deficiency• Drugs (hydroxyurea, zidovudine, methotrexate, azathioprine)
Abnormal RBC maturation
• Myelodysplastic syndrome• Acute leukemia• LGL leukemia• Multiple myeloma and other plasma cell disorders
Conditions causing reticulocytosis
• Erythropoietin therapy• Acute blood loss
Others
• Alcohol abuse• Liver disease• Hypothyroidism• Hyperlipidemia
Q.Enumerate the causes of macrocytic anemia.
Discuss the etiology, clinical features, diagnosisand management of Vit B
12 (cyanocobalamin)
deficiency.
Q.Bone marrow picture in megaloblastic anemia.
/square6RBCs with MCV more than 100 fL (femtoliters) are
called macrocytes (megaloblasts).
Causes of Macrocytic Anemia
• Vit B12 defficiency
• Folic acid deficiency
• Drugs: 6-mercaptopurine, azathioprine, 5-fluorouracil,
hydroxyurea, acyclovir, zidovudine
• Hereditary orotic aciduria
• Lesch-Nyhan syndrome
• Congenital dyserythropoietic anemia
Vit B12
/square6Vit B12 is found in animal proteins and dairy
products. Vegetables contain practically no B12.
Vegetarians get their B12 by dairy products.
/square6Normal recommended dietary allowance forVit B
12 is 2 microgram/day. Total body stores of
Vit B12 is 2 to 5 milligrams, half of which is in the
liver. These stores are enough for approximately3 years, and hence, it takes approximately 3 years
to develop manifestations of Vit B
12 deficiency after
absorption of dietary B12 ceases.
/square6Dietary B12 is liberated in the stomach in the
presence of acid and pepsin in the stomach and

/square6Diseases of Blood381
6binds to gastric-derived intrinsic factor (IF). IF is a
glycoprotein with very high affinity for B12. The
IF-B12 complex binds to a specific receptor in the
ileum, and is absorbed by an active process. In theplasma B
12, is bound to a protein called trans-
cobalamin.
Physiological Role of Vit B12
/square6Vit B12 is very important for nucleic acid synthesis
in every cell. Actively growing and dividing cells,
which synthesize DNA rapidly, e.g. mucosal cellsand hemopoietic cells, are likely to be particularlyaffected in Vit B
12 deficiency. It is also important
for the normal integrity of nervous system.
/square6Thymine (a purine) is important for DNA synthesis.
Synthesis of thymine requires tetrahydrofolate
(THF). Vitamin B12 is required for conversion of
methyl THF to THF. Thus lack of vitamin B12 causes
impaired DNA synthesis and cell division. RNAsynthesis continues, resulting in a large cell with alarge nucleus. All cell lines have dyspoiesis, in
which cytoplasmic maturity is greater than nuclear
maturity; this dyspoiesis produces megaloblasts inthe marrow before they appear in the peripheralblood. Dyspoiesis results in intramedullary cell death(intramedullary hemolysis), making erythropoiesisineffective and causing indirect hyperbilirubinemia
and hyperuricemia. Because dyspoiesis affects all
cell lines, pancytopenia develops in advancedstages of Vit B
12 deficiency. Hypersegmentation of
neutrophils is common, the mechanism of which isunknown.Decreased absorption
• Malabsorption syndromes• Ileal resection or bypass• Crohn’s disease• Blind loops• Fish tapeworm infestation• Pancreatitis
Agents that block absorption
• Neomycin• Biguanides (e.g. metformin)• Proton pump inhibitors (e.g. omeprazole)
Clinical Features
/square6Symptoms related to anemia such as easy fatiga-
bility, weakness, dyspnea, and effort intolerance.
/square6Hyperdynamic circulation due to anemia may lead
to palpitations, tinnitus and headache.
/square6Vit B12 deficiency causes atrophic glossitis and
neurologic symptoms.
/square6Vit B12 deficiency causes symmetrical peripheral
neuropathy (with paresthesias, ataxia, loss ofvibration and position sense). In severe deficiency,subacute combined degeneration (SCD) of thespinal cord may develop. In SCD, there is involve-
ment of posterior columns and corticospinal tract.
Manifestations of SCD are paresthesias, ataxia, lossof vibration and position sense due to posteriorcolumn involvement and weakness, spasticity,clonus, and paraplegia due to corticospinal tractinvolvement.
/square6Other neurologic symptoms of Vit B12 deficiency
include memory loss, irritability, and dementia.
Investigations
Complete blood count
/square6Hemoglobin level is low.
/square6Mean corpuscular volume (MCV) is over 100 fl(normal 80–95).
/square6Mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) and meancorpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC) areusually normal.
Peripheral blood smear
/square6Shows oval macrocytes, few myelocytes and
occasional normoblasts. There is anisocytosis and
poikilocytosis. Reticulocyte count is low in relationto degree of anemia. Hypersegmented neutrophilsare common. When the anemia is severe, there maybe leucopenia and thrombocytopenia (pancytopenia)and megaloblasts may be seen in the peripheral
blood smear.
Bone marrow
/square6Bone marrow is hypercellular with frequent mitoses
and increased myeloid: Erythroid ratio. There is
abundant iron store. The characteristic features are:
Presence of megaloblasts, giant bands and giantmetamyelocytes.
Figure 6.4 Role of Vit B12 and folic acid in the synthesis of
nucleic acid
Etiology of Vit B12 Deficiency
Inadequate intake
• Strict vegetarians
Intrinsic factor deficiency
• Pernicious anemia• Gastrectomy• Atrophic gastritis

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
6382
/square6Megakaryocytes are decreased with basophilic
agranular cytoplasm and hypersegmented nucleus.
Vit B12 and folic acid levels
/square6The normal Vit B12 level is 300 to 900 pg/mL; values
<200 pg/mL indicate clinically significant defi-ciency. Serum homocysteine and methylmalonicacid levels are high in Vit B
12 deficiency.
Other tests
/square6Shcilling test can be done to diagnose the cause of
Vit B12 deficiency.
/square6Upper GI scopy is useful in cases of pernicious
anemia.
/square6Jejunal biopsy is useful in malabsorption disorders.
Treatment
General management
/square6This is similar to other cases of anemia. For severe
symptomatic anemia (Hb <7 g/dl), packed red celltransfusion is given. Before transfusion it is necessaryto collect samples for B
12 and folic acid estimation.
Vit B12 replacement
/square6Vit B12 should be replaced by parenteral route since
malabsorption is the cause most of the time. 1000 μg
should be given intramuscularly per week for4 weeks, followed by 1000 μg every month for the
rest of the patient’s life.
/square6Oral replacement therapy with 2 mg Vit B12 per day
is also effective if malabsorption is not the cause ofdeficiency.
/square6Patient will experience increase in strength andwell-being even before hematological response.Marrow morphology begins to revert toward normalwithin a few hours after treatment is initiated.Reticulocytosis begins 4 to 5 days after therapy isstarted and peaks at about day 7, with subsequent
remission of the anemia over the next several weeks.
/square6Any underlying cause of Vit B12 deficiency should
be treated (e.g. antibiotics for intestinal bacterialovergrowth, deworming for tapeworm infestation).Q.Pernicious anemia.
/square6Pernicious anemia is due to B12 deficiency caused
by the absence of intrinsic factor, due to either
atrophy of the gastric mucosa or autoimmunedestruction of parietal cells. The disease was givenis common name because it was fatal (pernicious)prior to the discovery of treatment, similar toleukemia at that time.
/square6It is common in whites, and rare in Asians. Femalesare affected more often than males. It is a diseaseof the elderly, the average patient presenting nearage 60; it is rare under age 30. Patients are likely tobe having blood group A.
Pathogenesis
/square6Intrinsic factor is important for the absorption ofB
12. Intrinsic factor deficiency causes less absorp-
tion of B12 and its deficiency. Gastric atrophy also
results in hypochlorhydria and malabsorption ofB
12.
/square6Pernicious anemia may be associated with otherautoimmune diseases such as thyroid disorders,Addison’s disease, hypoparathyroidisim, diabetesmellitus, and rheumatoid arthritis.
/square690% of patients have parietal cell antibody in serumand 50% have antibody to intrinsic factor whichinhibits binding of B
12 to intrinsic factor.
Clinical Features
/square6Clinical features are similar to Vit B12 deficiency
anemia.
Investigations
/square6In addition to tests done for vitamin B12 deficiency,
antibodies to parietal cell and antibodies to intrinsic
factor may be demonstrated in serum and gastric
juice. Serum gastrin levels are elevated.
/square6Histamine or pentagastrin test: Acid secretion does
not increase even after injection of histamine or
pentagastrin.Figure 6.5 Peripheral smear in Vit B12 deficiency


/square6Diseases of Blood383
6/square6Barium meal examination:  Shows atrophic mucosal
pattern of stomach.
/square6Upper GI scopy and mucosal biopsy:  Shows atrophic
gastritis.
Treatment
/square6Treatment is similar to Vit B12 deficiency anemia.
Q.Schilling test (Vit B12 absorption test).
/square6This test is performed to determine the cause for
vitamin B12 malabsorption. Vitamin B12 is absorbed
in the terminal ileum.
/square6Causes of vitamin B12 malabsorption are intrinsic
factor deficiency, atrophic gastritis, small intestinalbacterial overgrowth, exocrine pancreatic insuffi-ciency, and ileal disease.
/square6Schilling test is performed by administering 1 μg
of radiolabelled Vit B12 orally, followed by an intra-
muscular injection of 1000 microgram of Vit B12 one
hour later to saturate Vit B12 binding sites so that
absorbed radiolabelled Vit B12 is excreted in the
urine.
/square6A 24-hour urine is then collected for determinationof the percent excretion of the oral dose. Normallyat least 10% of the radiolabeled vitamin B
12 is
excreted in the urine. In patients with pernicious
anemia or with deficiency due to impaired absorp-tion, less than 10% of the radiolabeled vitamin B
12
is excreted.
/square6Next, the above step is repeated after the additionof intrinsic factor. If this second urine collection isnormal, it proves intrinsic factor deficiency orpernicious anemia.
/square6If urinary excretion of Vit B12 is still less than 10%
after adding intrinsic factor, then the test is repeated
after a course of antibiotics. Small intestinalbacterial overgrowth is suggested if an abnormaltest is normalized after a course of antibiotics. Ifthe absorption is abnormal even after addition ofintrinsic factor and exclusion of bacterial over-
growth, it suggests terminal ileal disease. The
Schilling test can also be abnormal in pancreaticinsufficiency and celiac disease. Normalization afterpancreatic enzyme substitution or a gluten-free dietis useful for diagnosis of these causes of mal-absorption.
/square6The Schilling test can also be used to determine the
functional integrity of the ileal mucosa after treat-
ment of ileal Crohn’s disease.
/square6Many labs have stopped doing the Schilling test,due to lack of production of radiolabeled-B
12 test
substances. Also, the treatment remains same(i.e. injection of Vit B
12), even if the exact cause
were identified. Hence, it is not being performed
now.Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, diagnosis and
management of anemia due to folic acid deficiency.
Sources of Folic Acid
/square6Folic acid (folate) occurs in animal products and
green leafy vegetables in the polyglutamate form.High amounts are present in liver, kidney, spinach,cabbage, yeast, nuts and fruits. Milk and eggs are
poor in folate. It is easily destroyed by cooking.
Metabolism
/square6Polyglutamates in food are cleaved to monogluta-
mate in the jejunum where it is absorbed. Folatesenter plasma and are taken up by liver and othercells.
/square6Folate is mainly stored in liver. These stores areenough for approximately 3 months and hence,manifestations of deficiency appear after 3 monthsof deficient diet.
Physiological Role
/square6Folate is very important for nucleic acid synthesisin every cell. Actively growing and dividing cells,which synthesise DNA rapidly, e.g. mucosal cells
and hemopoietic cells, are likely to be particularly
affected by folate deficiency.
/square6Normal daily folate requirement for adults is 1 to2 mg/day.
Causes of Folic Acid Deficiency
Inadequate intake
• Alcoholics
• Poor dietary intake
• Overcooked foods
Increased requirements
• Pregnancy
• Infancy
• Malignancy
• Increased hematopoiesis (chronic hemolytic anemias)
• Exfoliative skin disorders
Malabsorption
• Tropical and nontropical sprue
• Inflammatory bowel disease
• Short bowel syndrome
Drugs
• Methotrexate
• Trimethoprim
• Pyrimethamine
• Phenytoin
Clinical Features
/square6Macrocytic anemia.
/square6Folate deficiency does not cause neurologic symp-
toms (unlike Vit B12 deficiency). Only depression,
irritability, poor judgment, forgetfulness and sleep
deprivation have been seen in some patients.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
6384 /square6Glossitis is less common than in vitamin B12 defi-
ciency.
/square6Anorexia and occasional diarrhea may be present.
Investigations
/square6Low serum folate levels (normal–6 to 20 ng/mL;values ≤4 ng/mL are diagnostic of folate defi-
ciency).
/square6Peripheral blood smear shows macrocytes.
/square6Bone marrow shows megaloblastic picture.
/square6Elevated serum homocystiene levels and normal
methylmalonic acid levels.
Management
/square6Correct the underlying cause.
/square6Oral folic acid supplementation (5–15 mg/day)should be given in deficiency states.
/square6It should be given prophylactically (350 μg/day)
to all pregnant women, premature babies, patients
receiving dialysis, and in severe and chronichemolytic states.
/square6Patients receiving folic acid antagonists such as
methotrexate should be given folinic acid daily
orally (15 mg).
/square6In the presence of Vit B12 deficiency, folate therapy
can aggravate neurological symptoms. Hence, care
should be taken to replace Vit B12 before folate
therapy.
Q.What are the causes of blood loss anemia? How
do you manage it?
Causes of Blood Loss Anemia
Acute blood loss
• Trauma
• Hematemesis
• Hemoptysis• Rupture of ectopic pregnancy
Chronic blood loss
• Slowly bleeding peptic ulcer• GI malignancy
• Hookworm infestation
Induced bleeding
• Repeated diagnostic testing
• Hemodialysis losses
• Excessive blood donation
Clinical Features
/square6Anemia due to acute blood loss is symptomatic if
severe. Losses of up to 20% of the blood volumecan be asymptomatic. Blood loss more than this cancause anxiety, hypotension, syncope, tachycardia,breathlessness, and shock. Hemoglobin levelimmediately after the bleed may be normal as it
takes some time for hemodilution to occur./square6Chronic blood loss as happens in hookworm infesta-
tion, peptic ulcer, etc. can produce severe anemiawhich can be asymptomatic. Symptoms will notappear until severe anemia develops.
Treatment
/square6In acute blood loss, volume replacement either byblood transfusion, or IV fluids is very important.
/square6In chronic blood loss anemia, if the patient isseverely anemic, packed RBC should be transfused.
/square6Underlying cause of blood loss should be treated
in both acute and chronic blood loss.
Q.Anemia of chronic disease (anemia of chronic
inflammation).
/square6The anemia of chronic disease (ACD), also termed
the anemia of chronic inflammation, is associatedwith many chronic diseases (infectious, inflamma-tory, neoplastic disease, severe trauma, heartdisease, diabetes mellitus, etc.). Though ACD occurs
in chronic diseases, it can begin acutely during
virtually any infection or inflammation.
Pathophysiology
/square6Three pathophysiologic mechanisms have been
identified in ACD:
1. Shortened RBC survival due to unknown mecha-
nisms
2. Impaired erythropoiesis due to decreases in both
erythropoietin (EPO) production and marrowresponsiveness to EPO
3. Impaired intracellular iron metabolism.
/square6Reticuloendothelial cells retain iron from senescent
RBCs, making iron unavailable for Hb synthesis.There is thus a failure to compensate for the anemia
with increased RBC production. Macrophage-
derived cytokines (e.g. IL-1, TNF, interferon) contri-bute to the decrease in EPO production and theimpaired iron metabolism.
Clinical Features
/square6Most patients have mild anemia that produces nosymptoms. Signs and symptoms of underlyingdisease may be present.
Investigations
/square6The anemia is normocytic-normochromic and
rarely microcytic-hypochromic.
/square6Reticulocyte count, leukocyte count and platelet
counts are normal.
/square6The serum iron concentration and transferrin level(also measured as total iron binding capacity, TIBC)are both low and the percent saturation of trans-ferrin is usually normal, which should distinguishACD from iron deficiency anemia, in which trans-
ferrin saturation is low.

/square6Diseases of Blood385
6Treatment
/square6Correctionof the underlying disorder.
/square6Iron supplements.
/square6Administration of recombinant human erythro-
poietin if anemia is severe.
Q.Discuss the classification, clinical features, diagnosis
and management of hemolytic anemias.
/square6Anemia resulting from increased red cells destruc-
tion is called hemolytic anemia. Hemolysis can bedefined as a shortening of RBC survival to less than100 days (normal 120 days).
/square6Normal marrow has tremendous capacity tocompensate for hemolysis, hence anemia occursonly when compensation is not adequate.
/square6Hemolysis may be an extravascular or an intra-
vascular phenomenon. Autoimmune hemolytic
anemia (AIHA) and hereditary spherocytosis areexamples of extravascular hemolysis because theRBCs are destroyed in the spleen and other reticulo-endothelial tissues. Others are due to intravascularhemolysis.
Classification of Hemolytic Anemias
Hereditary
• Membrane defects: Spherocytosis, elliptocytosis, spur cell
anemia
• Enzyme defects: G6PD-deficiency, pyruvate kinase
deficiency
• Hemoglobin defects: Thalassemias, sickle cell anemia
Acquired
• Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH)
• Immune mediated: Autoimmune hemolytic anemia,
incompatible blood transfusion
• Mechanical: Prosthetic heart valves, march hemoglobinuria
• Drugs: Dapsone, primaquine• Infections: Malaria
Clinical Features
History
/square6Patient may complain of fatigue and other symp-
toms of anemia.
/square6Mild jaundice (lemon yellow).
/square6History of passing red-brown urine (due to hemo-globinuria).
/square6Left hypochondrial pain due to splenomegaly.
/square6Right hypochondrial pain due to cholelithiasis.
Pigment stones occur due to increased production
of bilirubin from hemolysis.
/square6Family history may be present in hereditaryhemolytic anemia.
/square6Drug history may be positive.
/square6Symptoms of any underlying disease responsible
for hemolysis.Physical Findings
/square6Anemia.
/square6Mild jaundice.
/square6Splenomegaly.
/square6Hemolytic facies due to marrow hyperplasia in
skull bones and other bones.
/square6Ankle ulcers (seen in sickle cell anemia).
/square6Signs of any underlying disease responsible forhemolysis.
Investigations
Evidence of Increased RBC Destruction
/square6Indirect hyperbilirubinemia, usually less than
5 mg/dl.
/square6Increased urobilinogen excretion in urine.
/square6Decreased plasma haptoglbin and hemopexin.
/square6Increased plasma lactate dehydrogenase (LDH).
/square6Shortened RBC survival as demonstrated by
chromium-51 labeled RBCs.
Evidence of Increased RBC Production
/square6Increased reticulocyte count (reticulocytosis).
/square6Finding premature RBCs in peripheral smear(macrocytes, polychromasia, nucleated RBCs).
/square6Erytroid hyperplasia of bone marrow.
Additional Findings in Intravascular Hemolysis
/square6Hemoglobinuria.
/square6Hemosiderinuria.
Tests to Diagnose Underlying Cause of Hemolysis
/square6Peripheral blood smear examination.
/square6Coomb’s test (to detect antibodies causing hemolysis).
/square6Hemoglobin electrophoresis (for thalassemias).
/square6Osmotic fragility, sucrose lysis and hams test (formembrane defects).
/square6Measurement of enzyme activity (G6PD, pyruvatekinase).
/square6Other tests are done depending on the suspectedunderlying cause.
Treatment
Supportive Therapy
/square6Blood transfusion for severe anemia
/square6Replacement of vitamins due to increased erythro-
poiesis (iron, folic acid)
/square6Treatment of infections
/square6Treatment of ankle ulcers
/square6Splenectomy in selected cases
Specific Therapy
/square6This depends on the underlying cause—steroids forimmune hemolytic anemia, splenectomy in sickle
cell anemia and hereditary spherocytosis, with-drawal of offending drug, etc.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
6386 Q.Classify immune hemolytic anemias. Discuss the
clinical features, diagnosis and management of warm
antibody autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA).
/square6Hemolysis secondary to antibodies against red cellantigens is called immune hemolysis.
/square6It can be broadly divided into autoimmune andalloimmune hemolytic anemias. In autoimmune
hemolytic anemia, antibodies are directed against
person’s own RBCs. In alloimmune hemolyticanemia, antibodies are directed against transfusedRBCs.
Etiology and Classification of Immune Hemolytic Anemias
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA)
Warm-antibody AIHA• Idiopathic• Chronic lymphocytic leukemia• Hodgkin’s lymphoma• Systemic lupus erythematosus• Drugs
Cold agglutinin syndrome
• Idiopathic•Mycoplasma pneumoniae
• Infectious mononucleosis• Virus infection
Paroxysmal cold haemoglobinuria (PCH)
• Idiopathic• Viral infections• Syphilis
Atypical AIHA
• Antiglobulin test-negative AIHA• Combined cold and warm AIHA (biphasic)
Alloimmune hemolytic anemia
• Hemolytic transfusion reactions• Hemolytic disease of newborn
Warm Antibody Autoimmune Haemolysis
/square6Here the antibodies react with RBC antigens at body
temperature, hence called warm antibody auto-
immune hemolysis. Hemolysis occurs primarily inthe spleen. Antibodies are of IgG type.
/square6The disease is common in adults above the age of
40 years; more common in females.
Etiology
/square6Many conditions can induce warm antibody forma-
tion, which are as follows:
• Idiopathic (commonest cause)
• Connective tissue diseases (e.g. systemic lupus erythematosus)• Malignancies of the immune system (non-Hodgkin’s
lymphoma, chronic lymphocytic leukemia)
• Previous blood transfusion or hematopoietic cell trans-
plantation
• Drugs (alpha-methyldopa, sulfonamides, NSAIDs, metho-
trexate)Clinical Features
/square6Onset is insidious.
/square6Symptoms of anemia—fatigue, palpitations.
/square6Symptoms of hemolysis—mild jaundice, dark
urine.
/square6Splenomegaly.
Diagnosis
/square6Features of hemolysis with spherocytosis.
/square6Positive direct antiglobulin test.
Treatment
/square6Blood transfusion:  For significant anemia.
/square6Corticosteroids: Any significant hemolysis is treated
with 60 mg of prednisolone daily for 3–4 weeks andthen tapered; many need maintenance therapy.Parenteral methyl prednisolone is often used inacutely ill patients.
/square6Splenectomy: Patients who do not respond to steroids
and/or require large maintenance dosage arecandidates for splenectomy.
/square6Immunosuppressive drugs: Like azathioprine or
cyclophosphamide are used if significant hemolysiscontinues despite splenectomy. Intravenous gamma-globulin, danazol, cyclosporine and antithymocyteglobulin are used in occasional refractory cases.
/square6Folic acid supplements:  Should be given to all patients
with hemolysis because of increased requirementsdue to increased erythropoiesis.
/square6Treatment of underlying cause.
Q.Cold antibody autoimmune hemolysis (cold
hemagglutinin disease; paroxysmal cold hemo-
globinuria).
/square6Here the antibodies causing hemolysis react bestat temperatures below 37°C.
/square6Two forms are recognised: Cold hemagglutinindisease and paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria(PCH). They are relatively rare.
Cold Hemagglutinin Disease
/square6It is a disorder where red cells are agglutinated at
low temperature. It is a chronic insidious disease
most common in adults over 50 years.
Etiology
/square6Cold agglutinins are nearly always IgM antibodiesand protein electrophoresis may show an M band.Cold agglutinins occur in some infections and malig-nancies. Examples are Mycoplasma pneumoniae ,
infectious mononucleosis and lymphomas.
Clincal Features
/square6Patients have symptoms related to both anemia and
RBC agglutination.

/square6Diseases of Blood387
6/square6Symptoms of anemia include easy fatigability,
palpitations, etc.
/square6Symptoms related to RBC agglutination are dark,purple to gray discoloration of the skin of acral parts(finger tips, toes, nose, and ears) on exposure tocold. The color disappears upon warming of thepart.
/square6The hemolysis is both intra- and extravascular.
Treatment
/square6The single most useful therapy in cold agglutinindisease is avoidance of cold. Protective clothingduring cold weather, use of leather gloves and
stocking, or moving to a warm climate is all that is
needed.
/square6Cytotoxic agents, particularly cyclophosphamideand chlorambucil, are sometimes used to reducethe production of antibody in severe cases.Rituximab has been shown to be useful in severehemolysis not responding to conventional therapy.
/square6Steroids are not helpful and splenectomy is also nothelpful since spleen is not the site of hemolysis.
/square6Transfusions are rarely necessary. Blood must bewarmed before transfusion.
/square6Plasmapheresis helps in severe cases.
Paroxysmal Cold Hemoglobinuria (PCH)
/square6PCH is a rare disorder secondary to a cold-reactingautoantibody causing hemolysis. It occurs mainlyin children and occasionally in adults.
Etiology
/square6Infections (secondary and tertiary syphilis, viral
infections, Mycoplasma pneumoniae  and Klebsiella
pneumoniae ).
/square6Vaccinations (measles).
/square6Malignancies (lymphomas and chronic lympho-
cytic leukemia).
/square6Idiopathic.
Clinical Features
/square6Hemolysis is precipitated by exposure to cold and
is characterized by hemoglobinuria, pallor, jaundice
and splenomegaly. The adult form is usuallychronic, lasting several years.
Diagnosis
/square6The diagnosis of PCH is made by the demonstrationof an IgG antibody that reacts with the red cellat reduced temperature but not at 37ºC (Donath-Landsteiner antibody).
Treatment
/square6In children, PCH usually resolves spontaneouslyin a few weeks. Patient should be kept in a verywarm environment./square6If severe hemolysis is present transfusion may beneeded.
/square6Prednisolone (1 to 2 mg/kg per day) is also helpfulto reduce hemolysis. In adults not responding to
prednisolone, cyclophosphamide or azathioprine
can be tried.
/square6Splenectomy is not helpful as spleen does not playany role in hemolysis.
Q.Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH).
/square6This is a rare disorder secondary to an acquired
defect in the red cell membrane which makes itsensitive to lysis by complement.
/square6It is characterized by hemolytic anemia, venous
thrombosis, and deficient hematopoiesis.
Pathophysiology
/square6Hemolysis is intravascular and is due to membrane
defect in RBCs. Hemolysis is mediated by comple-ment system.
/square6Due to ongoing hemolysis, there is free hemoglobin
in the circulation which binds to and depletes nitric
oxide. Nitric oxide depletion leads to smooth musclespasm which causes abdominal pain, dysphagia,pulmonary hypertension, etc. It also contributesto thrombosis formation by enhancing plateletaggregation.
/square6PNH is also associated with bone marrow dys-function, likely due to immunologic attack onhematopoietic stem cells, often leading to leuko-penia and thrombocytopenia.
Clinical Features
/square6PNH affects mainly adults and both sexes.
/square6Three main features of PNH are hemolytic anemia,venous thrombosis, and deficient hematopoiesis.
/square6Hemolysis manifests as anemia, mild jaundice andhemoglobinuria. Its nocturnal paroxysmal natureaccounts for the name of this disorder. Patients
usually complain of dark urine at night with
partial clearing during the day. Hemolysis may beprecipitated by infection, iron use, vaccination, ormenstruation.
/square6Venous thrombosis is a frequent complication andcan occur in intra-abdominal, cerebral and peri-pheral veins.
/square6Diminished hematopoiesis leads to cytopenias oraplastic anemia.
/square6PNH may progress into myelodysplasia or acuteleukemia.
Laboratory Features
/square6Evidence of hemolysis includes anemia and raisedindirect bilirubin. Urine may be positive for hemo-
globinuria.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
6388 /square6Leucopenia, thrombocytopenia, and iron deficiency
may be present.
/square6Leukocyte alkaline phosphatase (LAP) score isdecreased.
/square6Bone marrow may be hypercellular or aplastic withdepleted or normal iron store.
/square6HAM test (acidified serum lysis test first describedby Dr HAM) and sucrose lysis test are positive. InHAM test, fresh normal serum of the patient withRBCs settled at the bottom of a test tube is acidifiedand looked for hemolysis. PNH cells are moresensitive to hemolysis when serum is acidified.
/square6Flow cytometry:  The state-of-the-art laboratory test
is flow cytometry of the patient’s blood to detectCD59 and CD55 on RBCs. Absence or reducedexpression of both CD59 and CD55 on RBCs is
diagnostic of PNH.
/square6Fluorescent aerolysin : This test uses fluorescently
labeled bacterial toxin aerolysin to detect PNH cells.It is more sensitive than flow cytometry.
Treatment
/square6Management is mainly supportive, consisting of
blood transfusions, folic acid supplements and iron
replacement.
/square6Recently, eculizumab a monoclonal antibody thatbinds to the C5 component of complement and
inhibits complement activation has been shown to
reduce hemolysis and transfusion requirements inpatients with PNH.
/square6Androgens, steroids and antithrombotic drugs are
used occasionally.
/square6Bone marrow transplantation or hematopoietic
stem cell transplantation is curative.
/square6Antiplatelets and anticoagulants may be requiredto prevent thrombosis.
Prognosis
/square6The mean survival is 10 years, but with goodmedical care many survive for longer period.
/square6Common causes of death include visceralthrombosis (cerebral, hepatic, portal), severeanemia, infection, hemorrhage or postoperativecomplications. Rarely, spontaneous remissions aredescribed.
Q. Coombs’ test (antiglobulin test).
/square6Coombs’ test  is used to check whether the blood
contains certain antibodies which cause hemolysis.
/square6There are two types of Coombs tests: Direct Coombs’
test (also known as direct antiglobulin test), and the
indirect Coombs’ test  (also known as indirect anti-
globulin test).
/square6Direct Coombs’ test  is used to detect these antibodies
or complement proteins that are bound to the
surface of red blood cells. Direct Coombs’ test isused to test for autoimmune hemolytic anemia. In
autoimmune hemolytic anemia, patient’s bloodmay contain IgG antibodies that can specificallybind to antigens on the RBC surface membrane.Complement proteins may subsequently bind to thebound antibodies and cause RBC destruction. Blood
sample from the patient is taken and the RBCs are
washed to remove patient’s own plasma and thenincubated with antihuman globulin (also known as“Coombs’ reagent”). If there are antibodies boundto RBC membrane, the antihuman globulin willbind to these antibodies producing agglutination
of RBCs which is called positive direct Coombs’ test.
/square6Indirect Coombs’ test  is used to detect antibodies
against RBCs that are present unbound in thepatient’s serum. Here, the serum from the patient
is incubated with RBCs of known antigenicity from
other patient blood samples. If agglutination occurs,the indirect Coombs’ test is positive. IndirectCoombs’ test is used in prenatal testing of pregnantwomen, and in testing blood prior to a bloodtransfusion ( see Fig. 6.6).
Q.Define aplastic anemia. Discuss the etiology,
classification, clinical features, investigations andmanagement of aplastic anemia.
Q.Drug induced aplastic anemias.
/square6Aplastic anemia is defined as pancytopenia with
an empty (hypoplastic or aplastic) bone marrow.
/square6The term “aplastic anemia” is a misnomer becausethere is not only anemia but also thrombocytopeniaand leucopenia (pancytopenia).
Etiology and Classification of Aplastic Anemia
Acquired
• Idiopathic (no identifiable cause)• Cytotoxic drugs• Radiation• Idiosyncratic drug reaction (chloramphenicol, gold, NSAIDs,
sulfonamides)
• Toxic chemicals (benzene, lindane, glue vapors)• Viral infections (parvovirus B19, HIV infection, Epstein-Barr
virus)
• Immune disorders (eosinophilic fasciitis, SLE, graft versus
host disease)
• Miscellaneous (paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria,
thymoma, pregnancy)
Inherited
• Fanconi’s anaemia• Dyskeratosis congenita• Diamond-Blackfan anemia
Pathogenesis
/square6In idiopathic cases, there is no identifiable cause
but in all such cases there is a stem cell defect
(diminished numbers, impaired maturation,

/square6Diseases of Blood389
6proliferation and differentiation). In all other cases,
there is damage to bone marrow which may be
dose-related or idiosyncratic reaction to radiation,drugs, chemicals or infectious agents.
Clinical Features
/square6The onset is insidious and symptoms and signs aredue to anemia, leukopenia and thrombocytopenia(pancytopenia).
/square6Anemia causes easy fatigability, exertional dyspneaand pallor.
/square6Leukopenia causes recurrent infections (pneu-
monia, urinary tract infections, fungal infections,
septicemia)./square6Thrombocytopenia causes bleeding manifesta-
tions (mucosal hemorrhages, menorrhagia, andpetechiae).
/square6Splenomegaly and lymphadenopathy are not afeature of aplastic anemia.
Investigations
/square6Hemoglobin is low.
/square6There is pancytopenia.
/square6Reticulocyte count is low in relation to the degreeof anemia.
/square6ESR is elevated.
/square6Peripheral blood smear shows pancytopenia and
normochromic-normocytic RBCs. No abnormal
cells are seen in peripheral blood.
Figure 6.6 Direct and indirect Coombs’ tests

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
6390 /square6Bone marrow examination shows profoundly hypo-
cellular marrow with a decrease in all cell elements.
The marrow space is composed mostly of fat cells
and marrow stroma. The residual hematopoietic cellsare morphologically normal. Malignant infiltrates
or fibrosis are absent. The bone marrow iron store
is normal or increased.
Prognosis
/square6Prognosis depends upon two factors, disease
severity and patient age. Severe aplastic anemia is
associated with reduced survival rate and there isa strong inverse relation between patient age and
5-year survival.
Treatment
Supportive Therapy
/square6Involves treatment of infection, correction of anemia
with blood transfusion, correction of thrombocyto-
penia by platelet transfusion.
/square6Antifibrinolytic agents (tranexamic acid or epsilon-
amino caproic acid) are also useful to controlbleeding in severe cases.
/square6Blood and platelet transfusions should be used
sparingly in patients who are candidates for
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation to avoidsensitization.
Definitive Therapy
/square6Bone marrow transplantation—allogeneic bonemarrow transplantation is curative in aplastic
anemia, but is limited by the availability of an HLA-
matched donor as well as graft versus host diseasein patients over the age of 45 years. This is the
treatment of choice in patients below 45 years if an
HLA-matched donor is available.
/square6Immunosuppressive regimens are recommendedfor those above 45 years. They are not curative, but
improve survival. A combination of anti-thymocyte
globulin, cyclosporine, and corticosteroids withor without granulocyte-colony stimulating factor
(G-CSF) can be used for immunosuppression.
/square6Treatment of the underlying cause or agent.
Q.Fanconi anemia.
/square6Fanconi anemia is the most common form of
inherited aplastic anemia.
/square6Random breaks of chromosomes are seen due to
defect in DNA repair.
/square6It is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized
by several congenital anomalies, progressive bone
marrow failure, and an increased incidence of
malignancies.
/square6It usually presents within the first decade of life. Thereare skeletal (hypoplastic or absent thumb, radii)
cardiac, neurologic (microcephaly, microphthalmia
and mental retardation) and renal malformations
with hyperpigmentation (patchy) of skin./square6Treatment involves hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation, androgens and corticosteroidtherapy.
Q.Erythropoietin.
Q.Ectopic sources of erythropoietin.
/square6Erythropoietin (EPO) is a glycoprotein growth
factor which stimulates erythropoiesis, and RBC
maturation.
/square6Erythropoietin is produced by the kidney and a
small amount (<10%) by the liver. In the kidneyinterstitial fibroblasts are thought to produce
erythropoietin and studies have shown that
proximal tubular cells also produce erythropoietin.Hypoxia is the main stimulus for erythropoietinrelease which in turn stimulates RBC production.
/square6In patients with chronic renal failure, anemia iscommon due to reduced erythropoietin production.Injection of erythropoietin in chronic renal failurepatients restores normal number of RBCs andcorrects anemia.
/square6Ectopic sources of erythropoietin include cerebellarhemangioma, uterine leiomyoma, pheochromo-cytoma, and hepatoma.
Recombinant Erythropoietin
/square6This is a synthetic (recombinant) erythropoietinavailable in the market. Darbepoetin alfa is asynthetic erythropoietin analogue which has longerhalf-life and hence can be given less frequently.
Indications for Erythropoietin Therapy
/square6Anemia of chronic kidney disease (most common
indication).
/square6Less common indications are anemia of chronic
disease and anemia associated with cancer chemo-therapy.
Side Effects of Erythropoietin Therapy
/square6Hypertension.
/square6Headache.
/square6Influenza-like syndrome.
Q.Define neutrophilia. Enumerate the causes of
neutrophilia.
/square6Absolute neutrophil count of more than 7,700/ μL
in the presence of a total WBC count less than 11,000/μL is called neutrophilia.
Causes of Neutrophilia
/square6Infections—bacterial, fungal, sometimes viral.
/square6Drug-induced—glucocorticoids, lithium.
/square6Inflammation—thermal injury, tissue necrosis,
myocardial and pulmonary infarction, hyper-sensitivity states, collagen vascular diseases.

/square6Diseases of Blood391
6/square6Myeloproliferative diseases—myelocytic leukemia,
myeloid metaplasia, polycythemia vera.
/square6Stress, excitement, vigorous exercise.
/square6Metabolic disorders—diabetic ketoacidosis, acuterenal failure, eclampsia, acute poisoning.
/square6Others—metastatic carcinoma, acute hemorrhage
or hemolysis.
Q.Define neutropenia and agranulocytosis. Describe
the etiology, clinical features and management of
neutropenia/agranulocytosis (febrile neutropenia).
/square6Neutropenia is defined as an absolute neutrophilcount (ANC) of less than 1500/ μL.
/square6Agranulocytosis refers to ANC less than 500/ μL.
/square6The risk of infection begins to increase at an ANC
below 1000/ μL.
Etiology
Decreased production
• Drug-induced (chemotherapeutic agents, methotrexate,
chloramphenicol, clozapine, carbimazole)
• Hematologic diseases—idiopathic, cyclic neutropenia,
Chédiak-Higashi syndrome, aplastic anemia
• Tumor invasion of bone marrow (myeloma, leukemias, myelo-
fibrosis)
• Nutritional deficiency—vitamin B12, folate (especially alcoholics)
• Infections—tuberculosis, typhoid fever, brucellosis, tularemia,
measles, infectious mononucleosis, malaria, viral hepatitis,
leishmaniasis, AIDS
Peripheral destruction
• Hypersplenism• Antineutrophil antibodies• Autoimmune disorders—Felty’s syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis,
lupus erythematosus
Peripheral pooling (transient neutropenia)
• Overwhelming bacterial infection (acute endotoxemia)• Hemodialysis• Cardiopulmonary bypass
Clinical Features
/square6Can be asymptomatic.
/square6Increased risk of recurrent infections and sepsis.
Common infective organisms include Staphylo-
coccus aureus , gram-negative organisms and fungi.
/square6Common sites of infection include the oral cavity
and mucous membranes, skin, perirectal andgenital areas.
/square6Classic presentation is sore throat and fever.
/square6Ulcers in the throat and mouth.
/square6Toxemia and sepsis can lead to death.
Investigations
/square6Total WBC count is low.
/square6Neutrophil count is low.
/square6Peripheral smear shows absence of neutrophil and
band forms./square6Bone marrow examination shows myeloid aplasia
or hypoplasia or myeloid maturation arrest.
/square6Blood culture may grow the infective organism.
/square6Imaging studies such as chest X-ray, X-ray of para-nasal sinuses, CT scan of the abdomen, etc. may bedone based on history and examination findings toidentify the focus of infection.
Treatment
/square6Treatment depends upon the cause and degree ofthe neutropenia.
/square6Patients with bone marrow hypoplasia and/orsevere infections should receive aggressive anti-bacterial therapy for fever, even in the absence ofsigns of infection. Broad spectrum antibiotics to
coverage both gram-positive and gram-negative
bacteria should be used. Patients with an ANC lessthan 500/ μL and marrow aplasia should always be
treated on an inpatient basis with parenteralantibiotics.
/square6G-CSF (granulocyte colony stimulating factor)should be given to patients with inadequateresponse to antibiotics.
Q.Define pancytopenia. Enumerate the causes of
pancytopenia.
/square6Pancytopenia refers to reduction of all three cells
of blood, i.e. RBCs, WBCs and platelets. If only two
types of cells are low, the term bicytopenia is used.
• Vit B12, iron and folic acid deficiency
• Aplastic anemia• Leukemias (acute leukemia, hairy cell leukemia)• Myelodysplastic syndrome• Hypersplenism• Bone marrow infiltration by carcinoma, lymphoma, multiple
myeloma, myelofibrosis, Niemann-Pick disease
• Osteopetrosis (marble bone disease)• Systemic lupus erythematosus• Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria• Disseminated tuberculosis• Overwhelming infections• Anticancer drugs• Radiotherapy
Q.Define eosinophilia. Enumerate the causes of
eosinophilia.
/square6Eosinophilia is defined as absolute eosinophil
counts above 600 eosinophils/ μL or >6% in peri-
pheral blood.
Causes of Eosinophilia
Allergic diseases
• Atopic and related diseases (Hay fever, asthma, eczema,
serum sickness, allergic vasculitis, and pemphigus)
• Drug allergy

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
6392Infectious diseases
• Parasitic infections (worm infestation, filariasis, Löeffler’s
syndrome, tropical pulmonary eosinophilia)
• Some fungal infections
Malignancies
• Hyper-eosinophilic syndrome
• Leukemia• Lymphomas
• Carcinoma lung, stomach, pancreas, ovary, and uterus
• Mastocytosis
Collagen vascular diseases
• Rheumatoid arthritis
• Eosinophilic fasciitis• Allergic angiitis
• Periarteritis nodosa
Endocrine
• Hypoadrenalism
Drugs
• Sulphonamides• Aspirin
• Nitrofurantoin
• Penicillins
Idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndrome
Q.Sideroblastic anemias.
/square6Sideroblastic anemias are due to deranged synthesis
of heme within red cell precursors. Deranged hemesynthesis leads to impaired hemoglobin productionwith the formation of hypochromic, microcytic andother mis-shaped RBCs.
/square6Iron cannot be utilized which accumulates insideRBCs leading to ring sideroblasts. Iron overloadis also a constant feature of most sideroblasticanemias.
/square6Sideroblastic anemias are characterized by thepresence of sideroblasts in the bone marrow andperipheral blood.
/square6Sideroblastic anemias are part of a myelodysplasticsyndrome but may be hereditary or may occursecondary to drugs or toxins.
Classification
Hereditary
• X-linked
• Autosomal• Sporadic congenital
Acquired
• Pure sideroblastic anemia
• Refractory anemia with ring sideroblasts (RARS)• Alcoholism• Drugs (isoniazid, chloramphenicol)
• Copper deficiency
• HypothermiaFeatures
/square6Indolent or progressive anemia.
/square6Microcytic hypochromic RBCs.
/square6Iron overload.
/square6Characteristic ringed sideroblasts in the bone
marrow. The iron laden mitochondria surround thenucleus and appear as the pathognomonic ringswith Prussian blue staining.
Figure 6.7 Ringed sideroblasts in blood
Diagnosis
/square6Sideroblastic anemia is suspected in patients withmicrocytic anemia, with increased serum iron,serum ferritin, and transferrin saturation.
Treatment
/square6Anemia responds to large doses of pyridoxine(200 mg daily for 2–3 months).
/square6Blood transfusions can be given for severe anemia.
/square6Iron overload can be treated by periodic phlebo-tomies and desferrioxamine.
/square6Recombinant human erythropoietin and GM-CSF(granulocyte-monocyte colony-stimulating factor)are helpful in selected cases.
/square6Iron overload is treated by iron chelating agentssuch as deferoxamine and phlebotomy.
/square6Bone marrow transplantation can be done in severe
transfusion-dependent patients.
Q.Describe the structure and function of normal
hemoglobin.
Q.Normal hemoglobins.
Hemoglobin Structure
/square6Hemoglobin (Hb) is a tetramer consisting of four
polypeptide chains: Two alpha chains and two beta
chains. Alpha chain contains 141 amino acids andbeta chain 146 amino acids.
/square6Different hemoglobins are produced during
embryonic, fetal, and adult life. The major adult

/square6Diseases of Blood393
6hemoglobin, HbA, has 2 alpha chains and 2 beta
chains ( α2β2). HbF predominates during fetal life and
contains 2 alpha chains and 2 gamma chains ( α2β2).
HbA2 is found in little concentration in adults and
contains 2 alpha chains and 2 delta chains ( α2β2).
/square6Each globin chain contains a single heme molecule,
consisting of a protoporphyrin IX ring complexedwith a single iron atom in the ferrous state (Fe
2+).
Each heme molecule can bind a single oxygenmolecule. Since there are four heme molecules in
every molecule of hemoglobin, it can transport up
to four oxygen molecules.
/square6The exterior surface of globin chain is hydrophilicand soluble whereas the interior forms a hydro-
phobic pocket into which heme is inserted. The
hemoglobin tetramer is highly soluble but indivi-dual globin chains are insoluble. Unpaired globinprecipitates, forming inclusions that damage thecell. Solubility and reversible oxygen binding areaffected in hemoglobinopathies.
Function of Hemoglobin
/square6Hemoglobin binds to oxygen at the alveolus, retains
it, and releases it to tissues.
Q.Define hemoglobinopathies. How do you classify
them?
/square6Hemoglobinopathies are disorders affecting the
structure, function, or production of hemoglobin.
Classification
Hereditary Hemoglobinopathies
/square6Qualitative abnormality of hemoglobin:  Here the amino
acid sequences in globin chains are defective which
lead to altered physical or chemical properties ofhemoglobin, e.g. HbS, HbC
/square6Quantitative abnormality of hemoglobin:  Here the
amino acid sequence is normal, but one or more
globin chains are absent, e.g. thalassemias.
Acquired Hemoglobinopathies
/square6Methemoglobin
/square6Sulfhemoglobin
/square6Carboxyhemoglobin
Q.Discuss the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features,
investigations and management of sickle cell anemia.
Q.Hemoglobin-S (Hb-S).
Q.Sickle cell crisis and its management.
Q.Splenic sequestration syndrome.
/square6The sickle cell anemia is characterized by the pre-
sence of HbS caused by a mutation in the β-globin
gene that changes the sixth amino acid fromglutamic acid to valine (glutamic acid goes)./square6If both genes encoding for beta chain are abnormal,it is called sickle cell disease. It is more severe and
is inherited as autosomal recessive manner.
/square6If only one gene is abnormal, and other gene is
normal, it is called sickle cell trait. These patientshave mild disease and can be asymptomatic.
Pathophysiology
/square6RBCs containing HbS turn into sickle shaped cells
on deoxygenation. Other factors leading to sickling
are fever, sluggish blood flow, and acidosis. Sicklinghappens due to polymerization of HbS whichdistort the shape of RBC.
/square6Sickling of RBCs leads to hemolysis causing anemia.Sickled RBCs cannot negotiate through smallvasculature leading to vaso-occlusive complicationssuch as organ damage.
Clinical Manifestations
/square6Clinical manifestations include anemia (due tohemolysis), pain (due to vascular occlusion causingischemia), infections (due to damage to spleen), and
damage to organ systems.
/square6Growth retardation and psycho-social problems are
common.
/square6Splenic infarcts result in frequent life-threateningepisodes of septicemia. Many types of crisis suchas painful crisis, splenic sequestration crisis andaplastic crisis can occur which is life threateningunless treated promptly.
/square6Vaso-occlusion can cause organ damage (particu-larly heart and kidney in adults and brain inchildren).
/square6Presence of high amount of Hb-F may decreasethe symptoms of sickle cell disease because Hb-Finterferes with polymerization of HbS.
Painful Crisis (Sickle Cell Crisis)
/square6Vascular-occlusion can lead to ischemic pain inmany areas of the body. Pain is the commonestcause of debility in Hb-S disease. Acute episode ofsevere pain is called painful crisis or sickle cell crisis.Acute pain is the first symptom of disease in manypatients and is the most frequent symptom afterFigure 6.8 Sickle cell anemia


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
6394 the age of two years. Acute pain is also the compli-
cation for which patients with sickle cell diseasecommonly seek medical attention.
/square6Pain may be precipitated by events such as weather
conditions (e.g. high wind speed/low humidity),
dehydration, infection, stress, menses, alcoholconsumption, and nocturnal hypoxemia. However,the majority of painful episodes have no identifiablecause.
/square6Pain can affect any area of the body, but commonin the back, chest, extremities, and abdomen.Dactylitis (acute pain in the hands and/or feet) iscommon in children.
/square6Pain can vary from mild to excruciating. Pain maybe accompanied by systemic symptoms such as fever,tachypnea, hypertension, nausea, and vomiting.
/square6Painful episodes last for two to seven days.
/square6Frequent pain may lead to psychosocial problems,depression and interfere with daily life.
Splenic Sequestration Crisis
/square6Vaso-occlusion can occur within the spleen andRBCs can get trapped in the spleen. Most of the
circulating red cell mass is sequestrated in the
spleen and the spleen rapidly enlarges (withinhours). There is marked fall in hemoglobinconcentration. There is a risk of hypovolemic shock.
/square6The patients who are susceptible to this syndromeare those whose spleens have not yet undergonefibrosis. Splenic sequestration crisis is associatedwith a 10 to 15 percent mortality rate, occurringbefore transfusions can be given.
/square6Sequestration can be recurrent in survivors andhence, splenectomy is recommended after the firstattack. Milder cases can be managed with trans-fusion and careful observation.
Aplastic Crisis
/square6In aplastic crisis, there is transient arrest of erythro-poiesis, leading to sudden decrease in hemoglobin,and reticulocytes. Bone marrow shows decrease in
red cell precursors.
/square6Most cases of aplastic crisis are precipitated by
infections such as parvovirus B19, Streptococcus
pneumoniae , Salmonella, streptococci, and Epstein-
Barr virus. Parvovirus B19 is the most important of
these.
/square6Affected patients require blood transfusion.Patients usually recover within a few days.
Infections
/square6Sickle cell patients are prone to a variety of infec-tions. Absent splenic function (autosplenectomydue to splenic infarcts) leads to infections with the
encapsulated organisms, e.g. strep pneumonia and
H. influenza.  Pneumococcal infections can result in
death within hours./square6Urinary tract infections (due to E. coli ) and osteo-
myelitis are also common. Salmonella typhimurium
is another common infecting organism.
Specific Organ Systems Complications
/square6CVS:  Anemia and vaso-occlusive phenomenon can
lead to myocardial ischemia and infarction.Repeated blood transfusions can lead to iron over-load and restrictive cardiomyopathy.
/square6RS: Pneumonia or pulmonary infarction.
/square6CNS:  Transient ischemic attacks, strokes and cere-
bral hemorrhage.
/square6Hepatobiliary system:  Gallstones (pigmented gall-
stones due to ongoing hemolysis), recurrent abdo-minal pain due to vaso-occlusive crisis, hepato-
megaly and hepatic dysfunction.
/square6Obstetric and gynecologic system:  Placental infarcts
can lead to intrauterine growth retardation andlow-birth-weight babies. The frequency of sponta-
neous abortion is high.
/square6Genitourinary system:  Hematuria, urinary tract
infection, hyperuricemia and gout are common.Renal failure is common in elderly people. Priapism
(painful erection of penis) can occur.
/square6Ocular complications:  Proliferative retinopathy.
/square6Orthopedic system:  Avascular necrosis of the hip and
osteomyelitis.
/square6Skin:  Ulcers around the ankle.
Investigations
/square6Features of hemolysis:  Mild to moderate anemia,
reticulocytosis, unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia,elevated serum LDH and low serum haptoglobin.
/square6Peripheral blood smear reveals sickled RBCs,polychromasia indicative of reticulocytosis, andHowell-Jolly bodies reflecting hyposplenia. RBCsare normochromic.
/square6Sickle test:  Sickling of RBCs occurs when mixed with
a solution of sodium metabisulphite.
/square6Hemoglobin electrophoresis allows the definitivediagnosis of sickle cell disease. Most of the hemo-globin is HbS.
/square6Genetic analysis can show the specific mutation.
Management
General Measures
/square6Avoidance of dehydration, cold weather andhypoxia
/square6Psychosocial support
/square6Dietary advice (adequate calorie intake, folic acid,vitamin C, vitamin E and zinc).
Specific Measures
/square6Infections:  Infections can be prevented by prophy-
lactic penicillin and immunizations. Pneumococcaland H. influenza  vaccination should be given to all

/square6Diseases of Blood395
6patients with sickle cell anemia. Hepatitis B vaccina-
tion is also necessary. Febrile episodes should beinvestigated appropriately and treated with earlyantibiotic therapy.
/square6Pain management: Pain should be controlled by
aggressive use of analgesics. Most of the time opioidanalgesics such as morphine, fentanyl or tramadolare required. Dehydration should be prevented.
/square6Blood transfusions:  Transfusions can be used to
correct anemia and also in emergencies such assplenic sequestration syndrome. Blood transfusionalso decreases the level of HbS by dilution.However, hemoglobin should not be raised above10 g/dL because of increases in viscosity and the
risk of vaso-occlusive episodes. Blood transfusions
are associated with problems like transmission ofviral diseases, iron overload and allo-immunisation.
/square6Hydroxyurea:  Hydroxyurea induces the synthesis of
fetal hemoglobin. High levels of fetal hemoglobin
(HbF) decrease the severity of crisis and prolongsurvival in sickle cell patients. Co-administrationof hematopoietic agents such as erythropoietinalong with hydroxyurea may also be useful.
/square6Bone marrow transplantation  offers the only chance
of cure at present.
Prognosis
/square6Patients now survive up to 6th or 7th decade.Common causes of death include organ failure(predominantly renal) and sickle cell crisis. A highlevel of HbF predicts prolonged survival.
Q.What are thalassemias? Classify thalassemias.
/square6Thalassemias are a group of inherited anemia
characterized by reduced or absent production ofone or more globin chains of the hemoglobin.
/square6Thalassemia is common in the Mediterraneanregion especially amongst Italians and Greeks. Thethalassemia belt extends to India and south EastAsia. In India, it is found in Punjab, Gujarat,
Maharashtra, Karnataka, Bengal and Assam. It is
relatively less common in the southern states. Onan average, 3% of Indians carry the thalassemiagene (chiefly beta thalassemia). The highestincidence is found in Lohanas and Sindhis.
Classification
/square6Thalassemias are named according to globin chaindeficiency, e.g. in beta thalassaemia, there is defi-ciency of beta chain, and in alpha thalassemia, thereis deficiency of alpha chain.
Beta thalassemias
•Beta thalassemia major  (Cooley’s anemia) (patient is
homozygous, i.e. both genes defective)
•Beta thalassemia intermedia  (here the patient is symptomatic,
but can do well even without transfusions)•Beta thalassemia minor  (also known as thalassemia trait, patient
is heterozygous, i.e. one gene defective, other gene normal)
Alpha thalassemias
•Alpha thalassemia-2 trait  (loss of one of the four alpha globin
genes)
•Alpha thalassemia-1 trait (loss of two of the four alpha globin
genes, also known as thalassemia minor)
•Hemoglobin H disease (loss of three of the four alpha globin
genes)
•Hemoglobin-Barts (hydrops fetalis)  (all four alpha globin
genes are non-functional)
Q.Discuss the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features,
investigations and management of beta thalassemia
major (Cooley’s anaemia).
Etiology
/square6Beta-thalassemias usually arise from point muta-
tions in or near the gene which encodes beta globinchain of hemoglobin. The “beta gene” cluster islocated on the short arm of chromosome 11.
Pathophysiology
/square6Impaired synthesis of globin chain decreases theproduction of hemoglobin causing hypochromiaand microcytosis. There is accumulation ofunaffected globin chains since their production
proceeds at a normal rate.
/square6In the presence of reduced β chains, the excess alpha
chains are unstable and precipitate, leading todamage of red blood cell membranes. This leads tointramedullary (in the bone marrow) and peri-
pheral hemolysis causing anemia.
/square6Anemia leads to bone marrow hyperplasia and
ineffective erythropoiesis resulting from the intra-medullary destruction of the developing erythroid
cells.
/square6Marked expansion of the bone marrow may cause
severe bony deformities, osteopenia, and pathologicfractures.
Clinical Features
/square6Symptoms start late in the first year of life whenfetal hemoglobin levels decline.
/square6Pallor, irritability, growth retardation, hepato-splenomegaly and jaundice develop due to severehemolytic anemia.
/square6Anemia and hemolysis stimulate erythropoiesis
leading to extensive marrow expansion leading to
characteristic chipmunk facies (frontal bossing andprominent check bones).
/square680% of untreated children die within the first five
years of life as a result of severe anemia, high output
heart failure, and infections.
/square6Repeated blood transfusions can lead to iron over-load. Many patients die secondary to iron overload-
related cardiomyopathy or arrhythmias.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
6396
/square6Various endocrinological abnormalities such as
delayed puberty, diabetes mellitus, hypopara-thyroidism and hypothyroidism can occur due toiron overload.
/square6Repeated blood transfusions can lead to trans-mission of viruses (HBV, HCV, and HIV).
Investigations
/square6Signs of hemolysis such as anemia, increasedindirect (unconjugated) bilirubin, increased LDHand reduced haptoglobin levels.
/square6HbA is markedly reduced and HbF is raised.
/square6Peripheral smear shows hypochromia, micro-
cytosis, anisopoikilocytosis, tear drop cells and
target cells. Nucleated red cells are abundant butreticulocyte count is low due to ineffective erythro-poiesis. RBCs show clumped inclusion bodiesrepresenting precipitates of alpha globin within thered cell. These precipitates (Heinz bodies) can be
stained with methyl violet or other supravital stains.
WBC and platelet counts are normal unless hyper-splenism develops.
/square6Bone marrow shows marked hypercellularity.
/square6Serum iron and transferin saturation are increaseddue to high red cell turnover.
/square6The osmotic fragility test is significantly reduced.
/square6Skull X-ray shows widened diploic space and hair-on-end appearance. Compression fractures of thevertebrae and marked osteoporosis are common.
Management
/square6Beta thalassemia major requires regular bloodtransfusion to maintain hemoglobin at >10 g/dl.Correction of anemia leads to normal growth anddevelopment.
/square6Repeated blood transfusions lead to iron overload.Hence, iron chelation therapy should be given(desferrioxamine infusion subcutaneously over8–10 hours a day, 5 days a week or oral iron chelatordeferiprone).
/square6Folic acid supplements should be given to allpatients because of increased requirements due toincreased red cell turnover.
/square6Splenectomy for gross symptomatic splenomegaly
or hypersplenism./square6Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation is the
treatment of choice for β-thalassemia major and can
cure it.
/square6Alternative forms of therapy include manipulation
of globin gene expression using butyrate and gene
therapy.
/square6Genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis shouldbe offered to affected parents.
/square6Thalassemia minor requires no treatment exceptgenetic counseling, avoidance of inappropriate irontherapy and close monitoring during pregnancy.
Q.Hereditary spherocytosis.
/square6Hereditary spherocytosis is the commonest hemo-
lytic anemia secondary to membrane defect.
/square6It is usually inherited as an autosomal dominant
condition, although 25% of cases have no familyhistory and represent new mutations.
Pathology
/square6It is due to a defective structural protein (spectrin)of the red cell membrane. Other defective mem-
brane proteins are ankyrin and band 3 protein. All
these protein defects lead to reduced surface areaof RBCs which lose their biconcave shape andbecome spherical. The morphologic hallmark of HSis the microspherocyte, which is caused by loss ofRBC membrane surface area and has abnormal
osmotic fragility in vitro . As the spherical cells are
unable to pass through the splenic microcirculation,they die prematurely.
Clinical Features
/square6Signs and symptoms of hereditary spherocytosis(HS) include mild pallor, intermittent jaundice, andsplenomegaly.TABLE 6.2: Differences between βββββ thalassaemia major and minor
Features Thalassemia major Thalassemia minor
•Symptoms Symptomatic Asymptomatic
•Genes resposnsible for globin Both defective One is normal, one is defective
chain synthesis
•Anemia Severe Mild
•Peripheral smear Severe hypochromasia, microcytosis and Mild hypochromasia and microcytosis, few
erythroblastosis target cells and punctate basophilia
•Hb electrophoresis Hb F elevatedHb A reduced/absent Hb A2 elevated
•Parents Both having thalassemia minor One parent having thalassemia minor
Figure 6.9 Hereditary spherocytosis


/square6Diseases of Blood397
6/square6Most cases are associated with an asymptomatic
compensated chronic hemolytic state.
/square6A hemolytic crisis can occur when the severity of
hemolysis increases; this is seen in association with
infection.
/square6A megaloblastic crisis can occur due to folate defi-ciency which is common during pregnancy.
/square6An aplastic crisis occurs in association with parvo-
virus B-19 infection.
/square6Pigment gallstones are present in up to 50% of
patients and may cause symptomatic cholecystitis.
Investigations
/square6Anemia.
/square6Reticulocytosis.
/square6Peripheral smear shows spherocytes.
/square6LFT shows rise in indirect bilirubin.
/square6Serum LDH level is raised.
/square6Direct Coombs test is negative excluding immunehemolysis.
/square6Osmotic fragility test shows increased sensitivity
to lysis in hypotonic saline solutions.
Management
/square6Folic acid prophylaxis, 5 mg once weekly, shouldbe given for life.
/square6Splenectomy may be considered in severe hemo-
lysis.
/square6Acute, severe hemolytic crises require blood trans-fusions.
Q.Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency.
/square6Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) defi-
ciency is the most common enzyme defect associa-
ted with hereditary hemolytic anemia. It is an X-
linked disorder, hence seen mostly in males. Females
are protected because of two X-chromosomes one
of which can carry normal gene.
Pathogenesis
/square6G6PD is the first enzyme in the hexose monophos-
phate shunt pathway which generates NADPH.
NADPH is required to keep the glutathione in
reduced state in RBCs.
/square6Depletion of cellular glutathione results in damageto RBCs by oxidizing agents and various drugs
leading to hemolysis.
Precipitating Causes of Hemolysis in G6PD Deficiency
/square6Drugs:  Primaquine, quinine, sulfonamides, dap-
sone.
/square6Diabetic ketoacidosis.
/square6Favabeans.
/square6Viral and bacterial infections.Clinical Features
/square6Hemolysis usually occurs only under oxidant
stress.
/square6Hemolysis is usually precipitated by infections dueto liberation of oxidant molecules by granulocytesand mononuclear phagocytes and oxidant drugs.Ingestion of fava beans (Italian broad beans) canalso cause hemolysis in some patients due to thepresence of high levels of oxidant pyrimidineanalogues in the beans.
/square6Hemolysis leads to anemia, reticulocytosis, hemo-globinuria, hyperbilirubinemia, and jaundice.Hemoglobinuria can cause renal tubular necrosisand renal failure.
/square6Many neonates with G6PD deficiency manifestjaundice at 1 to 4 days of age which usually respondsto phototherapy.
Investigations
/square6Evidence of intravascular hemolysis after infectionsand certain drugs.
/square6Estimation of G6PD activity in the RBC.
Treatment
/square6Asymptomatic individuals require no treatment.
/square6Mild hemolytic episodes are treated by withdraw-ing the offending drug, or treatment of the concurrent
infection.
/square6Severe hemolytic episodes may require red cell trans-fusions to correct anemia and measures to preventrenal failure due to hemoglobinuria.
Q.Methemoglobinemia.
/square6Methemoglobin is an altered state of hemoglobin
in which the ferrous (Fe2+) ions of heme are oxidized
to ferric (Fe3+) state. Methemoglobin is unable to
bind oxygen. Hence, oxygen delivery to the tissuesis impaired.
/square6Normally a small amount of methemoglobin isformed daily which is reduced back to normalhemoglobin by cytochrome b
5 reductase and
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD).
Causes
/square6Methemoglobinemia can occur due to congenitalor acquired causes.
/square6Most cases are acquired, due to increased methemo-globin formation by various agents such as dapsone,
benzocaine, etc.
/square6Hereditary methemoglobinemia is due to deficiencyof reducing enzymes such as cytochrome b
5 reduc-
tase. Another congenital cause of methemoglobi-nemia is hemoglobin M disease.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
6398 Clinical Features
/square6Chronic methemoglobinemia is asymptomatic most
of the time. Some may complain of headache andeasy fatigability. The main complaint is “cyanosis”
or slate-blue color of the skin and mucous mem-
branes. Cyanosis is present when the methemo-globin concentration exceeds 1.5 g/dL.
/square6Patients with acute methemoglobinemia are usuallysymptomatic due to acutely impaired oxygen
delivery to tissues. Symptoms include headache,
fatigue, dyspnea, and lethargy. At highermethemoglobin levels, respiratory depression,altered consciousness, shock, seizures, and deathmay occur.
Diagnosis
/square6Methemoglobinemia should be suspected whenthere is “cyanosis” in the presence of normal PaO
2
as obtained by arterial blood gases. Levels ofmethemoglobin should be measured in lab.
Treatment
/square6All patients with hereditary methemoglobinemiashould avoid exposure to aniline derivatives,nitrates, and other agents which can inducemethemoglobinemia. Methylene blue or ascorbicacid orally may be useful in cytochrome b5R
deficiency. Riboflavin has also been shown to be
useful.
/square6In acquired methemoglobinemia any offendingagent should be discontinued. In severe methemo-globinemia blood transfusion or exchange trans-fusion and intravenous methylene blue are helpful.
However, methylene blue is not helpful in patients
with G6PD deficiency, since the reduction ofmethemoglobin by methylene blue is dependentupon NADPH generated by G6PD.
Q.Kernicterus.
/square6Kernicterus refers to brain damage caused by
unconjugated bilirubin deposition in basal gangliaand brainstem nuclei, caused by either acute or
chronic hyperbilirubinemia. It occurs in neonates
due to hyperbilirubinemia of various reasons.Neurologic sequelae develop during the first yearafter birth.
/square6The major features of kernicterus include: Choreo-athetoid cerebral palsy (chorea, ballismus, tremor),
sensorineural hearing loss, gaze abnormalities
(especially limitation of upward gaze), dental-enamel dysplasia. Cognitive function is usuallyspared.
/square6There is no treatment for established kernicterus.It should be prevented by early recognition and
treatment of hyperbilirubinemia.Q.Etiology of leukemia.
Idiopathic
• Majority of cases are idiopathic
Ionizing radiation
• Atomic bombing
• X-ray exposure• Radiotherapy
Viruses
• Human T cell lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-I) (can cause
adult T cell leukemia)
• HTLV-II (causes a syndrome resembling hairy cell leukemia)• Epstein-Barr virus
Immunodeficiency state
• Immune deficiency states (e.g. HIV and hypogammaglobuli-
nemia) are associated with an increase in haematological
malignancy
Genetics factors
• Trisomy 21 (Down syndrome)• Trisomy 13 (Patau)
• XXY (Klinefelter syndrome)
• Disorders causing chromosomal instability (Bloom syndrome,
Fanconi’s anemia, and ataxia-telangiectasia)
• Philadelphia chromosome causing CML)
Chemicals and drugs
• Exposure to benzene and benzene-containing compounds
• Exposure to tobacco, chemotherapeutic agents (especially
cyclophosphamide, melphalan, other alkylating agents, and
etoposide)
Q.Classification of leukemias.
Q.Acute vs chronic leukemia.
Classification of Leukemias
Acute leukemias
• Lymphoid (lymphoblastic)• Myeloid (myeloblastic)
Chronic leukemias
• Lymphoid (lymphocytic)• Myeloid (myelocytic)
Acute vs Chronic Leukemia
/square6Acute leukemias are characterized by abnormal
cells that are less mature, develop quickly, and
leave the bone marrow as dysfunctional cells
called “blasts.” These blasts replace the healthycells in the bone marrow, causing the rapid onsetof symptoms. Blasts normally make up 1 to 5%of marrow cells, and having more than 20%blasts in the bone marrow is diagnostic of acute
leukemia.
/square6Chronic leukemias develop slowly and produce
symptoms slowly. Here, the leukemic cells moremature and functional.

/square6Diseases of Blood399
6Q.Define acute leukemia. Discuss the etiology, clinical
features, investigations and management of acuteleukemia.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of acute myeloblastic leukemia(AML).
Q.Aleukemic leukemia.
/square6Acute leukemiais defined as a malignant clonal
proliferation of lymphoid or myeloid precursor cell
which replace the marrow and ultimately spill over
to the peripheral blood and infiltrate lymph nodes,spleen, liver or other organs.
/square6Normally hematopoietic stem cells proliferate and
differentiate into various cellular components of
blood. In acute leukemia an early hematopoieticprecursor fails to differentiate and instead continuesto proliferate in an uncontrolled fashion. As a result,immature myeloid (in AML) or lymphoid cells (inALL), called blasts , rapidly accumulate and
progressively replace the bone marrow which in
turn results in decreased production of normal redcells, white cells, and platelets (pancytopenia).Eventually leukemic blasts will pour out into theblood and also infiltrate lymph nodes, spleen, andother vital organs. Acute leukemia is rapidly fatal
and most patients die within months of diagnosis.
However, in many patients it can be controlled orcured with appropriate therapy.
Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML)
/square6AML (acute myeloid leukemia) is more commonin adults.
Classification of AML
French-American-British (FAB) Classification)
• M0—Acute undifferentiated leukemia• M1—AML with minimal differentiation• M2—AML with differentiation• M3—Acute promyelocytic leukemia• M4—Acute myelomonocytic leukemia
• M5—Acute monocytic leukemia
• M6—Acute erythroleukemia• M7—Acute megakaryocytic leukemia
World Health Organization (WHO) classification of AML (2016)
• AML with recurrent genetic abnormalities• AML with myelodysplasia-related changes• Therapy-related myeloid neoplasms• AML not otherwise specified (NOS)• Myeloid sarcoma• Myeloid proliferations related to Down syndrome
Incidence
/square6Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is the most
common leukemia among the adult population and
accounts for about 80% of all cases. The incidencein the West varies from 3 to 13 per 100,000 per year.
The average age at the time of diagnosis is about65 years. Males are affected commonly thanfemales.
Etiology
/square6AML is due to mutations of the genes involved inhematopoiesis. These mutations result in a clonalexpansion of undifferentiated myeloid precursors
(blasts) in the bone marrow and peripheral blood.
/square6In most of the cases, AML appears as de novo  in a
previously healthy person.
/square6The exact cause of genetic mutations is unclear, butfollowing risk factors are known to cause suchmutations.
/square6Exposure to radiation and chemotherapeuticagents.
/square6Smoking.
/square6AML can also evolve from myeloproliferative dis-orders (MPD), myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS),paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria, and aplasticanemia.
/square6Familial causes of genetic mutations.
Clinical Features
/square6Two things happen in leukemia which causes allthe signs and symptoms. One is leukemic blasts fillthe bone marrow and interfere with its function.Another is leukemic blasts infiltrate normal organs
and lead to their dysfunction.
/square6Decreased bone marrow function leads to defi-
ciency of all three cell lines causing anemia,thrombocytopenia granulocytopenia. Anemia is
present at diagnosis in most patients and causes
fatigue, pallor, and headache and in severe casesangina or heart failure. Thrombocytopenia causesbleeding manifestations in the form of petechiae,ecchymoses, bleeding gums, epistaxis, or hemorr-hage. Granulocytopenia results in increased
incidence of infections.
/square6Infiltration of normal organs by leukemic blasts lead
to enlargement of lymph nodes, liver, and spleen.Bone pain may be present and is due to leukemic
infiltration of the periosteum or expansion of the
medullary cavity. Leukemic cells sometimesinfiltrate the skin and result in a raised, nonpruriticrash, a condition termed leukemia cutis . Leukemic
cells may infiltrate the leptomeninges and causeleukemic meningitis manifesting as headache and
nausea. In advanced cases, cranial nerve palsies,
other neurological deficits and seizures maydevelop. In AML, collections of leukemic blast cells,often referred to as chloromas  or myeloblastomas , can
occur in virtually any soft tissue and appear asrubbery, fast-growing masses.
/square6Certain clinical manifestations are unique tospecific subtypes of leukemia. For example, DIC

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
6400 (disseminated intravascular coagulation) is common
in promyelocytic leukemia (AML-M3) due torelease of tissue thromboplastins by leukemic cellswhen they die.
Laboratory Findings
/square6Anemia and thrombocytopenia.
/square6Total leukocyte count is markedly raised (often ashigh as 100,000/mm
3).
/square6Peripheral blood smear shows circulating blasts.However, blasts may not always be seen in
peripheral smear (“aleukemic leukemia”).
/square6Bone marrow is usually hypercellular with the
presence of blasts. More than 20% blasts arerequired to make a diagnosis of acute leukemia.
/square6Serum LDH, uric acid and alkaline phosphataselevels are elevated due to rapid cell turnover.
/square6The Auer rod, an eosinophilic needle-like inclusionin the cytoplasm, is pathognomonic of AML.
/square6Cytogenetic studies reveal many chromosomeabnormalities which can also predict the prognosis
in acute leukemias.
Treatment
/square6Chemotherapy is the mainstay of therapy for
acute leukemia. The aim of chemotherapy isto induce remission and maintain it. The type ofinitial chemotherapy depends on the subtype ofleukemia.
/square6Most patients with AML except acute promyelo-cytic leukemia are treated with a combination ofdaunorubicin, cytarabine and etoposide. Acutepromyelocytic leukemia is treated with dauno-rubicin plus tretinoin. Arsenic trioxide has been
shown to increase the cure rate of promyelocytic
leukemia when added to primary therapy.
/square6After remission induction, further therapy withcurative intent includes standard chemotherapy
and autologous or allogeneic bone marrow trans-
plantation. If the leukemia recurs after initialchemotherapy, the prognosis is worse.Prognosis
/square670–80% of patients under 60 years with AML achievecomplete remission. 30–40% of these patients can becured by high-dose post-remission chemotherapy.
The remission and cure rate for older patients is
low. Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation iscurative in 50–60% cases in young people.
Acute Lymphoid Leukemias (ALLs)
/square6Acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) is a malignancyof B or T lymphoblasts characterized by uncon-trolled proliferation of abnormal, immaturelymphocytes and their progenitors.
Incidence
/square6Acute lymphoid leukemias (ALLs) are predomi-
nantly cancers of children and young adults. It is
the most common malignancy of childhood. Peakincidence approximately four years age.
/square6More frequent in boys than in girls.
/square6Exposure to high-energy radiation in early child-hood increases the risk of developing T cell ALL.
Etiology
/square6Same as AML
Classification
/square6B-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma (B-ALL/
LBL).
/square6T-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma (T-ALL/
LBL).
/square6Disease can manifest as leukemia when neoplasticcells (lymphoblasts) involve blood and bone marrow(defined as >20% bone marrow blasts) or as lymp-
homa when blasts infiltrate mainly extramedullary
tissue.
Clinical Features
/square6ALL patients typically present with symptoms ofnight sweats, easy bruising, skin pallor, un-explained lymphadenopathy, weakness, weightloss, hepatosplenomegaly, or difficulty breathing.
/square6Pulmonary complications are common in ALL.These include pneumonia, pulmonary leukostasis,
malignant pleural effusion and/or pulmonary
infiltration and upper airway obstruction.
/square6The cause of upper airway obstruction can beepiglottitis, enlarged lymph nodes, laryngeal masscomprised of leukemic cells.
/square6Patients with ALL (especially T cell) may have amediastinal mass visible on chest radiograph. Thismediastinal mass can produce SVC obstruction.
/square6CNS involvement is common in ALL and can
present as meningitis, cranial nerve palsies and
seizures. Figure 6.10 Auer rods in AML


/square6Diseases of Blood401
6Laboratory Findings
/square6Anemia and thrombocytopenia.
/square6Total leukocyte count is markedly raised (often as
high as 100,000/mm3).
/square6Peripheral blood smear shows circulating blasts.However, blasts may not always be seen in
peripheral smear (“aleukemic leukemia”).
/square6Bone marrow is usually hypercellular with the
presence of blasts. More than 20% blasts arerequired to make a diagnosis of acute leukemia.
/square6Serum LDH, uric acid and alkaline phosphataselevels are elevated due to rapid cell turnover.
/square6Patients with ALL (especially T cell) may have amediastinal mass visible on chest radiograph.
/square6Cytogenetic studies reveal many chromosomeabnormalities which can also predict the prog-
nosis./square6ALL is diagnosed when there is no morphologic or
histochemical evidence of myeloid or monocyticlineage. The diagnosis of ALL is confirmed bydemonstrating surface markers of primitivelymphoid cells, by flow cytometry and monoclonalantibodies.
Treatment
/square6ALL is treated with combination chemotherapy,
including daunorubicin, vincristine, prednisone,
and asparaginase. For patients with Philadelphiachromosome-positive ALL, imatinib (or dasatinib)should be added to initial chemotherapy. As withAML, patients may be treated with either chemo-therapy or high-dose chemotherapy plus bone
marrow transplantation.
/square6Recently, chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) T-cell
therapy has been approved for ALL.
TABLE 6.3: Differences between AML and ALL
Features AML ALL
•Cell linage Myeloid precursors Lymphoid precursors
•Auer rods Present Absent
•Age group affected Commonly adults Commonly children
•Common genetic abnormalities t(8;21), t(15;17), and inv(16)(p13;q22) t(9;22) and t(4;11)
•Nuclear enzyme, terminal deoxynucleotidyl Rarely present Present in more than 90%
transferase (Tdt) in leukemic blasts
•Lymphadenopathy Uncommon Common
•Hepatosplenomegaly Uncommon Common
•CNS involvement Uncommon Common
•Cytochemical staining (myeloperoxidase, Positive Negative
sudan black B)Q.Differences between AML and ALL.
Q.Leukemoid reaction.
/square6In severe infections, and various toxic states, total
leucocyte count may go very high (exceed 50,000/cumm). Immature white cell precursors (blasts) arefound in the peripheral smear. All these featuresresemble leukemia and hence called leukemoid
reaction.
Differentiation from leukemia
/square6Counts are usually less than 1 lakh.
/square6Bone marrow is normal.
/square6Leukocyte alkaline phosphatase score (LAP) is
increased.
/square6There is left shift as evidenced by presence ofmyelocytes and metamyelocytes.
/square6Presence of toxic granules in neutrophils.
/square6Band forms may be seen.
/square6Basophilia and eosinophilia are not seen inleukemoid reaction.
/square6Treatment of underlying condition corrects theleukocyte counts.Q.Discuss the pathophysiology, clinical features,
investigations and management of chronic myeloid
leukemia (CML).
Q.Peripheral smear in chronic myeloid leukemia.
Q.Philadelphia chromosome.
Q.Imatinib mesylate.
/square6Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a myeloproli-
ferative disorder characterized by overproductionof myeloid cells.
Pathophysiology
/square6CML is characterized by a specific chromosomalabnormality, called the Philadelphia chromosomewhich occurs due to reciprocal translocationbetween the long arms of chromosomes 9 and 22.
The abnormal chromosome 22 is known as
Philadelphia chromosome.
/square6The oncogene c-ABL, normally situated in thelong arm of chromosome 9, gets translocated to
chromosome 22, where a specific gene called BCR

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
6402 (breakpoint cluster region) is situated. Both ABL
and BCR form a fusion gene, ABL/BCR , which is
important in the pathogenesis of CML. The fusiongene BCR/ABL produces a protein possessing
tyrosine kinase activity. This leads to tumor cellproliferation and inhibition of apoptosis.
/square6Patients who are Philadelphia chromosome nega-tive tend to be older, mostly male and respondpoorly to treatment./square6Patients usually present with fatigue, weight loss,night sweats, and low-grade fever due to the hyper-metabolic state caused by overproduction of whiteblood cells.
/square6Bleeding episodes are common due to platelet dys-function.
/square6Abdominal fullness, early satiety, left upper qua-drant pain, and discomfort may be complained of
due to massive splenomegaly.
/square6Acute gouty arthritis may be present due to over
production of uric acid.
/square6Extremely high leukocyte counts may causesymptoms due to hyperviscosity such as priapism,respiratory distress, visual blurring, and alteredmental status.
/square6Examination reveals pallor, massive splenomegaly,and sternal tenderness due to bone marrow hyper-plasia. Hepatomegaly may also be present.
Laboratory Findings
/square6Anemia is usually present.
/square6Total WBC count is usually above 1 lakh/mcL.
/square6Platelet count is normal or elevated.
/square6Absolute basophilia and eosinophilia are almostalways present.
/square6Peripheral blood smear shows presence of myelo-cytes and metamyelocytes. RBC morphology is
normal.
/square6Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy in patients with
CML in chronic phase shows myeloid hyperplasia,increase in reticulin fibers and vascularity. There is
increase in the myeloid-to-erythroid ratio in the
bone marrow as well as a marked increase in thenumber of megakaryocytes and the number of moreimmature forms. Blast crisis is diagnosed whenblasts are more than 20% in the bone marrow.
/square6The diagnosis of CML is established by demonstra-tion of the Philadelphia chromosome or the BCR–ABL fusion gene. BCR–ABL can be detected in theperipheral blood by polymerase chain reaction(PCR) test, which has now supplanted cytogenetics.
Treatment
Tyrosine Kinase Iinhibitors
(Imatinib Mesylate, Dasatinib, Nilotinib)
/square6The treatment of CML has been revolutionised by
the introduction of tyrosine kinase inhibitors suchas imatinib mesylate, which inhibit the tyrosine
kinase activity of the BCR/ABL oncogene. Imatinib
inhibits proliferation and induces apoptosis in cellspositive for BCR/ABL. Tyrosine kinase inhibitorsare the first line drugs for chronic and acceleratedphase of CML. Imatinib is well tolerated andcontrols the disease in 98% of chronic phase patients
with positive Philadelphia chromosome. In chronic
phase of CML, the dose of imatinib is 400 mg orally
Figure 6.11 Philadelphia chromosome
Natural Course
/square6The disease has 3 stages: (1) Chronic stable phase,
(2) accelerated phase and (3) blast crisis.
/square6The chronic phase is characterized by a large
increase in peripheral blood leukocytes. Mostpatients are in stable phase at presentation. This
phase may last months to years.
/square6In accelerated phase neutrophil differentiation
becomes progressively impaired and leukocytecounts are more difficult to control. There is
worsening anemia, progressive thrombocytopenia
or thrombocytosis, persistent or worseningsplenomegaly, clonal evolution, increasing bloodbasophils, and increasing marrow or blood blasts.
/square6In blast crisis, myeloid or lymphoid blasts fail todifferentiate and large number of blasts is foundin peripheral blood. Blast crisis carries very poorprognosis. Blasts in blood or marrow increase to>20%.
Clinical Features
/square6CML has an annual incidence of 1 to 2 cases per100,000, with a slight male predominance. CML is
a disorder of middle age (median age at presenta-
tion is 50 years).
/square6The clinical hallmark of CML is the uncontrolledproduction of maturing granulocytes, predomi-
nantly neutrophils, but also eosinophils and baso-
phils.

/square6Diseases of Blood403
6daily. Side effects are nausea, periorbital swelling,
edema, rash, and myalgia. Blood counts normalizeand splenomegaly regresses within several weeks,
usually within 3 months. Philadelphia chromosome
becomes negative within 6 months (maximum 12months). Dasatinib is an other agent which is
effective in patients not responding to imatinib.
However, tyrosine kinase inhibitors imatinib doesnot cure the patient. It controls the disease as longas it is given.
Omacetaxine
/square6Omacetaxine is a new drug introduced for the treat-
ment of CML. It is a protein translation inhibitor
that is indicated for chronic- or accelerated-phaseCML with resistance and/or intolerance to 2 ormore tyrosine kinase inhibitors.
Busulphan or Hydroxyurea
/square6These agents suppress the bone marrow and reduce
the leukocyte count. Conventional treatment of CML
in chronic phase has been single agent therapy withbusulphan or hydroxyurea. However, due to theavailability of newer agents such as imatinib, theseagents are being used less commonly now.
/square6Hydroxyurea is preferred over busulphan. It isgiven in a dose of 20–30 mg/kg OD orally daily.Blood counts should be monitored and the doseis adjusted as per the counts. WBC counts recoverwithin a short time after discontinuation of the drug.
/square6Busulphan is given in a dose of 6–8 mg daily orallyand reduced as the leukocyte count falls. It shouldbe discontinued when the leukocyte count fallsbelow 20,000/mcL and resumed if the count reaches
50,000/mcL.
Interferon Therapy
/square6Alpha IFN inhibits the late progenitors which may
be the major phase of CML clonal expansion.Patients with early chronic phase respond better.Reduction of ‘BCR-ABL’ oncogene expression has
been reported after therapy with IFN. Complete
hematological response is seen in 35–85% ofpatients. Side effects include influenza-likesymptoms, lethargy, poor memory, and myalgias.However, due to the availability of newer agentssuch as imatinib, interferon alpha is now used only
for refractory cases in combination with other agents.
Allogeneic Bone Marrow Transplantation
or Stem Cell Transplantation
/square6If the patients do not respond to imatinib, this isthe 2nd choice of therapy. The best results (80% curerate) are obtained in patients under 40 years of ageif transplanted within 1 year after diagnosis. Bonemarrow should be obtained from HLA matchedsiblings.Leukapheresis
Leukapheresis is sometimes used to control thenumber of WBCs in emergency situations. It is usefulin two types of patients: The hyperleukocytic patient
in whom rapid cytoreduction can reverse symptoms
and signs of leukostasis (e.g. stupor, hypoxia, tinnitus,papilledema, priapism), and in the pregnant patientwith CML who can be controlled by leukapheresistreatment without other drugs which can causedamage to the fetus.
Anagrelide
/square6Anagrelide can be used to decrease very high
platelet count not responding to imatinib alone.
Course and Prognosis
/square6In the past, median survival was 3–4 years. However,
after the introduction of imatinib mesylate, 4 yearsurvival and remission is 80%.
Q.Accelerated phase of CML.
/square6Clinical features that signal the conversion of the
chronic to the accelerated phase include un-explained fever, bone pain, weakness, night sweats,
weight loss, and loss of sense of well-being,
arthralgias, or left upper quadrant pain.
/square6Localized or diffuse lymphadenopathy maydevelop.
/square6Increase in spleen size.
/square6Anemia worsens.
/square6Increase in leukocyte count with blasts 10–19% inperipheral blood.
/square6Increase in basophil count (>10%).
/square6Poor response to therapy.
/square6Drug of choice for treatment of accelerated phase is
one of the tyrosine kinase inhibitors such as imatinib.
Q.Blast crisis in CML.
/square6Blast crisis represents transformation of CML into
an acute leukemia (myeloblastic). A variety ofmutations has been associated with progression toblast crisis. Mutations of the BCR-ABL tyrosine kinasedomain have been observed in up to 80% of patients.
/square6Blast crisis can develop from days to decades afterdiagnosis of CML.
/square6Clinical features include fever, hemorrhage, genera-lized lymphadenopathy, abrupt increase in spleensize, bone pain and sternal tenderness.
/square6Peripheral smear or bone marrow show more than
20% blasts.
Treatment of Blast Crisis
/square6Patients in myeloid blast crisis can be treated with
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) induction chemo-
therapy regimens (daunorubicin, cytarabine and

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
6404 etoposide) in combination with a tyrosine kinase
inhibitor; some patients can be treated with a TKIalone. Stem cell transplantation can also be consi-dered at this phase.
Q.Discuss the types, clinical features, investigations,
clinical staging and management of chronic
lymphocytic leukemia (CLL).
/square6Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a clonalmalignancy of B lymphocytes. It is characterizedby a progressive accumulation of functionallyincompetent lymphocytes which respond poorly toantigenic stimulation.
Pathophysiology
/square698% of cases of CLL are of B cell origin (CD5+
B type lymphocytes). In 2 to 3% of cases, malignant
lymphocytes can be of T cell origin.
/square6Malignat lymphocytes multiply and accumulate in
the bonemarrow initially and subsequently spillover to blood and infiltrate lymphnodes and
lymphoid organs leading to hepatomegaly and
splenomegaly.
/square6As CLL progresses, abnormal hematopoiesis resultsin anemia, neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia.
/square6The abnormal B lymphocytes cannot produceimmunoglobulins leading to hypogammaglobuli-nemia and increased susceptibility to infections.
Clinical Features
/square6CLL is a disease of older patients, and most casesoccur after the age of 50 years. Peak age is around65 years. It is more common in Western countries.
/square6More in males than females (2:1).
/square6Many patients are asymptomatic and the diagnosis
is suspected when lymphocytosis is noted on
routine blood testing. Others present with fatigueor lymphadenopathy.
/square6On examination, most patients will have genera-
lized lymphadenopathy and 50% will have spleno-
megaly.
/square6Recurrent infections are common due to immuno-deficiency.
/square6CLL usually runs a slow course, but some subtypesmay behave aggressively.
Staging
/square6A staging system (Rai system) has been developedfor CLL which is as follows:
Stage 0: Absolute lymphocytosis of >10,000/microL in blood
Stage I : Lymphocytosis plus lymphadenopathy
Stage II: Lymphocytosis plus hepatomegaly or splenomegaly
Stage III: Lymphocytosis plus anemia (Hb <11 gm/dl)
Stage IV: Lymphocytosis plus thrombocytopenia (<1 lakh)Laboratory Findings
/square6The white blood count is usually greater than
20,000/mcL and may be markedly elevated toseveral hundred thousand.
/square6The hallmark of CLL is isolated lymphocytosis.Usually more than 75% of the circulating cells arelymphocytes. Lymphocytes resemble normal smalllymphocytes, but few large and activated lympho-
cytes may be seen.
/square6RBC count and platelet count is usually normal
initially but may decrease in advanced disease.
/square6Bone marrow shows infiltration with lymphocytes.
/square6Immunophenotyping demonstrates B lymphocytemarkers such as CD5+.
/square6Lymph node biopsy shows well differentiated,small, non-cleaved lymphocytes.
/square6Hypogammaglobulinemia is present in manypatients and becomes more common with advanceddisease.
Treatment
/square6A common treatment of choice is the combinationof fludarabine plus rituximab. Fludarabine pluscyclophosphamide is also effective. Chlorambucilwas the drug of choice earlier, and remains a reason-
able first choice for elderly.
/square6Ibrutinib is a novel, oral inhibitor of the enzyme
Bruton tyrosine kinase which is required for theactivation of several B cell mediated pathways that
enhance survival of CLL cells. Ibrutinib appears to
be highly active in CLL and has induced durableremissions in some patients with relapsed or refrac-tory CLL. Its role as a single agent or as part ofcombination chemotherapy is evolving.
/square6Patients with immunosuppression and recurrentbacterial infections may benefit from prophylacticinfusions of gamma globulin given every month.
/square6Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation is poten-tially curative and can be offered to those whosedisease cannot be controlled by standard therapies.
Prognosis
/square6In the past, median survival was 6 years. However,newer therapies have improved the prognosis.Patients with stage 0 or stage I disease have amedian survival of 10–15 years.
/square6Patients with stage III or stage IV disease have a2-year survival of greater than 90% with newertherapies.
Q.Hairy Cell Leukemia.
/square6Hairy cell leukemia (HCL) is an uncommon chronic
B cell lymphoproliferative disorder. The malignantlymphocytes have characteristic hair like cyto-plasmic projections on their surface, hence called
hairy cell leukemia.

/square6Diseases of Blood405
6Etiology
/square6The etiology of HCL is unknown, although ionizing
radiation, Epstein-Barr virus, organic chemicals,wood working, and farming have been mentionedas possible causes.
Clinical Features
/square6The median age at onset is 52.
/square6More common in males than females (5:1).
/square6Patients may present with fatigue, weakness and
weight loss.
/square6Bleeding manifestations due to thrombocytopenia.
/square6Recurrent infections due to leucopenia.
/square6Massive splenomegaly.
/square6Hepatomegaly and lymphadenopathy are un-
common.
Laboratory Findings
/square6There is anemia, thrombocytopenia and leukopenia(pancytopenia).
/square6The characteristic “hairy cells” are usually present
in small numbers on the peripheral blood smear
and have numerous cytoplasmic projections.
/square6Bone marrow is usually inaspirable (dry tap), butbiopsy shows hypercellular marrow and hairy cell
infiltration.
/square6Immunophenotyping shows B cell markers on
malignant cells.
Treatment
/square6The treatment of choice is cladribine which is apurine analog. It is given at a dose of 0.14 mg/kg
daily for 7 days. Cladribine accumulates in lymphoid
cells and kills them because they are rich in deoxy-cytidine kinase. Complete remission is seen in morethan 80% of patients. Pentostatin also produces similarresults, but is more cumbersome to administer.
Course and Prognosis
/square6With new therapies more than 95% of patients withhairy cell leukemia survive longer than 10 years.
Q.Mention the myeloproliferative disorders.
/square6Myeloproliferative disorders are due to clonal
expansion of multipotent hematopoietic stem cellwith overproduction of one or more mature, func-
tional elements of the blood.
/square6These conditions may evolve into acute leukemia.For example, CML (also considered as a myelo-
proliferative disorder) may turn into AML.
These are
/square6Polycythemia vera
/square6Primary (idiopathic) myelofibrosis
/square6Essential thrombocytosis
/square6Chronic myeloid leukemia.
Q.Define polycythemia. Enumerate the causes of
polycythemia.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, diagnosis and
management of polycythemia vera.
/square6Polycythemia is defined as an increase in circulating
red blood cells above normal. Polycythemia issuspected when the hemoglobin is >16.5g/dL inwomen and >18.5 g/dL in men.
/square6Polycythemia may be absolute when the numberof cells is actually increased or relative when theplasma volume is decreased without actual increasein absolute number of cells.
Etiology
Polycythemia rubra vera (primary polycythemia)
Secondary polycythemia
• Heavy smoking• High altitude• Cyanotic congenital heart disease• Chronic lung disease with alveolar hypoventilation• Hemoglobinopathies which interfere with oxygen dissocia-
tion in the tissues, methemoglobinemia
• Obesity with pickwickian syndrome• Erythropoietin producing neoplasms (renal carcinoma,
carcinoma liver, uterine fibromyomas, cerebellar hemangio-
blastomas)
• Endocrine abnormalities; Cushing’s syndrome, pheochromo-
cytoma
• Drugs; corticosteroids, anabolic steroids
Relative polycythaemia (erythropoietin levels normal)
• Dehydration and loss of plasma as in diarrhea and burns
Polycythemia Vera
/square6Polycythemia vera (PV) is a myeloproliferative dis-
order. It is a low-grade neoplastic disorder caused
by clonal proliferation of erythroid precursors.Secondary polycythemia is due to some underlyingdisorder ( see above).
Pathology
/square6PV involves increased production of all cell lines,
including RBCs, WBCs, and platelets. Clonalhematopoiesis is a hallmark of PV, suggesting that
a mutation of hematopoietic stem cells is the causeFigure 6.12 Hairy cells with cytoplasmic projections


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
6406 of proliferation. Janus kinase-2 gene (JAK2) mutation
is seen in virtually all the patients with poly-cythemia vera. JAK2 mutation leads to sustainedactivation of the JAK2 protein, which causes excesscell production, independent of erythropoietinlevels.
/square6Increase in RBC volume increases the viscosityof the blood. Increased blood viscosity leads tothrombosis and occlusion of microcirculation in
many organs.
/square6Hemorrhages may occur due to damage to the
capillaries and also dysfunction of the platelets.
/square6Hyperuricemia occurs due to increased red cellturnover.
/square6Bone marrow is hypercellular.
/square6As the disease progresses, anemia and myelo-fibrosis develop.
/square6Extramedullary erythropoiesis takes place in the
spleen, liver and other sites.
Clinical Features
/square6Usually occurs above the age of 20 years and the
incidence increases with age.
/square6Males are affected more often.
/square6Initial symptoms are vague, such as headache,dizziness, tinnitus, weakness, lassitude, and fatigue.
/square6Thrombotic manifestations range from digitalischemia to Budd-Chiari syndrome with hepaticvein thrombosis. Abdominal thromboses areparticularly common. The cerebral, retinal, cardiac
and/or peripheral vessels may be the seat of
vascular occlusion.
/square6Neurologic symptoms such as vertigo and visual
disturbances may occur due to hyperviscosity.
/square6Hypertension is often present.
/square6Hyperuricemia may lead to secondary gout.
/square6Severe pruritus, especially after a hot bath, is a
common symptom.
/square6Erythromelalgia (burning pain in the feet or hands
accompanied by erythema, pallor, or cyanosis) is
common in polycythemia and is due to micro-vascular thrombotic occlusions.
/square6Congestion and plethoric appearance of the facewith congested conjunctivae.
/square6Splenomegaly is present in polycythemia vera but
absent in secondary polycythemia.
/square6Fundoscopy reveals congestion of the discs,
engorged veins, and hemorrhages.
Investigations
/square6Examination of blood reveals high Hb, increased
hematocrit and decreased ESR.
/square6Leukocyte alkaline phosphatase is high.
/square6The red cell volume can be accurately estimated
isotopically using 51Cr labelled erythrocytes./square6Bone marrow shows hypercellularity with normo-blastic hyperplasia and prominence of megakaryo-cytes.
/square6JAK2 mutation is present in virtually all patientswith PV.
/square6Other investigations to detect the underlying cause.
Complications
/square6Thrombosis and hemorrhages.
/square6Transformation into acute myeloid leukemia, myelo-fibrosis or chronic myeloid leukemia.
/square6Cardiac failure, hypertension and secondary gout.
Treatment
/square6Therapy aims at keeping the blood volume normal,with the PCV around 40–45 percent.
Venesection (Phlebotomy)
/square6This is the mainstay of therapy in polycythemia. Itis the treatment of choice in women of child-bearingage and in younger patients (age <40 years). Initiallyabout 500 ml of blood is withdrawn on alternatedays to bring down the hematocrit to normal. Later
on venesection can be done less frequently to
maintain hematocrit below 45 percent.
Antiplatelet Agents
/square6Low dose aspirin (75–100 mg/day) or clopidogrel
should be given to all patients with polycythemia
to prevent thrombotic events. Anagrelide alsoinhibits platelet aggregation and can be used ifother drugs are not effective.
Radioactive Phosphorus 32P
/square6This is a beta-emitter isotope. When administered,it is concentrated in the bone and the marrow isirradiated. Remission induced by a dose of 32Pusually lasts for 2–3 years. 32P treatment iscontraindicated during pregnancy.
Cytotoxic Drugs
/square6Drugs like busulphan, cyclophosphamide, andchlorambucil are useful in severe cases of poly-cythemia vera associated with high platelet count
(>6 lac/mm
3), massive splenomegaly, thrombotic
tendency, and elderly patients especially with poorcardiovascular status. Hydroxyurea is a safecytotoxic drug without tumor-producing potential.
Ruxolitinib
/square6Ruxolitinib is an inhibitor of JAK2 pathway and isapproved for the treatment of patients who donotrespond to hydroxyurea.
Allopurinol
/square6It is useful in patients with symptomatic hyper-uricemia.

/square6Diseases of Blood407
6Q.Differences between primary polycythemia and secondary polycythemia.
TABLE 6.4: Differences between primary polycythemia and secondary polycythemia
Features Primary polycythemia (polycythemia vera) Secondary polycythemia
Etiology Myeloproliferative disorder Secondary to an underlying disorder
Cell lines affected Usually all cells lines are increased (RBCs, Only RBCs are increased
WBCs and platelets)
Erythropoietin levels Normal or decreased Increased
Oxygen saturation Normal Low
Splenomegaly Present Absent
Leukocyte alkaline phosphatase Increased Normal
Bone marrow Panhyperplasia Erythroid hyperplasia
Treatment Phlebotomy, radioactive phosphorus and Mainly phlebotomy
bone marrow suppressive agents
Prognosis Bad Good prognosis
Q.Enumerate the causes of myelofibrosis.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of idiopathic myelofibrosis
(primary myelofibrosis; agnogenic myeloid meta-
plasia).
/square6Myelofibrosis refers to replacement of normal bonemarrow by fibrous tissue, with subsequent marked
increase in extramedullary hematopoiesis (primarilyin the liver and spleen, which enlarge significantly).
/square6Myelofibrosis can be primary (idiopathic) or secon-
dary to other diseases involving bone marrow.
Causes of Myelofibrosis
Primary myelifibrosis (idiopathic)
Malignancies• Cancer with bone marrow metastases• Lymphoma• Leukemias (particularly chronic myelogenous and hairy cell)• Multiple myeloma• Polycythemia vera• Essential thrombocythemia• Malignant histiocytosis• Myelodysplastic syndrome
Toxins
• Benzene• Thorium dioxide• Ionizing radiation
Infections
• Tuberculosis• Osteomyelitis
Autoimmune disorders (rarely)
• SLE• Systemic sclerosis
Primary Myelofibrosis (Idiopathic Myelofibrosis;
Agnogenic Myeloid Metaplasia)
/square6Primary myelofibrosis is a myeloproliferative dis-
order characterized by fibrosis of the bone marrow,splenomegaly, and a leukoerythroblastic peripheral
blood picture with teardrop poikilocytosis./square6Fibrosis occurs due to increased secretion of
platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and othercytokines from atypical megakaryocytes in the bone
marrow.
/square6Since bone marrow failure occurs, compensatory
extramedullary hematopoiesis takes place in the
liver, spleen, and lymph nodes.
Etiology
/square6The exact cause of primary (idiopathic) myelo-
fibrosis is unknown.
/square6It is considered to arise from a somatic mutation of
a pluripotent hematopoietic progenitor cell.
/square6It has been linked exposure to thorium dioxide,
petroleum manufacturing plants (especially toluene
and benzene), and ionizing radiation.
Clinical Features
/square6Usually occurs over 50 years of age.
/square6Insidious onset.
/square6Fatigue and weakness due to anemia.
/square6Weight loss due to hypermetabolic state.
/square6Abdominal fullness and early satiety due to spleno-
megaly.
/square6Bleeding manifestations due to thrombocytopenia.
/square6Massive splenomegaly and in some cases hepato-megaly. Painful episodes of splenic infarction mayoccur.
/square6Extramedullary hematopoiesis in the liver leads toportal hypertension with ascites, and esophagealvarices.
Laboratory Findings
/square6Anemia is usually present.
/square6Total leukocyte count is variable—either low,normal, or elevated.
/square6The platelet count is also variable.
/square6Peripheral blood smear:  Shows poikilocytosis and
teardrop red cells. Nucleated RBCs and WBCs are
present. Giant degranulated platelets may be seen.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
6408 The triad of tear drop poikilocytosis, leukoerythro-
blastic blood, and giant abnormal platelets is highlysuggestive of myelofibrosis.
/square6Bone marrow:  Usually cannot be aspirated (dry tap).
In early stages it is hypercellular with a marked
increase in megakaryocytes and reticulin fibers. Inlater stages, biopsy shows severe fibrosis, witheventual replacement of hematopoietic precursorsby collagen.
/square6Leukocyte alkaline phosphatase (LAP) score iselevated.
Treatment
/square6Patients with mild disease have excellent survivalrate and require no specific therapy other thanoccasional blood transfusions.
/square6For younger patients with advanced diseaseallogeneic bone marrow transplantation is thetreatment of choice.
/square6If bone marrow transplantation is not possible,supportive treatment with thalidomide (improvessystemic symptoms, anemia, splenomegaly, andrefractory cytopenias), blood transfusions anderythropoietin (for anemia), and hydroxyurea (forsplenomegaly, thrombocytosis, and leukocytosis)
can be used. Etanercept also improves systemic
symptoms.
/square6Splenectomy is indicated for splenic enlargementcausing recurrent painful episodes, severe thrombo-
cytopenia, or an unacceptable transfusion require-
ment.
/square6Inhibitors of the JAK2 pathway such as ruxolitinibhave a significant effect on splenomegaly and
symptoms even if there is no JAK2 mutation.
Course and Prognosis
/square6The median survival from time of diagnosis is
approximately 5 years. Newer therapies haveimproved survival.
Q.Essential thrombocytosis (essential thrombo-
cythemia).
/square6Essential thrombocytosis is a myeloproliferative
disorder characterized by marked proliferation ofmegakaryocytes in the bone marrow leading to
increased platelet count.
/square6It is an uncommon disorder and the cause is
unknown.
Clinical Features
/square6The median age at presentation is 50–60 years,
and there is a slightly increased incidence in
women.
/square6Patients may be asymptomatic and the disorder isoften suspected when an elevated platelet count is
found./square6Patients may present with thrombosis. Venous
thrombosis may occur in unusual sites such as themesenteric, hepatic, or portal vein.
/square6Vasomotor symptoms such as headache, light
headedness and erythromelalgia may be experien-
ced by patients. Erythromelalgia is painful burningof the hands accompanied by erythema whichresponds to aspirin.
/square6Paradoxically, bleeding may occur due to qualita-tive platelet defect.
/square6Splenomegaly is present in some patients.
Laboratory Findings
/square6Platelet count is elevated and is usually more than600,000/mcL.
/square6The white blood cell count is often mildly elevated.
/square6Hemoglobin and RBC morphology is normal.
/square6Peripheral blood smear shows large and increasedplatelets.
/square6Bone marrow shows megakaryocytic hyperplasia.
Treatment
/square6The risk of thrombosis can be reduced by controlof the platelet count, which should be kept below500,000/mcL. The drug of choice to achieve this ishydroxyurea. Anagrelide  is an alternative.
/square6Vasomotor symptoms such as erythromelalgia and
paresthesias can be controlled by aspirin.
/square6Daily aspirin intake reduces the risk of thrombosis.
Course and Prognosis
/square6Essential thrombocytosis is an indolent disorderand long-term survival is excellent. There is a small
risk of transformation into myelofibrosis or acute
leukemia.
Q.Myelodysplastic syndrome.
/square6The myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is group of
disorders characterized by peripheral cytopenia,
dysplastic hematopoietic progenitors, a hyper-cellular or hypocellular bone marrow, and a highrisk of conversion to acute myeloid leukemia.
/square6They were also called “preleukemia” in the pastsince they may evolve into AML.
Etiology
/square6These disorders are usually idiopathic but may ariseafter radiation exposure and chemotherapy. Somechromosomal abnormalities such as deletions oflong arms of chromosomes 5 and 7 may be seen.
Pathology
/square6MDS is characterized by clonal proliferation ofhematopoietic cells, including erythroid, myeloid,and megakaryocytic forms. The bone marrow is
normal or hypercellular, but ineffective hemato-

/square6Diseases of Blood409
6poiesis causes anemia (most common), neutropenia,
and thrombocytopenia. Ineffective hematopoiesisis also associated with morphologic cellular abnor-malities in bone marrow and blood. Extramedullaryhematopoiesis may occur, leading to hepatomegalyand splenomegaly.
/square6MDS can lead to myelofibrosis or may progress toAML.
Classification
/square6The classification of MDS by WHO (2016) is as follows:
• Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) with single lineage dysplasia
• MDS with ring sideroblasts (MDS-RS)• MDS with multi-lineage dysplasia (MDS-MLD)• MDS with excess blasts (MDS-EB-1), with 5 to 9% blasts in
the bone marrow
• MDS with excess blasts (MDS-EB-2), with 10 to 19% blasts
in the bone marrow
• MDS with isolated del (5q)• MDS, unclassifiable (MDS-U)
Clinical Features
/square6Patients are usually over 60 years of age.
/square6Many patients are asymptomatic, and the condition
is first suspected because of abnormal blood counts.
/square6Patients usually present with fatigue (due toanemia), infection (due to leucopenia), or bleeding(due to thrombocytopenia) related to bone marrowfailure. The course may be indolent, and the diseasemay present as a wasting illness with fever, weightloss, and general debility.
/square6Examination reveals pallor, bleeding, and signs ofinfection. Splenomegaly may be present.
Laboratory Findings
/square6Anemia may be severe and require blood trans-fusion.
/square6Peripheral smear:  White cell count is usually normal
or reduced, and neutropenia is common. The
neutrophils may exhibit morphologic abnor-
malities, including deficient numbers of granulesor a bilobed nucleus (Pelger-Huet anomaly).Promyelocytes or blasts may be seen. The plateletcount is normal or reduced.
/square6Bone marrow  is characteristically hypercellular.
Erythroid hyperplasia is common. Prussian bluestain may demonstrate ringed sideroblasts. Themyeloid series is often left-shifted, with increasedblasts.
Treatment
/square6Anemia is treated by red blood cell transfusions.Erythropoietin injection given weekly subcuta-neously reduces the red cell transfusion require-ment. Lenalidomide, a thalidomide derivative,
improves anemia and reduces the need for blood
transfusion./square6Myeloid growth factors such as G-CSF (granulocytecolony stimulating factor) help patients with severeneutropenia.
/square6Azacitidine (5-azacytidine) relieves symptoms,
decreases the rate of transformation to leukemia
and the need for transfusions, and improvessurvival.
/square6Stem cell transplantation is the only curative
therapy for myelodysplasia.
Course and Prognosis
/square6Myelodysplasia is an ultimately fatal disease, and
patients most commonly succumb to infections orbleeding.
/square6Patients with excess blasts have short survivals
(usually <2 years) and have a higher risk of develop-
ing acute leukemia.
Q.Define lymphomas.
Q.Discuss the classification, clinical features, clinical
staging, investigations and management of
Hodgkin’s lymphoma.
/square6Lymphomas are malignant transformations oflymphoid cells. They are divided into two major
types: Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (NHL) andHodgkin lymphoma (HL). NHL is the most commontype of lymphoma.
Hodgkin’s Lymphoma
/square6Hodgkin’s lymphoma is named after the Britishphysician who first described it. The cancer cells inHodgkin’s lympoma are known as Reed-Sternbergcells (named after the physicians who discovered
them) which are derived from B lymphocytes.
Etiology
/square6Exact cause is unknown, but genetic susceptibility;
occupation such as woodworking; history oftreatment with phenytoin, radiation therapy,chemotherapy; infection with Epstein-Barr virus,Mycobacterium tuberculosis , herpes virus type 6, and
HIV play a role.
/square6Immunosuppressed state (e.g. post-transplantpatients taking immunosuppressants, congenitalimmunodeficiency disorders) also increases the riskof developing Hodgkin lymphoma.
Pathological Classification
/square6Pathologically Hodgkins lymphoma is divided into
4 subtypes:
Type Incidence Prognosis
Lymphocytic predominant 5% Very good
Mixed cellularity 20% GoodNodular sclerosis 70% FairLymphocyte depleted Rare Poor

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
6410 /square6Nodular sclerosis is the most common type and
lymphocyte depleted is the least common type.
Clinical Features
/square6Hodgkin’s lymphoma has bimodal age distribution,with one peak in the 20s and a second over age50 years.
/square6More common in males.
/square6The majority of patients present with overt disease,most often as an asymptomatic enlarged lymphnode or a mass on chest X-ray.
/square6Lymphadenopathy is most often found in neck.
Other sites of lymph node involvement are cervical,
supraclavicular, axillary, inguinal, mediastinal andintrabdominal nodes. Involved lymph nodes arepainless and non-tender with a rubbery consis-tency.
/square6Constitutional symptoms such as fever in excess of38°C, drenching night sweats, and weight loss
exceeding 10 percent of baseline body weight
during the 6 months preceding diagnosis aredesignated as symptomatic “B” disease. Fever isusually of low grade and irregular. Rarely, a cyclicpattern of high fevers for 1 to 2 weeks alternatingwith afebrile periods of similar duration is present
at diagnosis. This fever pattern is called Pel-Ebstein
fever and is virtually diagnostic of Hodgkin’s
lymphoma.
/square6Compression of various structures by tumor massescan produce many signs and symptoms. These arejaundice due to bile duct obstruction, leg swellingdue to lymphatic obstruction in the pelvis or groin,
dyspnea due to tracheobronchial compression,
paraplegia due to compression of the spinal cord,Horner syndrome due to compression of cervicalsympathetic chain by enlarged lymph nodes,hoarseness of voice due to compression of recurrentlaryngeal nerves, radicular pain due to compression
of nerve roots, superior vena cava obstruction due
to compression by enlarged mediastinal lymph-nodes, etc.
/square6Hepatosplenomegaly may be present.
/square6An unusual symptom of Hodgkin’s disease is painin an involved lymph node following alcohol inges-tion.
/square6Patients may have a variety of nonspecific symptomsreflecting organ involvement or paraneoplastic
syndromes.
/square6Skin manifestations such as ichthyosis, urticaria,
erythema multiforme, and skin infiltration may beseen.
Staging of Hodgkin Lymphoma
/square6The Lugano classification is the current staging used
for both Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphoma. It
is based on the extent of the disease.Stage Criteria
I 1 lymph region only or single extranodal site
II ≥2 lymph regions on the same side of the diaphragm
and may include limited contiguous extranodalinvolvement
III Lymph nodes, spleen, or both and on both sides of
the diaphragm
IV Extranodal involvement (e.g. bone marrow, lungs,
liver)
/square6In addition, patients are designated as stage A if
they lack constitutional symptoms and stage Bif they have constitutional symptoms (>10% weightloss over 6 months, fever, or night sweats are
present).
Investigations
/square6Complete blood count shows normocytic normo-
chromic anemia, normal WBC count and elevatedESR. Lymphopenia, if present is a bad prognosticfactor.
/square6ALP may be elevated due to liver or bone involve-
ment.
/square6LDH levels may be raised and indicate bad prog-
nosis.
/square6Liver function tests may be abnormal due to hepaticinfiltration. An obstructive pattern may be caused
by enlarged nodes at the porta hepatis.
/square6Chest X-ray:  Can show mediastinal widening due
to involvement of mediastinum and lymph nodes.It can also show pericardial effusion.
/square6CT scan of the thorax, abdomen, and pelvis:  This is used
to establish the extent of disease.
/square6Whole-body positron emission tomography (PET scan):It is more sensitive imaging technique than CT scanto find out the extent and staging of disease.PET scan can differentiate malignant from non-malignant lesions.
/square6Lymph node biopsy:  Can establish the diagnosis of
lymphoma. Presence of Reed-Sternberg cells ischaracteristic of Hodgkin’s lymphoma.
/square6Bone marrow biopsy is required sometimes, ifinfiltration to bone marrow is suspected.
/square6Staging laparotomy is less commonly done nowdue to the availability of PET scan.
Treatment
Radiotherapy
/square6Radiotherapy is used as initial treatment only forpatients with low-risk stage IA and IIA disease.
Radiotherapy is also indicated for lesions causing
serious pressure problems.
Chemotherapy
/square6Limited chemotherapy can be given for some
patients treated with radiotherapy.

/square6Diseases of Blood411
6/square6Most patients with Hodgkin’s disease (including
stage III-B and IV disease) are best treated withcombination chemotherapy using doxorubicin(Adriamycin), bleomycin, vincristine, and dacarba-zine (ABVD). Another regimen includes cyclo-phosphamide, vincristine, procarbazine, and
prednisolone (COPP). These drugs are given
every 3 to 4 weeks for a total of 6–8 cycles. Treatmentresponse is assessed clinically and by repeat CT.
Autologous stem cell transplantation
/square6Should be considered for patients who relapse after
initial chemotherapy.
Combined modality treatment
/square6Radiotherapy is given after chemotherapy to sites
where there was originally bulkdisease.
Prognosis
/square6The prognosis of patients with stage IA or IIA is
excellent, with 10-year survival rates in excess of80%. Patients with disseminated disease (IIIB, IV)have poorer prognosis.
Q.Reed-Sternberg cells.
/square6These are the histologic hallmark of Hodgkin
lymphoma (HL). The presence of these cells differen-tiates Hodgkin from non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
/square6These are large malignant lymphoid cells of B cellorigin with paired, mirror imaged nuclei (binucleate)with large nucleoli. There is a characteristic cleararea around the nucleoli giving an “owl’s eyes”appearance to the nuclei.
/square6They are often only present in small numbers butare surrounded by large numbers of reactivenormal T cells, plasma cells and eosinophils.Classification
/square6WHO classification of the non-Hodgkin lymphomas
Precursor B
• B cell lymphoblastic lymphoma
Mature B
• Diffuse large B cell lymphoma• Mediastinal large B cell lymphoma
• Follicular lymphoma
• Small lymphocytic lymphoma• Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma
• Mantle cell lymphoma
• Burkitt’s lymphoma• Marginal zone lymphoma (MALT type, nodal, splenic)
• Mucosal tissue associated
Precursor T
• T cell lymphoblastic lymphoma
Mature T (and NK cell)
• Anaplastic T cell lymphoma• Peripheral T cell lymphoma
Etiology
/square6The exact etiology is unknown in most of the cases.
Many risk factors have been identified which areas follows.
Immune deficiency states
• AIDS• Ataxia telangiectasia
• Immunosuppressive therapy
Occupational and environmental exposure
• Organic solvents• Hair dyes• Ultraviolet rays
Infectious agents
• EBV• HTLV-1• HHV-8• Hepatitis-C•H. pylori  (gastric lymphoma)
Pathology
/square6Most (80 to 85%) NHL arise from B cells; the
remainder arise from T cells or natural killer cells.Either precursor or mature cells may be involved.
/square6In most cases of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, activa-tion of proto-oncogenes is the major abnormality.In some cases, there may be deletion of tumorsuppressor genes. For example, in Burkitt’slymphoma, there is translocation between the longarms of chromosomes 8 and 14 which causes over
expression of proto-oncogene c- myc which in turn
leads to malignant transformation of lymphocytes.In the follicular lymphomas, the t(14,18) transloca-Figure 6.13 Reed-Sternberg cells
Q.Disuss the classification, clinical features, clinical
staging, investigations and management of non-
Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL).
/square6The non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHL) are a hetero-
geneous group of cancers of lymphocytes. NHL is
more common than Hodgkin lymphoma.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
6412 tion results in overexpression of bcl-2,  resulting
in decreased apoptosis and malignant transforma-tion.
Clinical Features
/square6NHL is more common in men than women.
/square6Its incidence increases with age and is higher in
whites than in other ethnic groups. Median age65–70 years.
/square6Clinical presentation can be indolent to aggressive.Patients with indolent lymphomas usually presentwith painless enlargement in one or more of the
lymph nodes, particularly in the neck, axilla, or
inguinal areas. Lymph nodes in the thorax,abdomen and pelvis can be involved. Even the
indolent lymphomas are usually disseminated at
the time of diagnosis, and bone marrow involve-ment is common.
/square6Patients with intermediate and high-grade lympho-mas may have constitutional symptoms such as
fever, drenching night sweats, or weight loss
(B-symptoms). Patients with Burkitt’s lymphomamay complain of abdominal pain or fullness
due to frequent involvement of nodes in the
abdomen.
/square6NHL can involve any organ in the body, and there
may be clinical features relating to that organ dys-
function. Examples are neurological symptomswith CNS lymphoma, breathlessness with MALT
lymphomas in the lung, epigastric pain and vomiting
with gastric MALT or diffuse large B-cell lymphomas,bowel obstruction with small bowel lymphomas,
testicular masses with testicular lymphoma, and skin
lesions with cutaneous lymphomas. SVC obstruc-tion can occur due to mediastinal lymphadeno-
pathy. Bone marrow involvement leads to bone
marrow failure manifesting as recurrent infections,bleeding, and anemia.
/square6Examination reveals lymphadenopathy which isrubbery and non-tender. Hepatosplenomegaly may
be present.
Investigations
/square6Anemia is usually present.
/square6ESR is raised.
/square6Serum LDH is usually elevated.
/square6Chest X-ray may show a mediastinal mass due to
lymph node enlargement.
/square6CT scan of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis, blood
tests, bone marrow biopsy, and PET scan.
/square6Peripheral smear is usually normal.
/square6Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy./square6CSF cytology if CNS involvement is suspected.
/square6Lymph node or tissue biopsy to confirm the diag-nosis.
/square6Immunophenotyping of surface antigens to
distinguish T and B cell tumors. This may be done
on blood, marrow or nodal material.
/square6Genetic studies will help to find the molecular
abnormality.
Lugano Staging of Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma
/square6This is same as that of Hodgkin lymphoma ( see
under Hodgkin lymphoma).
Treatment
/square6Treatment depends on whether the behavior of
many of these neoplasms is indolent or aggressive,
localized or disseminated and the patient condition.
Some lymphomas can be managed initially withobservation, whereas other situations, such as spinal
cord compression require emergency treatment.
Radiotherapy
/square6Local radiotherapy can be used for localized low
grade lymphomas either alone or in combinationwith chemotherapy. Radiotherapy is also used as
palliative therapy to treat symptomatic sites of
relapse.
Chemotherapy
/square6Most patients require chemotherapy, either singleor combinations of drugs. Common chemotherapy
regimens include fludarabine; the combination of
cyclo phosphamide, vincristine, and prednisone (R-
CVP); and cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincris-
tine, prednisone (R-CHOP). Combination chemo-
therapy is especially helpful in intermediate andhigh grade lymphomas.
Monoclonal Antibody Therapy
/square6Monoclonal antibodies can be used to target surface
antigens on tumor cells, and induce tumor cell
apoptosis. The anti-CD20 antibody rituximab hasbeen shown to induce durable clinical responses.
Synergistic effects are seen when rituximab is
combined with chemotherapy.
Autologous Stem Cell Transplantation
/square6Individuals with very high-risk lymphoma are besttreated with stem cell transplantation.
Splenectomy
/square6Can improve cytopenias
/square6Palliative therapy for symptomatic splenomegaly.

/square6Diseases of Blood413
6Q.Burkitt lymphoma.
/square6Burkitt lymphoma is a highly aggressive B cell non-
Hodgkin’s lymphoma (NHL).
/square6It often presents with extranodal disease and occurs
most often in children and immunocompromisedhosts.
/square6Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) has been implicated in thecausation of disease.
Pathology
/square6Most cases are associated with t(8:14), translocationbetween chromosomes 8 and 14.
/square6Burkitt lymphoma is the most rapidly growinghuman tumor, and pathology reveals a high mitotic
rate, a monoclonal proliferation of B cells, and a
“starry-sky” pattern of benign macrophages thathave engulfed apoptotic malignant lymphocytes.
Clinical Features
/square6Three clinical forms of Burkitt lymphoma can berecognized: Endemic, sporadic, and immunodefi-ciency-associated.
/square6The endemic form presents as a jaw or facial bone
tumor that spreads to extranodal sites.
/square6The nonendemic form has an abdominal presenta-
tion, with massive disease and ascites.
/square6Immunodeficiency-related cases more often involvelymph nodes.
Investigations
/square6Histology shows tumor cells, frequent mitoticfigures and starry sky appearance.
/square6Chromosome analysis may show 8/14 translocation.
/square6Antibodies against EBV may be detected.
Treatment
/square6Treatment should be initiated within 48 hours of
diagnosis./square6Combination chemotherapy CHOP (cyclophospha-
mide, hydroxydoxorubicin, oncovin, and predniso-lone) or CODOX-M/IVAC (cyclophosphamide,oncovin, doxorubicin, methotrexate and ifosfamide,etoposide, VP-16 or etoposide, cytarabine).
/square6Intrathecal methotrexate for meningeal prophylaxis.
Q.Mycosis fungoides.
/square6Mycosis fungoides is type of non-Hodgkin’s
lymphoma of T cell origin with primary involve-
ment of the skin.
Clinical Features
/square6It presents as a cutaneous eruption with erythe-matous scaly patches or plaques, often resemblingeczema or psoriasis. As the disease progresses,patches may evolve into infiltrated plaques with amore generalized distribution.
Diagnosis
/square6Skin biopsy.
/square6For staging, bone marrow biopsy and CT of chest,abdomen, and pelvis.
Treatment
/square6Topical application of steroid, retinoid, or chemo-therapeutic agents (nitrogen mustard). Other skin-directed therapies include phototherapy (UVB orPUVA, see below), or radiation therapy (localizedelectron beam therapy).
Q.Hematopoetic stem cells.
/square6Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) are the blood cells
that give rise to all the other blood cells.
Sources of Hematopoietic Stem Cells
/square6Bone marrow:  Marrow is the original source of stem
cells. They are removed by bone marrow puncture.Q.Enumerate the differences between Hodgkin lymphoma and non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
TABLE 6.5: Differences between Hodgkin lymphoma and non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Feature Hodgkin lymphoma Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Peak incidence Bimodal peak, one peak in the 20s 65–70 years
and another peak over age 50 years
Reed-Sternberg cells Present and pathognomonic Absent
B-symptoms More common Less common
Alcohol induced pain in involved lymph nodes Yes No
Dissemination at presentation Well localized Widespread
Origin B lymphocytes and unifocal B or T cells and multifocal
Involvement of extralymphatic organs Late Early
Involvement of Waldeyer’s ring Uncommon Common
Involvement of epitrochlear node Uncommon Common
Involvement of mediastinum Common Uncommon
Involvement of bone marrow Late Early

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
6414 /square6Peripheral blood:  This has become a preferred alterna-
tive to marrow to obtain stem cells. Stem cells haveto be mobilized into the peripheral blood by inject-ing granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulatingfactor (GM-CSF).
/square6Placental blood:  T lymphocytes in placental blood
appear to be less alloreactive than T cells fromadults and hence less likely to produce GVHD.
Placental blood is obtained from the umbilical cord
after birth.
Indications for Stem Cell Transplantation
/square6See bone marrow transplantation below.
Q.Bone marrow transplantation (hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation).
Q.Allogenic bone marrow transplantation.
Q.Indications and complications of bone marrow
transplantation.
/square6Bone marrow transplantation is now called hemato-
poietic stem cell transplantation. Hematopoieticstem cell has remarkable regenerative capacity,and can settle in the marrow space following intra-venous injection.
/square6Transplantation of a few percent of a donor’s bonemarrow volume results in complete replacementof the recipient’s entire lymphohematopoieticsystem, including red cells, granulocytes, B andT lymphocytes, and platelets, as well as cellscomprising the fixed macrophage population,including Kupffer cells of the liver, pulmonary
alveolar macrophages, osteoclasts, Langerhans cells
of the skin, and brain microglial cells.
/square6Human hematopoietic stem cells can survivefreezing and thawing making it possible to removeand store a portion of the patient’s own bone
marrow for later reinfusion after treatment with
high-dose myelotoxic therapy.
Types of Bone Marrow Transplantation
Syngeneic Transplantation
/square6Here the donor is identical twin. Advantages arethere is no risk of graft-versus-host disease (GVHD)
and there is no risk of contamination with tumor
cells as in autologous transplantation.
Allogeneic Transplantation
/square6Here the donor and recipient are not immunologi-cally identical. Here the immune cells developingfrom the donor marrow can react against therecipient causing graft vs host disease (GVHD).Sometimes immunocompetent cells of the patient
can reject the transplant. Hence both donor and
recipient should be HLA matched.Autologous Transplantation
/square6Here patient’s own stem cells are removed andstored for subsequent reinfusion after the patientreceives high-dose myeloablative therapy. Unlike
allogeneic transplantation, there is no risk of GVHD
or graft rejection. However, autologous transplan-tation lacks a graft-versus-tumor (GVT) effect, andthe autologous stem cell product can be contami-nated with tumor cells which can lead to relapse.
Method of Transplantation
/square6Marrow is usually collected from the donor’sposterior and sometimes anterior iliac crests with
the donor under general or spinal anesthesia.
Hematopoietic stem cells can also be obtained fromperipheral blood after giving the donor hemato-poietic growth factors for 4–5 days. Umbilical cordblood contains a high concentration of hemato-poietic progenitor cells, and can be used for trans-
plantation.
/square6The recipient should be prepared before transplan-
tation which involves eradication of patient’sunderlying disease and, immunosuppressing the
patient adequately to prevent rejection of the trans-
planted marrow. However, if the donor is a histo-compatible sibling, no treatment is required becauseno host cells require eradication. Eradication of hostimmune cells involves various regimens of busulfan,
cyclophosphamide, melphalan, thiotepa, carmustine,
etoposide, and total-body irradiation in various
combinations.
/square6Typically, 10 to 15 mL/kg of marrow is aspirated,placed in heparinized media, and filtered to remove
fat and bony spicules. Then, this marrow is infused
through a large-bore central venous catheter. Cellsproduced by transplanted stem cells begin toappear after a week in the peripheral blood.
Indications for Bone Marrow Transplantation
Malignant diseases
• Acute leukemia• Chronic leukemia• Myelodysplasia• Lymphoma• MyelomaNonmalignant diseases• Immunodeficiency disorders (severe combined immuno-
deficiency, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, and Chédiak-Higashisyndrome)
• Aplastic anemia• Hemoglobinopathies (thalassemia major)• Storage diseases caused by enzymatic deficiencies
(Gaucher’s disease, Hurler’s syndrome
Complications of Bone Marrow Transplantation
/square6Due to preparatory regimens : Infections due to
immunosuppression (herpes simplex virus,

/square6Diseases of Blood415
6cytomegalovirus, varicella-zoster virus); cardio-
toxicity; hemorrhagic cystitis if high dose cyclo-phosphamide is used; hair loss; and pancytopena.
/square6GVHD (graft-versus-host disease).
/square6Veno-occlusive disease of the liver.
/square6Graft failure.
Q.Graft versus host disease (GVHD).
/square6This is seen in allogenic bone marrow transplanta-
tion. It is the result of donor T cells reacting withhost cells.
/square6GVHD developing within the first 3 months post-
transplant is termed acute GVHD, while GVHD
developing or persisting beyond 3 months post-transplant is termed chronic GVHD.
/square6Acute GVHD is characterized by an erythematous
maculopapular rash; persistent anorexia or
diarrhea, or both; and liver impairment withincreased levels of bilirubin, alanine and aspartateaminotransferase, and alkaline phosphatase. Sincemany conditions can mimic acute GVHD, diagnosisusually requires skin, liver, or endoscopic biopsy
for confirmation. In all these organs, endothelial
damage and lymphocytic infiltrates are seen. Theincidence of acute GVHD is higher in recipients ofstem cells from mismatched or unrelated donorsand in older patients.
/square6Chronic GVHD resembles an autoimmune disorderwith malar rash, sicca syndrome, arthritis, oblitera-tive bronchiolitis, and bile duct degeneration andcholestasis.
/square6GVHD can be prevented by giving immuno-suppressive drugs after transplantation. Combina-tions of methotrexate plus cyclosporine ortacrolimus are commonly used for this purpose.Prednisone, anti–T cell antibodies, mycophenolatemofetil, and other immunosuppressive are
also being studied. GVHD can also be prevented
by removing T cells from the stem cells beforetransplantation but this is associated with anincreased incidence of graft failure and tumorrecurrence.
/square6GVHD can be treated with glucocorticoids, anti-thymocyte globulin, or monoclonal antibodiestargeted against T cells.
Q.What are plasma cell disorders? Enumerate plasma
cell disorders.
/square6Plasma cell disorders are a group of neoplastic or
potentially neoplastic diseases associated with
proliferation of a single clone of plasma cellsderived from B cells. This group of disorders hasbeen referred to as monoclonal gammopathies,immunoglobulinopathies, paraproteinemias, anddysproteinemias.Classification of Plasma Cell Disorders
• Monoclonal gammopathies of undetermined significance
(MGUS)
• Malignant monoclonal gammopathies (multiple myeloma,
Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia)
• Heavy-chain diseases• Cryoglobulinemia• Primary amyloidosis
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of multiple myeloma.
/square6Multiple myeloma is a malignancy of plasma cells.
/square6It is characterized by neoplastic proliferation of a
single clone of plasma cells in the bone marrowresulting in extensive skeletal destruction withosteolytic lesions, osteopenia, and/or pathologicfractures.
Clinical Features
/square6Myeloma is a disease of older adults (median ageat presentation, 65 years).
/square6Myeloma causes clinical symptoms and signsthrough a variety of mechanisms.
/square6Replacement of the bone marrow by malignantplasma cells leads to anemia initially and laterpancytopenia.
/square6Bone involvement causes bone pain, osteoporosis,lytic lesions, pathologic fractures, and hyper-calcemia. Bone pain is most common in the back orribs.
/square6Neutropenia due to bone marrow failure may leadto recurrent infections.
/square6Low platelet count may lead to bleeding tendency.
/square6The paraproteins secreted by the malignant plasmacells (either IgG or IgA) may cause hyperviscositymanifesting as vertigo, nausea, visual disturbances,and alterations in mental status.
/square6The light chain component of the immunoglobulinmay cause renal failure. Light chain componentsmay be deposited in various organs as amyloidcausing variety of symptoms due to organ damage.
/square6Examination may reveal pallor, bone tenderness,and soft tissue masses. Fever may be present dueto infection. Neurologic signs related to neuropathyand spinal cord compression may be present.Features of amyloidosis such as enlarged tongue,
neuropathy, congestive heart failure, or hepato-
megaly may be present.
Laboratory Features
/square6Normocytic anemia.
/square6Leucocyte count and platelet counts are usuallynormal initially but may be low with advanceddisease.
/square6ESR is elevated due to increased rouleaux forma-
tion.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
6416 /square6Hypercalcemia, high uric acid and renal failure.
/square6The hallmark of myeloma is the finding of a para-
protein on serum protein electrophoresis. In sporadiccases, no paraprotein is present (“nonsecretorymyeloma”).
/square6Bone marrow examination shows infiltration by
morphologically abnormal plasma cells.
/square6X-rays of bones may show multiple punched out
(lytic) lesions. Such lesions are commonly seen inthe axial skeleton: Skull, spine, proximal long bones,and ribs. Sometimes only generalized osteoporosismay be seen.
/square6Positron emission tomography (PET) scans areuseful for staging of myeloma.
/square6Beta-2 microglobulin level has prognostic signifi-cance in myeloma. Beta-2 microglobulin level of>4 mg/L is associated with poor prognosis.
/square6Bone marrow cytogenetic characteristics also have
prognostic significance. Deletions of chromosome
13q and the translocation t(4,14) are associated witha poor outcome.
Treatment
/square6Asymptomatic patients with minimal disease canbe observed without treatment since there is noadvantage to early treatment of asymptomaticmyeloma.
/square6Symptomatic patients may be treated with an initialregimen of thalidomide plus dexamethasone.
Newer agents such as bortezomib and lenalidomide
have improved the outcome.
/square6Bone marrow transplantation should be consideredin young patients.
/square6Localized radiotherapy can reduce bone pain anderadicate the tumor at the site of pathologic fracture.
/square6Hypercalcemia can be treated with mobilizationand hydration. The bisphosphonates (pamidronate90 mg or zoledronic acid 4 mg intravenouslymonthly) reduce hypercalcemia and pathologicfractures.
/square6Blood transfusion for anemia.
Indicators of Poor Prognosis in Multiple Myeloma
• Low serum albumin
• Presence of renal failure• Thrombocytopenia• Age ≥70 years
• Advanced lytic bone lesions
• Beta-2-microglobulin >4 mg/L
• Hypercalcemia• Low hemoglobin• Bone marrow plasma cell percentage ≥50 percentQ.Causes of renal failure in multiple myeloma.
• Myeloma cast nephropathy (myeloma kidney) (most
common cause)
• Development of renal amyloidosis• Renal tubular dysfunction• Urate nephropathy due to high uric acid levels• Recurrent urinary tract infections• Hypercalcemia, with or without nephrocalcinosis• Tubulointerstitial nephritis• Plasma cell infiltration of the kidneys• Hyperviscosity syndrome
Q.Monoclonal gamopathy of undetermined signifi-
cance (MGUS).
/square6Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined signifi-
cance (MGUS) is the production of M-protein by
noncancerous plasma cells in the absence of other
manifestations typical of multiple myeloma.
/square6MGUS is defined by the following three criteria:
1. Presence of a serum monoclonal protein
(M-protein, whether IgA, IgG, or IgM).
2. Fewer than 10 percent plasma cells in the bone
marrow.
3. Absence of lytic bone lesions, anemia, hyper-
calcemia, and renal insufficiency related to theplasma cell proliferative process.
/square6It is usually asymptomatic. Incidence is higher inpatients over age 70.
/square6Diagnosis is usually suspected when M-protein isincidentally detected in blood or urine during aroutine examination. MGUS is differentiated fromother plasma cell disorders because M-proteinlevels remain relatively stable over time and lyticbone lesions, anemia, and renal dysfunction are
absent.
/square6Although MGUS is a benign disorder, some cases
may progress to other B-cell related disorderssuch as myeloma, amyloidosis, lymphoma, or
Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia.
/square6Treatment is not required, but patients should be
kept on follow up. Serum protein electrophoresisshould be done every year to detect the progression
to multiple myeloma, etc.
Q.Discuss the mechanism of coagulation (hemostasis).
Q.Coagulation cascade.
Q.Anticoagulants (coagulation inhibitors).
Normal Hemostasis
/square6The normal hemostatic process can be divided into
primary and secondary components.
/square6Primary hemostasis  consists of platelet plug
formation at sites of injury. It occurs within secondsof injury and is of prime importance in stoppingblood loss from capillaries, small arterioles, and

/square6Diseases of Blood417
6venules. Platelet plug attaches to vessel wall
through von Willebrand factor (vWF). TXA2
(thromboxane) stimulates platelet aggregation and
prostacyclin inhibits platelet aggregation.
/square6Secondary hemostasis  consists of fibrin formation
which involves many steps in plasma coagulation
system (coagulation cascade). Secondary hemo-
stasis requires several minutes for completion and
is important to prevent bleeding in larger vessels
and late bleeding occurring hours or days after the
injury.
/square6Actually these two events do not occur separately.
They occur simultaneously. As the primary hemo-
static plug is being formed, plasma coagulation
proteins are activated to initiate secondary hemo-
stasis.
Coagulation Cascade
/square6Coagulation cascade (secondary hemostasis) involves
a number of steps. Each step leads to activation of
a molecule which in turn activates next molecule.
Coagulation cascade can start by two independent
activation pathways, the intrinsic pathway and
extrinsic pathway (tissue factor mediated). Both
pathways merge at the point of factor X activation
and subsequent steps are same for both.coagulation factors except factor VII thus inhibiting
the formation of active molecules. Protein C gets
converted to activated protein C by thrombin which
then inactivates factors V and VIII required for
coagulation. The inhibitory function of protein C
is enhanced by protein S.
/square6Reduced levels of antithrombin, proteins C and
S, result in a hypercoagulable or prothrombotic
state.
Q.Discuss the evaluation of a patient with a bleeding
disorder.
Or
Q.Discuss the approach to hemorrhagic disorders.
Or
Q.How will you investigate a case of bleeding disorder?
Q.Differences between bleeding and clotting dis-
orders.
/square6Bleeding results either from a breach of the vessel
wall due to a specific insult (e.g. trauma) or from a
defect in the hemostatic system.
/square6Defects in the hemostatic system may be due to a
deficiency of one or more of the coagulation factors,
thrombocytopenia, or occasionally excessive
fibrinolysis (e.g. after fibrinolytic therapy with tPA
or streptokinase).
/square6Detailed history and physical examination are
important in finding out the cause of bleeding
disorder.
History
The following points should be elicited from the
history:
/square6Site of bleeds: Superficial bleeds (skin and mucous
membranes), epistaxis, gastrointestinal haemorr-
hage or menorrhagia indicates a platelet disorder,
thrombocytopenia, or von Willebrand disease.
Deep seated bleeding such as bleed into muscle,
joint, or retroperitoneum indicates a coagulation
defect. Recurrent bleed at the same site indicates a
local structural abnormality.
/square6Duration of history:  Onset in childhood may suggest
a coagulation defect such as hemophilia. It also
suggests inherited hemostatic disorder.
/square6Precipitating causes: Bleeding arising spontaneously
indicates a more severe defect than bleeding that
occurs only after trauma.
/square6Surgery or trauma:  Ask about all past surgeries or
trauma. Bleeding from a platelet disorder usually
occurs immediately after trauma or surgery, and is
easily controlled by local measures (such as local
pressure). Bleeding due to coagulation defects (e.g.
hemophilia) occurs hours or days after injury, and
cannot be controlled by local measures.Figure 6.14 Coagulation cascade
Anticoagulants (Coagulation Inhibitors)
/square6Just like there are factors which help in coagulation
of blood (procoagulants), there are factors which
inhibit coagulation. These are called anticoagulants.
A fine balance between procoagulant and anti-
coagulant factors maintains the fluidity of blood.
/square6The flow of the blood itself inhibits coagulatiuon.
Hence, blood clots when it stagnates.
/square6Antithrombin, proteins C and S, and TFPI (tissue
factor pathway inhibitor) are important natural
anticoagulant factors that maintain blood fluidity.
/square6These inhibitors have distinct modes of action. Anti-
thrombin forms complexes with all serine protease

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
6418 /square6Family history: A family history of bleeding suggests
an inherited hemostatic disorder such as hemophilia.However, about one-third of cases of hemophiliaarise in individuals without a family history.
/square6Systemic illnesses: Enquire about the presence of liver
disease, renal failure, paraproteinemia or a connec-tive tissue disease (vasculitis) which can cause bleeding.
/square6Drugs:  Many drugs can cause bleeding either by
bone marrow suppression or by inhibiting Vit Kdependent clotting factors and platelets. Examplesare aspirin, clopidogrel, warfarin, etc.
Physical Examination
/square6Examination should note the presence of anybleeding in the skin and mucous membranes such
as petechiae, ecchymoses and hematomas./square6Bleeding into body cavities, the retroperitoneum,
or joints is common in coagulation disorders such
as hemophilia.
/square6Joint deformities may be present in coagulationdisorders due to recurrent bleeding.
/square6Hematomas can also compress nerves and lead toneurological deficits. For example, retroperitoneal
hematoma can compress femoral nerve. Intra-cerebral bleed can lead to stroke and altered
sensorium. Intracerebral bleed is the leading cause
of death in hemostatic disorders.
/square6Look for evidence of liver disease; splenomegalymay cause thrombocytopenia due to hyper-splenism.
Investigations
TABLE 6.6: Investigations done in bleeding and clotting disorders
Investigation Normal value Significance
•Platelet count 1.5 to 4.5 lakhs Low in many disorders. Low count causes prolongation of bleeding
time whereas PT remains normal
•Bleeding time < 8 mins Prolonged in thrombocytopenia, abnormal platelet function, and
deficiency of von Willebrand factor
•Prothrombin time (PT) 12–15 seconds PT screens the extrinsic or tissue factor-dependent pathway. PT is
prolonged in deficiencies of factors II, V, VII, and X, vitamin Kdeficiency, and warfarin use
•Activated partial thromboplastin 30–40 seconds Screens the intrinsic limb of the coagulation system. APTT is prolonged
time (APTT) in deficiencies of factors II, V, VIII, IX, X, XI, XII, heparin antibodies
against clotting factors and presence of lupus anticoagulant
•Fibrinogen level 1.5–4.0 g/L Low levels found in DIC and liver disease
•Thrombin time 3–5 seconds Tests the conversion of fibrinogen to fibrin
Differences between primary (bleeding) and secondary (clotting) hemostatic disorders
TABLE 6.7: Differences between primary and secondary clotting disorders
Features Primary hemostatic disorder (bleeding Secondary hemostatic disorder (coagulation
disorder, e.g. platelet defects) disorder, e.g. hemophilia)
•Onset of bleeding after trauma Immediate Delayed—hours or days
•Age of onset Late Childhood
•Sites of bleeding Superficial: Skin and mucous membranes Deep: Joints, muscle, retroperitoneum
•Physical findings Petechiae, ecchymoses Hematomas, hemarthroses
•Family history Usually absent Usually present
•Inheritance Autosomal dominant Autosomal or X-linked recessive
•Local measures Can control bleeding Cannot control bleeding
Q.Causes of thrombocytopenia.
Q.Define thrombocytopenia. Discuss the causes,
clinical features, investigations and management of
thrombocytopenia.
Q.Tourniquet test (capillary resistance test; Hess test).
/square6Thrombocytopenia is defined as a platelet count less
than 150,000/microL (normal 150,000 to 450,000).Causes of Thrombocytopenia
Decreased production
•Aplastic anemia
• Marrow infiltration (leukemia, myeloma, carcinoma, myelo-
fibrosis, osteopetrosis)
• Myelodysplasia• Vit B
12 and folic acid deficiency
• Chronic alcoholism

/square6Diseases of Blood419
6• Infections (rubella, mumps, varicella, parvovirus)
• Drugs (anticancer drugs, antimetabolites)
Increased destruction
• Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura• HELLP syndrome (hemolytic anemia, elevated liver function
tests, and low platelet count) in pregnant women
• Secondary (CLL, SLE)• Hypersplenism• Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)• Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura• Hemolytic-uremic syndrome• Sepsis• Hemangiomas• Infections (dengue, HIV)• Drugs (heparin, quinine, sulfonamides)
Dilutional
• After massive blood transfusion
Clinical Features
/square6Bleeding manifestations may not occur until the
platelet count falls below 10,000/uL.
/square6Patients present with bleeding manifestations from
cutaneous and mucus membranes.
/square6Bleeding manifestations include epistaxis, petechiae,
purpura, ecchymosis, GI bleed and genitourinarybleeding. Women may present with menorrhagia.
Intracranial bleeding can occur in severe thrombo-
cytopenia and cause death.
/square6Tourniquet test (Hess test):  A sphygmomanometer
cuff is tied around the arm and inflated above
diastolic blood pressure but below systolic pressure.
Cuff is deflated after 5 minutes. In thrombocyto-penia, petechial spots appear in the forearm. Morethan 10 petechial spots in a square inch area is consi-dered positive Hess test. It is due to the increasedcapillary fragility in thrombocytopenia.
Investigations
/square6Low platelet counts.
/square6Anemia may be present due to blood loss.
/square6Prolonged bleeding time.
/square6Peripheral smear:  This gives information on morpho-
logy of cells, presence or absence of platelet clump-ing, etc. Peripheral smear can also diagnose diseasessuch as leukemia.
/square6Bone marrow examination: This may show aplasia,
an infiltrative disease, or increased number ofmegakaryocytes in excessive peripheral destruction(e.g. in ITP).
/square6Other tests:  Should be directed at the suspected
cause. HIV serology, liver function tests, ultrasoundabdomen to look for splenomegaly, etc. are helpful.
Management
/square6Treat the underlying cause
/square6Platelet transfusion is required if the platelet countis less than 20,000/cumm.Q.Heparin-Induced Thrombocytopenia (HIT).
/square6Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) is the most
common type of drug-induced thrombocytopenia.
/square6There are two types of HIT. Type 1 HIT presentswithin the first 2 days after exposure to heparin,and the platelet count normalizes even with conti-
nued heparin therapy. Type 1 HIT is non-immune
mediated reaction and is due to the direct effect ofheparin on platelet activation.
/square6Type 2 HIT is an immune-mediated disorder thattypically occurs 4–10 days after exposure to heparin.
It is caused by an IgG autoantibody that reacts with
platelet factor 4 (PF4) on the platelet surface, usuallyin a complex with heparin. The interaction of the
antibody with PF4 is prothrombotic due to the
release of platelet microparticles into the circulation.Because of prothrombotic state, arterial and venous
thrombosis may occur. In general medical practice,
the term HIT refers to type 2 HIT.
/square6The risk of HIT is higher with unfractionated heparinthan with low-molecular-weight heparin. It is seenusually after 4 days of heparin use and often the first
finding is asymptomatic thrombocytopenia.
Diagnosis
/square6HIT should be suspected in any patient who deve-lops thrombocytopenia while receiving heparin.
Finding HIT antibodies confirms the diagnosis.
Treatment
/square6Heparin should be immediately stopped and
alternative anticoagulants should be started.
/square6Fondaparinux does not cause HIT and can be usedinstead of heparin. The direct thrombin inhibitors
(such as argatroban and bivalirudin) or rivaroxabancan also be used as alternatives to heparin.
Q.Describe the etiology, clinical features, diagnosis
and management of immune thrombocytopenic
purpura (ITP).
/square6Immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) is an auto-immune disorder due to the presence of an IgGautoantibody against platelets.
Etiology
/square6ITP is due to development of antibodies to one’sown platelets, usually triggered by a preceding
infection. Any infection can trigger antibody
production but common cause is viral infections.
Common causes are as follows:
• Infections
• Malignancy (e.g. adenocarcinoma and lymphoma)• Autoimmune diseases (e.g. systemic lupus erythematosus,
autoimmune hepatitis, and thyroid disease)
• Drugs (acetazolamide, aspirin, carbamazepine, phenytoin,
methyldopa)

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
6420 Pathogenesis
/square6Antibody bound platelets are destroyed in the
spleen, where splenic macrophages with Fc receptorsbind to antibody-coated platelets. Since the spleen
is the major site both of antibody production and
platelet destruction, splenectomy is highly effectivetherapy for ITP.
Clinical Features
/square6ITP is a disease of young. Peak incidence is betweenages 20 and 50 years.
/square6Females are more commonly affected than males.
/square6Patients present with mucosal or skin bleeding.Common types of bleeding are epistaxis, oralbleeding, menorrhagia, purpura, and petechiae.
Intracerebral bleed can be fatal in these patients.
/square6On examination, patient appears well. Bleeding
manifestations such as petechiae and purpura maybe noted. In ITP, usually there is no splenomegaly
and presence of splenomegaly should make one
suspect an alternative diagnosis.
Laboratory Features
/square6The hallmark of the disease is thrombocytopenia.Platelet counts can be very low such as less than10,000/mcL.
/square6Bleeding time is prolonged due to low platelets butclotting time is normal.
/square6Other counts are usually normal except foroccasional mild anemia due to bleeding.
/square6Peripheral smear is normal except reduced platelets.
/square6Antiplatelet antibodies are usually positive.
/square6Bone marrow is normal except increased numberof megakaryocytes.
/square6Tests to rule out any underlying triggering causesuch as HIV ELISA, IgG antibodies againstH. pylori , ANA and anti-dsDNA (to rule out SLE).
Differential Diagnosis
• Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP)
• DIC• Gestational thrombocytopenia• Drug induced thrombocytopenia• Infections (e.g. dengue, HIV)• Hypersplenism• Myelodysplasia• Congenital thrombocytopenias• Acquired pure megakaryocytic aplasia
Treatment
/square6Few patients may have spontaneous remission, but
most will require treatment.
Platelet Transfusions
/square6Platelet transfusions are given if the platelet count is
below 20,000/microL because spontaneous bleedingcan occur below this level. However, even these
exogenous platelets are destroyed and the effectlasts only a few hours. Platelet transfusion shouldbe reserved for cases of life-threatening bleedingin which even fleeting hemostasis may be of benefit.
Steroids
/square6Prednisolone 1–2 mg/kg/d acts by decreasing theaffinity of splenic macrophages for antibody-coated
platelets. It also reduces the production of antibody
and binding of antibody to the platelet surface.Platelet count will usually begin to rise within aweek, and responses are almost always seen within3 weeks. Steroids are continued until the plateletcount is normal, and the dose should then be
gradually tapered. Dexamethasone can also be used.
Immunoglobulin Therapy
/square6Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), 1 g/day for
3 to 5 days, is highly effective in raising the plateletcount.
/square6IVIG works by blocking Fc receptors on macro-
phages, thereby inhibiting phagocytosis. However,
this treatment is expensive, and it should bereserved for bleeding emergencies. A less expensivealternative is Rho immunoglobulin (RhIG) whichis anti-Rh antibody. Mechanism of action is sameas that of IVIG.
H. pylori Eradication
/square6H. pylori  infection also has been implicated in many
cases of ITP. Testing and eradicating H. pylori
infection can cure many cases of ITP.
Splenectomy
/square6Splenectomy is indicated if patients do not respond
to other therapies such as steroids or immuno-globulin.
Other Therapies
These are tried if the patient does not respond to abovetherapies.
/square6Danazol.
/square6Immunosuppressive agents (vincristine, azathio-prine, cyclosporine, and cyclophosphamide).
/square6Rituximab.
/square6High-dose immunosuppression and autologous
stem cell transplantation.
/square6Thrombopoietin receptor agonists, such as romi-
plostim and eltrombopag are also beneficial.
Prognosis
/square6Prognosis is good and most patients will recover
with medical line of management. Patients may die
due to intracranial hemorrhage.

/square6Diseases of Blood421
6Q.Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP).
/square6Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) is an
acute, fulminant disorder characterized by thrombo-cytopenia and microangiopathic hemolytic anemia.
Etiology
/square6TTP is caused bydeficient activity of the plasmaenzyme ADAMTS13 which cleaves large vonWillebrand factor into smaller sizes. Reducedactivity of ADAMTS13 enzyme leads to accumula-tion of unusually large von Willebrand factor
(VWF) multimers which cause platelet aggregation
and microthrombi formation.
/square6Deficiency of enzyme ADAMTS13 can be due to here-ditary or acquired factors. Most cases are acquireddue to an autoantibody against ADAMTS13.
Pathology
/square6There is formation of widespread microthrombiwhich occlude small blood vessels. These micro-thrombi are mainly made of von Willebrand factorand platelets. When RBCs pass through theseoccluded blood vessels, they get lysed because ofshear forces leading to hemolytic anemia. Occlusion
of blood vessels also leads to ischemia and multiple
organ dysfunction. Platelet count becomes low asthey get used up in microthrombi formation. Thebrain, heart, and kidneys are particularly likely tobe affected.
Clinical Features
/square6Thrombocytopenia leads to bleeding tendency
manifesting as mucosal bleeding as well as
petechial or purpuric skin spots.
/square6Anemia (due to microangiopathic hemolysis) leadsto fatigue, dyspnea, and jaundice.
/square6Microthrombi cause ischemia and dysfunction ofmultiple organs. Brain dysfunction can present asheadache, stroke, seizures, confusion, and vertigo.Renal involvement presents as hematuria and/orproteinuria and rarely as renal failure. Mesentericischemia symptoms include abdominal pain,
nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea.
/square6There may be history suggestive of an infection fewdays before the onset of above symptoms (such as
fever, malaise, body ache, diarrhea).
Diagnosis
/square6Typical clinical features.
/square6Low plasma ADAMTS13 enzyme level.
/square6Presence of thrombocytopenia and anemia.
/square6Presence of schistocytes in peripheral smearsuggesting microangiopathic hemolytic anemia.
/square6Normal clotting tests.
Differential Diagnosis
/square6Hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS):  This is now
considered as a different entity from TTP./square6Immune thrombocytopenia (ITP).
/square6Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).
/square6Pre-eclampsia and eclampsia in pregnant ladies.
Treatment
/square6Untreated thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
is usually fatal.
/square6Daily plasma exchange:  Plasma exchange reverses the
platelet consumption that is responsible for the
thrombus formation in microcirculation. May be
required for several days to many weeks.
/square6Corticosteroids can be used with plasma exchange.
/square6Rituximab is useful when there is recurrence afterwhen plasma exchange is stopped or in patientswith relapses.
/square6Caplacizumab inhibits the interaction betweenunusually large von Willebrand factor multimersand platelets and can be considered in patientsrefractory to plasma exchange and/or cortico-steroids.
Q.Hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS).
/square6Hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS) is an acute,
fulminant disorder characterized by thrombocyto-
penia, microangiopathic hemolytic anemia, and
acute kidney injury.
/square6HUS usually occurs in children following aninfection, typically with Shiga toxin—producingbacteria (e.g. Escherichia coli  O157:H7), but may also
occur in adults.
/square6Note that even though most of the clinical features
are similar to TTP, HUS and TTP are differententities because their etiology and pathogenesis is
different.
Etiology
/square6Acute hemorrhagic colitis due to shiga toxin–
producing bacteria (e.g. Escherichia coli O157:H7, or
some strains of Shigella dysenteriae ) is the most
common cause. Occasionally the cause is pneumo-coccal infection and rarely HIV infection.
/square6Small minority of cases may be due to dysregulationof the complement system.
Pathophysiology
/square6HUS typically develops after consuming under-cooked beef or unpasteurized milk which conta-minated with causative bacteria. The Shiga toxinformed by the E. coli  in the intestine is absorbed
into the blood stream. The toxin then binds to
glycosphingolipid found on different cells of thebody. The damage that ensues leads to an increasein thrombin and fibrin levels resulting in micro-thrombi. These microthrombi lead to plateletconsumption, causing thrombocytopenia. Micro-
thrombi present in the blood vessel also lead to

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
6422 mechanical shear stress leading to hemolytic
anemia. The Shiga toxin also has a high affinity toglomerular endothelium and tubular cells, andcauses acute kidney injury.
/square6Multiple organs develop damage due to micro-thrombi in addition to kidneys. These include brain,heart, and intestines.
Clinical Features
/square6There may be history of vomiting, abdominal pain,and bloody diarrhea indicating infection with shiga
toxin producing bacteria.
/square6Brain involvement produces weakness, confusion,
and seizures.
/square6Kidney injury may produce hematuria, decreasedurination or anuria, and/or hypertension.
/square6Gastrointestinal tract ischemia (due to mesentericischemia) may cause hemorrhagic colitis, withabdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and bloodydiarrhea. Note that same GI symptoms may also
occur even prior to the development of HUS due
to shiga toxin producing bacteria.
/square6Cardiac involvement may cause arrhythmias.
/square6Thrombocytopenia may produce bleeding manifes-tations.
Investigations
/square6Complete blood count (CBC) shows thrombocyto-penia and anemia.
/square6Peripheralblood smear may show fragmented RBCs(schistocytes) due to microangiopathic hemolysis.
/square6Direct antiglobulin (Coombs) test is negative andexcludes autoimmune hemolytic anemia.
/square6LDH is elevated.
/square6Prothrombin time (PT), and aPTT are normal (thesewill be elevated in DIC).
/square6Plasma ADAMTS13 enzyme activity is helpful toexclude thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura TTP(low levels are found in TTP).
/square6Renal function tests (urea, creatinine) may showevidence of kidney injury.
/square6Liver function tests (LFT) show raised indirect
bilirubin due to hemolysis.
/square6Stool testing for Shiga toxin and stool culture for
E. coli  O157:H7.
Treatment
/square6Hemodialysis for renal failure.
/square6Blood transfusion for anemia.
/square6Platelet transfusion only if there is active bleeding.
/square6Antibiotics are usually not required as the disease
is self-limiting.
/square6In patients with HUS due to complement dys-
regulation, complement inhibition with eculizumabor ravulizumab can help.Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical manifestations,
investigations and management of von Willebrandsdisease.
Q.Von Willebrand’s factor.
/square6Von Willebrand’s disease is the most common
congenital bleeding disorder and is transmitted inan autosomal dominant pattern. Rarely, it can beacquired also.
Etiology
/square6von Willebrand’s disease is due to deficient ordefective von Willebrand factor (vWF).
/square6vWF is important for platelet adhesion to subendo-thelium. vWF is synthesized by megakaryocytesand endothelial cells. The gene for von Willebrand’sfactor is located on chromosome 12.
/square6vWF also acts as a carrier for factor VIII in thecirculation, increasing the half-life of factor VIII.Hence, in von Willebrand’s disease, there may be
secondarily coagulation disturbance due to
decreased levels of factor VIII.
Clinical Features
/square6von Willebrand’s disease affects both men and
women.
/square6Most cases are mild.
/square6Patients present with mucosal bleeding (epistaxis,
gingival bleeding, menorrhagia).
/square6Some patients may come to attention because ofexcessive bleeding after surgical incisions or dentalextractions. Bleeding tendency is exacerbated by
aspirin.
/square6Characteristically, bleeding decreases during preg-nancy or estrogen use.
Investigations
/square6Bleeding time is prolonged in the presence of
normal platelet count.
/square6Defective or absent platelet aggregation.
/square6Levels of von Willebrand’s factor in plasma arereduced.
/square6Ristocetin cofactor test is the most specific andshows decreased biological activity of vVF.
Management
/square6Since the bleeding is mild, no treatment is necessaryexcept before surgery or dental procedures.
/square6Desmopressin acetate (DDAVP) can increase thevWF levels by two to three fold by releasing storedvWF from endothelial cells. It can be given beforesurgery or dental procedures.
/square6The antifibrinolytic agent epsilon aminocaproic acid(EACA) is useful as adjunctive therapy during
dental procedures. It is given after DDAVP.

/square6Diseases of Blood423
6Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of Hemophilia A.
Q.Factor VIII (antihemophilic factor).
/square6Hemophilia A (classic hemophilia) is a hereditary
bleeding disorder due to deficiency of coagulationfactor VIII.
/square6Most of the cases are due to quantitative reductionof factor VIII. However, a small number of casesare due to qualitative defect in factor VIII.
/square6Hemophilia is an X-linked recessive disease, andhence, males are usually affected. However, rarely,female carriers can be affected if their normalX chromosome is also disproportionately inacti-
vated. Females may also become affected if their
father is a hemophiliac and mother is a carrier.
/square6Antenatal diagnosis can be made by chorionicvillous sampling or amniocentesis.
Pathogenesis
/square6Factor VIII (antihemophilic factor)  is a large (265-kDa)
single-chain protein that regulates the activation offactor X by proteases generated in the intrinsicpathway. Hence deficiency of factor VIII leads to
defective coagulation and bleeding.
/square6Factor VIII is synthesized in liver and circulates inthe blood. von Willebrand factor (vWF) acts as a
carrier of factor VIII in blood.
/square6The gene for factor VIII is on the X chromosome,
and carrier detection and prenatal diagnosis are
well established. One in 10,000 males is born withdeficiency or dysfunction of the factor VIII mole-cule.
/square6Hemophilia is classified as mild, moderate andsevere based on the factor VIII level in the blood.In mild hemophilia (factor levels 5 to 25% ofnormal), excessive bleeding may occur after surgery
or dental extraction. Moderate hemophilia (factor
levels 1 to 5% of normal) usually causes bleedingafter minimal trauma. Severe hemophilia (factorVIII level <1% of normal) causes severe bleedingthroughout life, usually beginning soon after birth(e.g. scalp hematoma after delivery or excessive
bleeding after circumcision).
Clinical Features
/square6Hemophilia A is the second most common con-
genital bleeding disorder after von Willebrand’sdisease. It is a severe bleeding disorder.
/square6Family history of hemophilia is usually positive.
/square6The bleeding tendency is related to factor VIIIlevels. Patients with mild hemophilia bleed onlyafter major trauma or surgery, those with mode-rately severe hemophilia bleed with mild traumaor surgery, and those with severe disease bleed
spontaneously./square6Bleeding can occur anywhere but commonly occurs
in deep tissues such as joints (knees, ankles, elbows),muscles, and from GIT.
/square6Bleeding into joints (hemarthrosis) is common inhemophilia A and is almost diagnostic of the dis-order. Recurrent bleeding into joints leads to joint
destruction and joint deformities.
/square6Earlier when HIV screening of donor blood was not
widely adopted, many hemophiliacs got infectedwith HIV due to factor VIII transfusion and manyof these have already developed AIDS. However,this is uncommon now due to universal screening
of donor blood.
Investigations
/square6Partial thromboplastin time (PTT) is prolonged.
/square6Platelet count and PT are normal.
/square6Bleeding time and fibrinogen levels are also normal.
/square6Factor VIII levels are reduced.
Treatment
/square6Treatment of hemophilia A involves infusion offactor VIII concentrates, either recombinant or heat
treated.
/square6In minor bleeding, it is enough if the factor VIIIlevels are raised to 25% of normal. For moderatebleeding, levels should be kept above 25% ofnormal. When major surgery is to be performed,
factor VIII level should be raised to 100% and then
maintained above 50% for 10–14 days.
/square6For mild hemophiliacs, DDAVP (desmopressin) isenough for minor surgeries. It causes release ofstored factor VIII and will raise the factor VIII levelstwo- to three-fold for several hours.
/square6EACA (epsilon amino caproic acid) may be addedif bleeding persists after treating with factor VIIIand desmopressin.
/square6Fresh frozen plasma can be used if factor VIIconcentrate is not available.
/square6Emicizumab is a monoclonal antibody that binds to
both factor IX and factor X, link them into a factor X
as like active complex that obviates the need forfactor VIII, and may be an effective treatment forhemophilia A.
/square6A gene therapy is currently in the developmentalphase.
/square6Avoid the use of aspirin in these patients.
/square6Patients with hemophilia should be vaccinatedagainst hepatitis B.
Prognosis
/square6Prognosis is good now because of the availabilityof factor VIII concentrates. Intracerebral hemorr-hage is the usual cause of death but uncommon.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
6424 Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of Hemophilia B (Christmas
disease).
/square6Hemophilia B (Christmas disease) is a hereditarybleeding disorder due to deficiency of coagulationfactor IX. It is sometimes called Christmas disease,named after Stephen Christmas, the first patientdescribed with this disease. Inheritance is same ashemophilia A (X-linked recessive).
/square6Most cases are due to reduced levels of factor IXbut some cases may be due to qualitative defect infactor IX.
/square6Factor IX deficiency is less common than factor VIIIdeficiency but is otherwise clinically and geneticallyidentical.
Clinical Features
/square6Same as hemophilia A, but less severe.
Investigations
/square6Factor IX levels are reduced.
/square6Other laboratory features are same as factor VIIIdeficiency.
Treatment
/square6Transfusion of factor IX concentrates. Recombinantfactor IX is available now.
/square6Fresh frozen plasma can be used in emergencies iffactor IX concentrate is not available.
/square6DDAVP is not useful in this disorder.
/square6Aspirin should be avoided.
Prognosis
/square6Prognosis is same as hemophilia A.
Q.Classify anticoagulants. Give a brief account of
commonly used anticoagulantsQ.Indications of anticoagulation
/square6Anticoagulants are agents which interfere with coagu-
lation of blood. They are useful in a variety of dis-
orders associated with abnormal blood coagulation.
Classification
/square6Refer to Fig. 6.15.
Uses
/square6Prophylaxis and treatment of deep vein thrombosis.
/square6Pulmonary embolism.
/square6Myocardial infarction.
/square6Atrial fibrillation.
/square6Patients with mechanical prosthetic valves.
/square6Procoagulant states.
Adverse Effects
/square6Bleeding (monitor aPTT in patients with heparinand PT in patients on warfarin).
/square6HIT (heparin induced thrombocytopenia with
unfractionated heparin).
/square6Osteoporosis.
/square6Hypersensitivity reactions.
Q.Warfarin
/square6Warfarin is a coumarin derivative. It inhibits
vitamin K reductase thus causing depletion ofreduced Vit K required for the production offunctionally active (gama-carboxylated) coagula-tion proteins (factors 7, 9, and 10) and anticoagulantproteins (protein C and protein S).
/square6Warfarin is well absorbed orally. It has a delayed
onset of action (2 to 7 days) and half-life of about
40 hours. Its anticoagulant effect lasts for 4–5 daysafter discontinuation.
Figure 6.15 Classification of anticoagulants


/square6Diseases of Blood425
6/square6The effect of warfarin is influenced by many factors,
including age, liver disease, dietary vitamin K,genetic factors, concomitant drug use, patientcompliance, and inappropriate dosage adjustments.The effect of warfarin varies widely among indivi-duals, and hence should be monitored closely.
/square6Its effect can be monitored by prothrombin timeand is reported as international normalized ratio(INR).
Indications for Warfarin
/square6Atrial fibrillation (AF).
/square6Valvular heart disease (native and prosthetic tissueand mechanical heart valves).
/square6Prevention and treatment of venous thrombo-
embolism.
/square6Prevention of stroke, recurrent MI, and death in
patients with acute MI.
/square6Prevention of arterial and venous thrombosis inpatients with procoagulant states.
Dosing and Monitoring
/square6Warfarin should be started at low dose (5 mg daily)and titrated as required. Lesser starting dose(3–4 mg) should be used in elderly because theyare more sensitive to warfarin.
/square6If a rapid anticoagulant effect is required, heparinand warfarin should be started simultaneously andoverlapped for at least 5 days. Then, heparin isdiscontinued when the INR is in the therapeutic
range for 2 days.
/square6INR (international normalized ratio) should be
monitored frequently in patients on warfarintherapy.
/square6A target INR of 2.5 (range 2.0 to 3.0) is recommen-ded for all indications except for patients withmechanical prosthetic heart valves, for which anINR of 3.0 (range 2.5 to 3.5) is recommended.
Adverse Effects
/square6Increased risk of bleeding. Elderly patients are at
higher risk of bleeding including intracranial bleeding.
Reversing the Effect of Warfarin
/square6The anticoagulant effect of warfarin can be reversed
by stopping the drug, by administering Vit K orfresh-frozen plasma. Vit K is a natural antagonistof warfarin.
Q.Heparin.
/square6Heparin acts as an anticoagulant by activating anti-
thrombin (AT) which inactivates thrombin, factorXa, and other coagulation enzymes. Anticoagulanteffect of heparin is monitored by activated partial
thromboplastin time (aPTT).Uses
/square6Prevention and treatment of venous thrombo-
embolism.
/square6Unstable angina and acute MI.
/square6Cardiopulmonary bypass.
/square6During and after coronary angioplasty and coronarystenting.
/square6During hemodialysis.
Adverse Effects
/square6Increased risk of bleeding.
/square6Heparin induced thrombocytopenia (HIT).
Q.Low-molecular-weight heparins (LMWHs).
/square6LMWHs are fragments produced by chemical or
enzymatic depolymerization of heparin. LMWHs
are approximately one-third the size of heparin.
/square6Examples:  Enoxaparin, dalteparin.
Advantages
/square6They have less protein and cellular binding and,
hence, have more predictable anticoagulant
response, better bioavailability, and longer plasma
half-life than regular heparin. LMWHs are excreted
mainly by kidneys.
/square6LMWHs are associated with a lower incidence of
heparin induced thrombocytopenia (HIT) and
heparin-induced osteoporosis than heparin.
/square6Since LMWHs have a longer plasma half-life and amore predictable anticoagulant effect, they can be
administered once daily without laboratory
monitoring.
Indications
/square6Same as those for heparin.
Q.New oral anticoagulants.
Q.Direct oral anticoagulants (DOACs).
/square6Vitamin K antagonists (warfarin) were the only class
of oral anticoagulants available to clinicians for
decades. Warfarin has many disadvantages which
include long period of onset of action, unpredict-
able pharmacokinetics, significant interaction with
food and other drugs, and the need to monitor
prothrombin time regularly.
/square6However, now with the availability of new oral
anticoagulants, also known as direct oral anti-
coagulants clinicians have broader choice of
anticoagulants with minimum side effects.
/square6Currently available direct oral anticoagulants aredabigatran, rivaroxaban, apixaban , and endoxaban.
Dabigatran
/square6Dabigatran is the first oral direct thrombin inhibitor
to be approved.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
6426 Mechanism of Action
/square6Dabigatran binds to thrombin and blocks its pro-
coagulant activity.
Indications
/square6Prevention of stroke and systemic embolism inadult patients with non-valvular atrial fibrillation
(i.e. AF not due to mechanical or bioprosthetic valve
or severe mitral stenosis). Direct oral anticoagulantsare associated with excess thromboembolic andbleeding events in valvular AF. Vitamin K anta-gonists (warfarin or acenocoumarol) are still remainthe drug of choice for valvular AF.
/square6Prevent and treatment of venous thrombo-embolism.
Dosage
/square6The recommended dose is 150 mg orally twicedaily.
Advantages Over Warfarin
/square6There is no need to monitor prothrombin time.
/square6Bleeding risk is less.
Side Effects
/square6Dyspepsia incidence is more than warfarin.
/square6Risk of myocardial infarction is slightly increased.
Rivaroxaban
/square6Rivaroxaban is a new oral anticoagulant which acts
by inhibiting factor Xa.
/square6Indications and advantages are same as
dabigatran.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of disseminated intravascular
coagulation (DIC; comsumptive coagulopathy)
/square6Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) isa state/syndrome characterized by widespreadintravascular coagulation associated with increasedconsumption of platelet and clotting factors.
/square6DIC involves abnormal, excessive generation ofthrombin and fibrin in the circulating blood. Duringthe process, increased platelet aggregation andconsumption of coagulation factors occur.
/square6DIC produces both thrombosis and hemorrhage.DIC that evolves slowly (over weeks or months)causes primarily venous thrombotic and embolicmanifestations; DIC that evolves rapidly (overhours or days) causes primarily bleeding.
Etiology
/square6DIC usually results from exposure of tissue factorto blood, initiating the coagulation cascade. DIC
most often occurs in the following circumstances.• Infections
• Severe tissue injury (trauma, burns, head injury)• Cancer (particularly carcinomas of the pancreas, prostate,
and acute promyelocytic leukemia)
• Obstretic complications (amniotic fluid embolism, HELLP
syndrome, eclampsia, retained fetal products, septic abortion)
• Abdominal aortic aneurysm• Hemolytic transfusion reaction (ABO incompatibility)• Snake bite• Fulminant hepatic failure
Pathogenesis
/square6Normally coagulation is mediated by thrombin and
kept confined to a localized area by a combination
of blood flow and coagulation inhibitors especiallyantithrombin III. When these mechanisms areoverwhelmed by the markedly increased produc-tion of thrombin, thrombin may circulate and leadto disseminated intravascular coagulation.
/square6There is widespread deposition of fibrin leadingto blocked blood vessels and tissue ischemia,consumption of platelets, fibrinogen, prothrombin,factors V and VIII. Consumption of all these
coagulant factors in turn may lead to bleeding. The
major stimulus to thrombin activation in DIC comesfrom the tissue factor.
Figure 6.16 Pathophysiology of DIC
Clinical Features
/square6DIC leads to both bleeding and thrombosis.Bleeding is more common than thrombosis.
/square6Bleeding may occur at any site, but spontaneousbleeding and oozing at venipuncture sites orwounds are important clues to the diagnosis.
/square6Thrombosis is most commonly manifested bydigital ischemia and gangrene.
/square6Other manifestations include dysfunction of liver,kidney, lungs, and central nervous system. DIC also
causes microangiopathic hemolytic anemia.
Laboratory Findings
/square6Hypofibrinogenemia, thrombocytopenia, and
elevated fibrin degradation products. D-dimer isthe most sensitive fibrin degradation product.

/square6Diseases of Blood427
6/square6PT is prolonged.
/square6APTT may or may not be prolonged.
/square6Peripheral smear shows fragmented RBCs due to
microangiopathic hemolytic anemia.
/square6Antithrombin III levels may be markedly reduced.
Treatment
/square6Underlying cause of DIC should be treated.
/square6Replacement therapy:  Platelets should be transfused
to maintain a platelet count greater than 30,000/mcL.Fibrinogen is replaced with cryoprecipitate. Coagu-lation factor deficiency may require replacementwith fresh-frozen plasma. When there is excessive
fibrinolysis, EACA 1 g intravenously per hour may
be tried in combination with heparin. EACA shouldnot be used without heparin in DIC because of therisk of thrombosis. Antithrombin III replacementhas not been shown to reduce mortality rate ofsevere sepsis with DIC. However, one trial has
shown benefit by the use of activated protein C.
/square6The role of heparin in the treatment of DIC is
controversial. Clearly, it is contraindicated beforeor after neurosurgical procedures. Heparin is useful
in slowly evolving DIC which presents primarily
with thrombosis. It is also useful in the presence ofthrombosis or fibrin deposition leading to acralcyanosis. Heparin is usually not indicated in rapidlyevolving DIC with bleeding manifestations exceptin women with a retained dead fetus and evolving
DIC with a progressive decrease in platelets,
fibrinogen, and coagulation factors. A dose of500–750 units per hour of heparin is enough in DICand aPTT need not be prolonged for clinical benefit.Heparin is not effective if antithrombin III levelsare markedly reduced. If antithrombin III levels are
very low, it can be raised by giving fresh-frozen
plasma or antithrombin III concentrates.
Q.Causes of splenomegaly.
Q.Differential diagnosis of massive splenomegaly.
Causes of Splenomegaly
Mild splenomegaly
• Acute infections: Typhoid, malaria, septicemia, sub-acute
bacterial endocarditis
Moderate splenomegaly
• Leukemia, lymphomas• Polycythemia vera• Hemolytic anemias• Cirrhosis of liver• Hemochromatosis• Tumors and cysts• Tuberculosis
Massive splenomegaly
• Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)• Myelofibrosis• Gaucher’s disease• Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)• Hairy cell leukemia• Kala-azar (visceral leishmaniasis)• Tropical splenomegaly syndrome (hyperreactive malarial
splenomegaly syndrome)
• Thalassemia major• AIDS with disseminated Mycobacterium avium  complex
infection
Differential Diagnosis of Massive Splenomegaly
Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML)
Clinical features
/square6Median age at presentation is around 50 years.
/square6Patients may have systemic symptoms such as
fatigue (due to anemia), malaise, weight loss,excessive sweating).
/square6Abdominal fullness and left hyphochondrial paindue to massive splenomegaly.
/square6Bleeding episodes due to platelet dysfunction.
/square6Moderate to massive splenomegaly with hepato-
megaly.
/square6Pallor due to anemia.
Laboratory findings
/square6Normocytic normochromic anemia.
/square6WBC count is markedly raised (usually >100,000).
/square6Platelet count may be raised, but in advanced
disease falls.
/square6Peripheral smear shows presence of myelocytes and
metamyelocytes.
/square6Philadelphia chromosome is positive in >95%cases.
/square6Leukocyte alkaline phosphatase (LAP) score is verylow.
Myelofibrosis
Clinical features
/square6The median age at presentation is 67 years.
/square6The most common presenting complaint is severe
fatigue.
/square6Hepatomegaly.
Laboratory findings
/square6Anemia.
/square6WBC count is variable and thrombocytopenia is
often present.
/square6Leukocyte alkaline phosphatase (LAP) score isincreased.
/square6Peripheral smear shows teardrop-shaped RBCs,nucleated RBCs and granulocyte precursors(myelocytes, metamyelocytes, and blasts).
/square6Bone marrow is often difficult to aspirate, usuallyyielding a “dry” tap. Bone marrow biopsy showsextensive replacement of the marrow by fibrosis,
which is the hallmark of the disease.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
6428 Gaucher’s Disease
Clinical features
/square6It is an autosomal recessive disorder.
/square6Hepatosplenomegaly, anemia, thrombocytopenia,
and bone disease.
/square6Bone manifestations include fractures, infarctions,
and vertebral collapse.
Laboratory findings
/square6Thrombocytopenia and anemia.
/square6Liver enzymes may be mildly elevated.
/square6Acid phosphatase is elevated in patients with active
bone disease.
/square6Reduced glucocerebrosidase activity in leukocytes.
Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL)
Clinical features
/square6Painless lymphadenopathy.
/square6Weight loss, fever and night sweats without evi-
dence of infection.
/square6Easy fatigability.
/square6Hepatomegaly may be present.
Laboratory findings
/square6Anemia.
/square6Increased WBC count.
/square6Thrombocytopenia.
Hairy Cell Leukemia
Clinical features
/square6The median age of presentation is approximately
55 years, with a male predominance.
/square6Symptoms include abdominal fullness, fatigue,weakness, weight loss, and bleeding tendency.
/square6Lymphadenopathy is unusual.
Laboratory features
/square6Pancytopenia.
/square6Peripheral smear shows malignant cells with
cytoplasmic projections (“hairy cells”).
/square6Bone marrow shows presence of hyper-cellularity
and hairy cells.
Kala-azar (Visceral Leishmaniasis)
Clinical features
/square6Visceral leishmaniasis is a parasitic disease causedby the obligate intracellular protozoa Leishmania .
/square6It is also known as kala-azar (Hindi for black sick-
ness or fever) and is a systemic disease that can be
life-threatening.
/square690% of cases occur in Bangladesh, Northeastern
India, Nepal, Sudan, and Northeastern Brazil.
/square6Clinical features are organomegaly, fever and
cachexia.
Laboratory features
/square6Pancytopenia due to massive splenomegaly and
bone marrow involvement./square6Hypergammaglobulinemia
/square6Abnormal liver function tests, hypoalbuminemiaand hyperbilirubinemia.
/square6Antibodies against leishmania positive.
/square6A skin or bone marrow aspirate usually showsamastigotes.
Tropical Splenomegaly Syndrome (Hyperreactive Malarial
Splenomegaly Syndrome)
Clinical features
/square6Patient is from malaria endemic area.
/square6Recurrent attacks of malaria in the past.
Laboratory features
/square6Pancytopenia.
/square6Peripheral smear may demonstrate malarial
parasite.
Thalassemia Major
Clinical features
/square6Thalassemia is common in the Mediterranean regionespecially amongst Italians and Greeks. The thala-ssemia belt extends to India and South East Asia.
/square6Symptoms start late in the first year of life whenfetal hemoglobin levels decline.
/square6Pallor, irritability, growth retardation, hepato-splenomegaly and jaundice develop due to severe
hemolytic anemia.
/square6Characteristic chipmunk facies (frontal bossing and
prominent cheek bones) due to bone marrowexpansion.
/square6Eighty percent (80%) of untreated children diewithin the first five years of life, as a result of severeanemia, high output heart failure, and infections.
Laboratory features
/square6Signs of hemolysis such as anemia, increased
indirect (unconjugated) bilirubin, increased LDHand reduced haptoglobin levels.
/square6Hemoglobin electrophoresis shows markedly
reduced HbA and raised HbF.
/square6Peripheral smear shows hypochromia, micro-
cytosis, anisopoikilocytosis, tear drop cells andtarget cells. WBC and platelet counts are normal
unless hypersplenism develops.
/square6Bone marrow shows marked hypercellularity.
/square6The osmotic fragility test is significantly reduced.
/square6Skull X-ray shows widened diploic space and hair-
on-end appearance. Compression fractures of thevertebrae and marked osteoporosis are common.
AIDS with Mycobacterium avium Complex
Clinical features
/square6Intermittent or persistent fever, fatigue, malaise,anorexia, and weight loss.
/square6Lymphadenopathy and hepatomegaly may bepresent.

/square6Diseases of Blood429
6Laboratory features
/square6HIV serology is positive.
/square6Anemia and neutropenia from bone marrow
involvement.
/square6Elevated liver enzymes due to liver involvement.
/square6Blood culture is positive for nontuberculous
mycobacteria.
Q.Hypersplenism.
/square6Hypersplenism is a clinical syndrome characterized
by: Splenomegaly, pancytopenia or a reduction inthe number of one or more types of blood cells,hyperplasia of the precursor cells in the marrow,
and decreased RBC/platelet survival.
Causes of Hypersplenism
/square6Any disease which produces splenic enlargement
can produce hypersplenism.
Pathophysiology
/square6Spleen is the major organ of the monocyte/macro-phage system.
/square6As the blood passes through the white and red pulp,
old and defective blood cells are removed by thespleen. The macrophages in the spleen hold, retard,modify (“pitting’’), or remove (“culling’’) old andsenescent RBCs. The normal pitting function of thespleen removes nuclear residua (Howell-Jollybodies) and the normal culling function of thespleen removes senescent RBCs.
/square6All these normal activities of the spleen can bemarkedly accentuated in a large spleen leading topancytopenia (anemia, neutropenia and thrombo-cytopenia). This is called hypersplenism.
Clinical Features
/square6Hypersplenism is suspected when there iscytopenia along with splenomegaly.
Treatment of Hypersplenism
/square6Underlying causes should be treated.
/square6Splenectomy or splenic ablation by radiationtherapy may be considered if cytopenia is verysevere.
Q.Enumerate the causes of generalized lymphadeno-
pathy.
Q.Differential diagnosis of generalized lymphadeno-
pathy in an adult.
/square6Lymphadenopathy is classified as localized when
it involves only one region and generalized whenit involves more than one region.Causes of Generalized Lymphadenopathy
• Infections:  Disseminated tuberculosis, cat scratch disease,
secondary syphilis, HIV, infectious mononucleosis, histo-
plasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, cryptococcosis, toxoplas-
mosis, leshmaniasis
•Malignancy : Metastatic ca, lymphoma, leukemia
•Connective tissue diseases : Rheumatoid arthritis, SLE,
sarcoidosis
•Endocrine disorders : Hypothyroidism, Addison disease
•Drugs : Allopurinol, hydralazine, phenytoin
Differential Diagnosis of Important Causes
HIV Infection
Clinical features
/square6Common in persons with high risk sexual behavior
and intravenous drug addicts.
/square6Fever, weight loss, and chronic diarrhea may bepresent.
/square6Non-tender lymphadenopathy primarily involvingthe axillary, cervical, and occipital nodes.
Lab features
/square6HIV-ELISA test positive.
/square6Western blot test confirms the diagnosis.
Disseminated Tuberculosis
Clinical features
/square6Nodes are typically non-tender, enlarge over weeks
to months without prominent systemic symptoms,and can progress to matting and fluctuation.
/square6Fever, weight loss, night sweats.
/square6Hepatosplenomegaly.
Lab features
/square6Mantoux test may be positive.
/square6Chest X-ray may show military mottling.
/square6Lymph node or liver biopsy may show caseating
granulomas.
Infectious Mononucleosis
Clinical features
/square6Triad of fever, pharyngitis, and lymphadenopathy.
/square6Maculopapular rash may be present.
/square6Lymphadenopathy is typically symmetric andinvolves the posterior cervical nodes more than theanterior group.
/square6Lymphadenopathy may also be present in theaxillary and inguinal areas, which distinguishesinfectious mononucleosis from other causes ofpharyngitis.
Lab features
/square6Atypical lymphocytosis in the peripheral blood.
/square6Paul-Bunnel test and monospot test may be
positive.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
6430 Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
/square6Nodes are soft, nontender, and discrete.
/square6Cervical, axillary, and inguinal areas are usually
involved.
/square6Lymphadenopathy is more frequently noted at theonset of disease or in association with an exacerba-tion.
/square6Other features such as joint pain and rash (especiallymalar rash) may be present
/square6ANA and anti-dsDNA may be positive.
Brucellosis
Clinical features
/square6Fever, polyarthritis, hepatosplenomegaly
/square6Common in veterinary staff and slaughter housepersonnel.
Lab features
/square6Positive blood culture.
/square6Positive brucella agglutination test.
Lymphomas (Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin)
Clinical features
/square6Constitutional symptoms like fever and weight loss.
/square6Painless rubbery lymphadenopathy, usually in the
neck or supraclavicular fossae.
/square6Dry cough, breathlessness and dysphagia mayoccur due to mediastinal lymphadenopathy.
/square6Hepatosplenomegaly may be present.
Lab features
/square6Normochromic, normocytic anemia.
/square6LDH may be raised.
/square6Lymph node biopsy confirms the disease. Charac-
teristic Reed-Sternberg cells are found in Hodgkin
lymphoma.
Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL)
Clinical features
/square6More common in elderly males
/square6Recurrent infections are common due to immuno-deficiency.
/square6Hepatosplenomegaly.
Lab features
/square6WBC count is usually greater than 20,000/mcL.
/square6The hallmark of CLL is isolated lymphocytosis.
Usually more than 75% of the circulating cells arelymphocytes.
/square6Bone marrow shows infiltration with lymphocytes.
/square6Lymph node biopsy shows well differentiated,
small, non-cleaved lymphocytes.
CML in Blast Crisis
Clinical features
/square6Fever, hemorrhage, generalized lymphadenopathy,
bone pain and sternal tenderness.
/square6Abrupt increase in spleen size.Lab features
/square6Peripheral smear and bone marrow show more
than 20% blasts.
/square6Philadelphia chromosome is positive in mostcases.
Drugs
/square6Many drugs can cause serum sickness characterizedby fever, arthralgias, rash, and generalized lympha-denopathy. Phenytoin can cause generalized
lymphadenopathy in the absence of a serum
sickness reaction.
/square6There is temporal correlation between drug intakeand the onset of lymphadenopathy. Withdrawal ofoffending drug leads to resolution of lymphadeno-
pathy.
Q.Indications and complications of blood transfusion.
Red Blood Cell Transfusions
/square6Red blood cell transfusions are given to raise the
hematocrit levels in patients with severe anemia orto replace losses during acute bleeding episodes.
/square6Preparations containing red blood cells are mainlyof three types.
Whole Blood
/square6Whole blood contains all components of blood such
as red blood cells, plasma, and platelets. Whole
blood transfusion is used during surgery and acuteblood loss.
Packed Red Blood Cells
/square6Packed red cells do not contain any other compo-nent of blood. Each unit has a volume of about
300 mL, of which approximately 200 mL consists
of red blood cells. Packed RBC transfusion is usefulin patients with severe anemia who already have
normal plasma volume.
Autologous Packed Red Blood Cells
/square6Patients scheduled for elective surgery may donatetheir own blood beforehand for transfusion during
surgery. These units may be stored for up to 35 days.
Compatibility Testing
/square6Before transfusion, the recipient’s and the donor’s
blood are cross-matched to avoid hemolytic trans-
fusion reactions. Although many antigen systemsare present on red blood cells, only the ABO and
Rh systems are specifically tested prior to all
transfusions.
/square6Incompatible blood transfusion can lead to severeblood transfusion reactions.

/square6Diseases of Blood431
6Complications of Blood Transfusion
• Transfusion reactions (hemolytic, non-hemolytic)
• Transmission of infections (hepatitis B, HIV, hepatitis C,
malaria, syphilis)
• Circulatory overload
• Hypocalcemia (due to citrate binding to calcium in stored
blood)
• Hyperkalemia (due to potassium coming out of RBCs in
stored blood)
• Hypothermia (due to massive blood transfusion of fridge
stored blood)
• Thrombocytopenia (seen in massive blood transfusion
because platelets do not survive for long in stored blood)
• Iron overload (seen in thalassemia due to recurrent blood
transfusion)
Q.Hemolytic transfusion reactions.
/square6Severe hemolytic reactions occur if ABO incompa-
tible blood is transfused. Most of these cases are
due to clinical or laboratory errors or mislabeledspecimens.
/square6Hemolysis is rapid and intravascular, releasing freehemoglobin into the plasma. Hemolytic transfusionreactions caused by minor antigen systems (suchas Duffy, Kidd, Kell,) are less severe and hemolysisis extravascular.
Clinical Features
/square6Major hemolytic transfusion reactions cause feverand chills, flank pain and red or brown urine (dueto hemoglobinuria).
/square6In severe cases, there may be apprehension,dyspnea, hypotension, vascular collapse, DIC, andacute renal failure. In patients under anesthesia orin coma, above signs may not be manifest and DIC
may be the presenting mode, with oozing of blood
from puncture sites and hemoglobinuria.
Laboratory Findings
/square6Evidence of renal failure and DIC.
/square6Plasma appears pink due to hemoglobinuria.
/square6Urine may show hemoglobinuria.
/square6Indirect bilirubin may be elevated due to hemo-lysis.
Treatment
/square6If a hemolytic transfusion reaction is suspected,
blood transfusion must be immediately stopped.
/square6Identification of the recipient and of the blood
should be checked. The donor transfusion bag andinfusion set should be returned to the blood bank,
along with a fresh blood sample of the patient for
retyping and repeat cross-matching.
/square6Patient should be hydrated well to prevent renalfailure due to hemoglobinuria. Forced alkaline
diuresis may help prevent renal damage.Q.Non-hemolytic transfusion reactions.
Leukoagglutinin Reactions
/square6These reactions occur due to antibodies formed in
the recipient against antigens present on white
blood cells of donor by previous transfusions.
/square6Patients will develop fever and chills and in severecases, cough and dyspnea may occur. Chest X-ray
may show transient pulmonary infiltrates. Sincethere is no hemolysis, Hb rises as expected after
transfusion.
/square6Treatment involves antihistamines such as di-phenhydramine, antipyretics (paracetamol) and
corticosteroids. Removal of leukocytes by filtrationbefore blood storage will reduce the incidence of
these reactions.
Anaphylactic Reactions
/square6These reactions are usually due to plasma proteins
present in the donor blood. Patients will develop
urticaria or bronchospasm during a transfusion.
/square6These reactions respond to antihistamines andcorticosteroids. There is no need to stop transfusion
unless it is very severe. Patients with such reactionsmay require transfusion of washed red blood cells
to avoid future severe reactions.
Reactions due to Contaminated Blood
/square6Transfusion of blood contaminated with bacteria
(gram-negative) can lead to septicemia and shockfrom endotoxin.
/square6If this is suspected, the offending unit should be
cultured and the patient treated with appropriate
antibiotics.
Q.Transfusion-related acute lung injury (TRALI).
/square6Transfusion–related acute lung injury (TRALI) is a
syndrome characterized by acute respiratory distress
following transfusion. It is caused by anti-HLA
and/or antigranulocyte antibodies in donor plasmathat agglutinate and degranulate recipient granulo-
cytes within the lung.
Clinical Features
/square6Incidence is 1 in 5,000 to one in 10,000, but many
cases are mild. Mild to moderate transfusion-related
acute lung injury probably is commonly missed.
/square6Symptoms of TRALI typically develop within
6 hours of a transfusion. Patients develop breath-lessness. There may be associated fever, cyanosis, and
hypotension. Examination reveals bilateral crepi-
tations. Chest X-ray shows evidence of bilateralpulmonary edema (non-cardiogenic pulmonary
edema or ARDS).

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
6432 Treatment
/square6Treatment of TRALI is supportive. Mild forms of
TRALI respond to oxygen supplementation. Severe
forms may require mechanical ventilation and ICU
support. Majority of patients recover within 72 to
96 hours.
Q.Transfusion of blood components.
Packed RBCs
/square6See above.
Fresh Frozen Plasma
/square6Fresh frozen plasma (FFP) is prepared from single
units of whole blood or from plasma collected by
apheresis techniques. It is frozen at minus 18 tominus 30ºC within eight hours of collection and canbe stored up to one year.
/square6FFP contains all of the coagulation factors presentin the blood.
/square6Contains albumin.
/square6ABO compatibility is required before transfusion,but Rh typing is not required.
/square6A dose of 10 to 15 mL/kg (3–5 units) will correct
coagulation abnormality.
Indications
/square6Bleeding due to excess warfarin, vitamin K defi-
ciency, or deficiency of multiple coagulation factors(e.g. DIC, liver disease, dilutional coagulopathy).
/square6Treatment of TTP.
/square6Hemophilia.Cryoprecipitate
/square6Cryo is made from FFP which is frozen andrepeatedly thawed in a laboratory.
/square6It contains high concentration of certain clottingfactors such as Factor VIII, von Willebrand factorand fibrinogen. Unlike FFP, cryoprecipitate does not
contain all the clotting factors (factors IX and X).
Cryoprecipitate does not contain albumin also.
Indications
/square6Fibrinogen deficiency.
/square6von Willebrand disease and hemophilia A ifrecombinant products are not available.
Platelet Concentrate (PC) or Platelet Rich Plasma (PRP)
/square6One unit is made from four or five donations ofwhole blood, or from a single platelet apheresis
technique.
/square6Stored at 20–24°C and must be kept agitated toavoid clumping.
/square6Shelf life up to 5 days from collection.
/square6ABO compatibility is required, though ABO incom-
patible platelets can be used.
/square6One unit of platelet concentrate generally increasesplatelet count by 4000–8000/mm
3.
Indications
/square6Bleeding due to thrombocytopenia or platelet dys-function. Platelets should be transfused irrespectiveof bleeding when count is <10,000/mm
3.
/square6Prior to surgery in thrombocytopenic patients.

7
433Q.Enumerate the functions of liver
Metabolism
• Carbohydrate• Protein• Lipids• Drugs and alcohol• Hormones
Excretion
• Bile salts• Bilirubin
Synthesis
• Albumin• Coagulation factors• Complement factors• Haptoglobin• Ceruloplasmin• Transferrin• Bile acids
Storage
• Iron• Copper• Vitamins A, D and B
12
[Remember the nemonic MESS, M—metabolism, E—excretion,
S—synthesis, S—storage]
Q.What are the signs and symptoms of liver disease?
Signs and Symptoms of Liver Disease
/square6Jaundice (acute hepatitis, decompensated cirrhosis,
liver abscess, liver metastases, obstructive jaundice).
/square6Easy fatigability and malaise.
/square6Altered mental status (due to hepatic encephalopathy).
/square6Pruritus (in obstructive jaundice).
/square6Abdominal distension (ascites, hepatomegaly).
/square6Light-colored stools (in obstructive jaundice).
/square6Bleeding tendency (due to reduced synthesis ofclotting factors).Diseases of Liver
and Biliary System
/square6Peripheral edema (cirrhosis with portal HTN).
/square6Gynecomastia (chronic liver disease).
/square6Spider angioma (acute or chronic liver disease).
/square6Palmar erythema (chronic liver disease).
/square6Flapping tremors (hepatic encephalopathy).
/square6Ascites (cirrhosis of liver with portal HTN).
/square6Right upper quadrant tenderness (acute hepatitis,
fatty liver, congested liver, hepatic abscess).
/square6Hepatomegaly (fatty liver, acute hepatitis, hepa-toma, liver metastases, liver abscess, congestivehepatomegaly in CCF).
Q.Liver function tests (LFT) and their interpretation.
Q.Diagnostic tests for the evaluation of liver disease.
Liver function tests are done for following purposes:
/square6Detecting hepatic dysfunction.
/square6Assessing the severity of liver injury.
/square6Monitoring the course of liver diseases and the
response to treatment.
/square6Refining the diagnosis.
Tests for Liver Injury
Aminotransferases (Transaminases): AST and ALT
/square6Normal circulating liver enzyme levels are due to
enzymes released during normal hepatocyte
turnover. These liver enzymes are increased duringliver cell injury or death.
/square6Normal serum levels are 5–40 IU/L.
/square6Serum AST and ALT level increases in acute hepato-cyte injury due to viruses (viral hepatitis), toxins(alcohol, drugs) and ischemia (ischemic hepatitis).Elevated ALT is more specific for liver injury.
Because AST is present in the heart, skeletal muscle,
kidneys, and pancreas, elevated AST may reflectrhabdomyolysis or injury to one of these organs.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
7434 /square6Enzymes are usually less than 200 to 300 IU/L in
alcoholic hepatitis whereas they are 1000 IU/L ormore in acute viral hepatitis or shortly after acutebiliary obstruction, for example, during passage ofa gallstone. Aminotransferase levels may be low inmassive hepatic necrosis because liver injury is so
extensive that little enzyme activity remains.
/square6Aminotransferase levels can be used to monitor
activity of chronic liver disease such as chronichepatitis B or C.
/square6In most liver diseases, the ratio of AST to ALT isusually less than or equal to 1. However, ratios areusually 2 or more in alcoholic fatty liver andalcoholic hepatitis, reflecting increased synthesis as
well as secretion of mitochondrial AST into plasma
and selective loss of ALT activity due to pyridoxinedeficiency seen in alcoholism. An elevated AST/ALT ratio can also be found in fulminant hepatitisdue to Wilson’s disease.
Tests for Cholestasis
Alkaline Phosphatase
/square6Alkaline phosphatases can be found in many organs(liver, bile ducts, intestine, bone, kidney, placenta,and leukocytes). Serum alkaline phosphatasemainly comes from liver and bone.
/square6It catalyzes the release of phosphate from estersubstrates at an alkaline pH.
/square6The normal level in adults is less than 110 IU/L.
Alkaline phosphatase levels are elevated in
cholestatic hepatobiliary diseases. Modest increases(up to 3 times normal) occur in many hepatic paren-chymal disorders, such as hepatitis and cirrhosis.Larger increases (3 to 10 times normal) are seen inbiliary obstruction. Major elevations also occur with
intrahepatic cholestasis and with infiltrative or mass
lesions (malignancy, lymphoma, leukemia). It is alsoelevated in bone disorders (Paget’s disease, osteo-malacia, bone metastases), during rapid bone growthin children, pregnancy, and chronic renal failure.
/square6To know whether elevated ALP is due to hepato-biliary disease, levels of 52-nucleotidase can bemeasured. If 52-nucleotidase levels are also elevatedalong with ALP, it means ALP elevation is due tohepatobiliary disease.
5′-nucleotidase
/square65′-nucleotidase is a plasma membrane enzyme
which cleaves phosphate from the 52 position fromadenosine or inosine phosphate. Its levels are elevated
in cholestasis. Its major use is to confirm whether
an elevated serum alkaline phosphatase is hepaticin origin. It can be increased in late pregnancy.
Gamma-Glutamyl Transpeptidase (GGT)
/square6The normal range is 0 to 51 international units per
liter (IU/L)./square6GGT is present in many tissues. Its level is increased
in hepatobiliary diseases, but is not specific tohepatobiliary diseases. It can also be elevated inmyocardial infarction, neuromuscular diseases,pancreatic disease, pulmonary disease, and diabetes.Its levels are especially elevated in alcoholic liver
disease. Hence, it is sometimes used for monitoring
abstinence from alcohol. GGT levels parallel thoseof ALP; hence, it can be used to confirm whetherALP elevation is due to hepatobiliary disease.
Tests to Assess Metabolic Function
/square6Bilirubin, ammonia and various drugs are meta-bolized or detoxified in the liver. Serum levels ofthese metabolites can be a sensitive indicator of liver
disease.
Bilirubin
/square6Normally, total bilirubin is mostly unconjugated,
with values of <1.2 mg/dL.
/square6Direct hyperbilirubinemia is seen in cholestatichepatobiliary diseases and Dubin-Johnson disease.
/square6Indirect hyperbilirubinemia is found in Gilbert’ssyndrome, Crigler-Najjar syndromes, and hemolysis.
/square6High bilirubin levels correlate with a poorerprognosis in alcoholic hepatitis, primary biliarycirrhosis, and fulminant hepatic failure.
Ammonia
/square6Ammonia is a by-product of amino acid metabolismand is removed from blood by the liver, convertedto urea in Krebs cycle, and excreted by the kidneys.Normal serum level is 15–45 micrograms per
deciliter ( μg/dL).
/square6Ammonia levels are elevated in liver dysfunction
and portosystemic shunting. Measurements of bloodammonia are used to confirm a diagnosis of hepatic
encephalopathy and to monitor the success of therapy.
/square6Elevated ammonia levels also occur when ammonia
production is increased by intestinal flora (e.g. aftera high-protein meal or gastrointestinal bleeding),
by the kidney (in response to metabolic alkalosis
or hypokalemia), or in rare genetic diseases thataffect urea cycle.
Drug Clearance
/square6Bromosulfophthalein (BSP) clearance can quantifyhepatic function, but rarely used in clinical practice.
Tests for Hepatic Synthetic Function
Prothrombin Time
/square6Prothrombin time (PT) reflects the plasma concen-
trations of factors VII, X, and V, prothrombin, and
fibrinogen.
/square6Normal value is 11–13.5 seconds, or INR (internationalnormalized ratio) of 0.8–1.1.

/square6Diseases of Liver and Biliary System435
7/square6Since clotting factors are synthesized in liver, a
prolonged PT occurs in liver diseases. ProlongedPT can also occur due to vitamin K deficiency, onecause of which is malabsorption from cholestaticliver disease since bile juice is important for theabsorption of this fat soluble vitamin.
Serum Albumin Level
/square6The normal range is 3.5–5.5 grams per deciliter
(g/dL). Albumin is produced solely by the liver.
Hence albumin levels can be decreased in liverdysfunction and there will be reversal of albuminglobulin ratio (normal 2:1).
/square6Other causes of low albumin are nephrotic syndrome,protein-losing enteropathy, severe burns, exfolia-tive dermatitis, and major gastrointestinal bleeding.
Liver Biopsy
/square6Liver biopsy is useful in the diagnosis of diffuse orlocalized parenchymal diseases, including chronichepatitis, cirrhosis, and malignancy.
/square6Liver biopsy for diffuse disease can be done blindly.However, localized disease such as tumors requiresbiopsy under ultrasound or radiographic guidance.Liver biopsy can also be done under direct visualiza-tion during laparoscopy or laparotomy.
/square6Contraindications include coagulopathy, high-grade biliary obstruction, and biliary sepsis.
Other Tests used in Liver Disease (Not included underLiver Function Tests)
Examination of Urine and Stool
/square6Bilirubinuria indicates increase in plasma conju-gated bilirubin levels. Stool occult blood may be
positive due to portal gastropathy, portal hyper-
tension and GI malignancy which might have meta-stasized to liver. Melena indicates upper GI bleed.
Hematologic Tests in Liver Disease
/square6Anemia can occur due to bleeding esophagealvarices, hypersplenism or bone marrow suppressionby alcohol. Pancytopenia can occur due to hyper-splenism or bone marrow suppression by alcohol.
/square6Target cells (erythrocytes with an expanded cellmembrane) may be found in chronic liver diseasedue to abnormalities in serum lipids. Spur cells(acanthocytes) can occur in advanced alcoholic
cirrhosis.
Tests for Specific Liver Diseases
/square6Specific tests for viral antigens, nucleic acids, and
antibodies are available for the hepatitis viruses(hepatitis A, B, C, D, E) as well as Epstein-Barr virus,cytomegalovirus and herpesviruses.
/square6Antimitochondrial antibodies are virtually diag-nostic of primary biliary cirrhosis. Antinuclear,anti-smooth muscle and anti-liver microsomal
antibodies are present in autoimmune hepatitis.
/square6Iron studies may help to rule out hemochromatosis.Serum copper land ceruloplasmin levels may help
to rule out Wilson’s disease.
Q.Describe the liver function tests in acute hepatitis
and obstructive jaundice.
LFTs in Acute Hepatitis
/square6The serum aminotransferases AST and ALT
(previously called SGOT and SGPT) are increased
in acute hepatitis (400 to 4000 IU or more). Patientswith viral hepatitis usually have aminotransferasesgreater than 500 U/L, with the ALT greater than orequal to the AST. Patients with alcoholic hepatitisusually have an AST at least 2 times more than ALT.
/square6Serum alkaline phosphatase is normal or onlymildly elevated.
/square6Bilirubin level in acute hepatitis range from 5 to20 mg/dL. Jaundice is usually visible in the scleraor skin when the serum bilirubin is more than2.5 mg/dL. Both conjugated and unconjugatedbilirubin rise in acute hepatitis.
/square6Prothrombin time (PT) may be prolonged andreflects a severe hepatic synthetic defect, signifiesextensive hepatocellular necrosis, and indicates aworse prognosis.
/square6Serum albumin is usually normal in acute viralhepatitis. Globulin level may be mildly elevated.
LFTs in Obstructive Jaundice
/square6AST and ALT are only moderately elevated inbiliary obstruction.
/square6Serum alkaline phosphatase is markedly elevated(>3–10 times normal). 5 ′ nucleotidase and Gama
glutamyt transferase are also elevated and usually
parallel that of alkaline phosphatase.
/square6Conjugated bilirubin is more than unconjugatedbilirubin.
/square6Prothrombin time (PT) may be prolonged secon-dary to Vit K malabsorption because bile juice isrequired for the absorption of this fat solublevitamin.
/square6Serum albumin and globulin levels are usuallynormal.
Q.Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography
(ERCP).
/square6ERCP is a procedure where a specialized side-
viewing endoscope is passed into the second part
of duodenum allowing for instruments to be passedinto the bile or pancreatic ducts. A small cathetercan be introduced into the bile or pancreatic duct,and radiographic contrast medium is injected underfluoroscopic monitoring to visualize the pancreatic

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
7436 and biliary tree. A very fine caliber “baby” endo-
scope can also be introduced into the duct of interestfor direct visualization.
/square6ERCP is a technically demanding procedure, and
there is risk of serious complications (e.g. pancrea-
titis).
Indications for ERCP
/square6Removal of stones from CBD.
/square6Endoscopic therapy of postoperative biliary leaksand strictures.
/square6Identifying and treating underlying cause inpatients with recurrent acute pancreatitis.
/square6Treatment of symptomatic strictures in chronicpancreatitis.
/square6Diagnosis and treatment of symptomatic pancreatic-duct stones.
/square6Treatment of pancreatic-duct disruptions or leaksby placement of bridging or transpapillarypancreatic stents.
/square6Draining symptomatic pancreatic pseudocysts.
/square6Palliation of biliary obstruction in patients withpancreatic or biliary cancer.
/square6Tissue sampling in patients with pancreatic, biliaryand ampullary cancers.
/square6Biliary pancreatitis.
/square6Patients with type I sphincter of Oddi dysfunction(SOD) respond to ERCP guided sphincterotomy.
Complications for ERCP
/square6Pancreatitis
/square6Bleeding
/square6Sepsis
/square6Perforation
Q.Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography
(MRCP).
/square6MRCP is a new noninvasive technique for evaluat-
ing the intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile ducts andthe pancreatic duct.
/square6MRCP is a digital reconstruction technique basedon an abdominal MRI scan. It is noninvasive andhas excellent sensitivity and specificity.UnlikeERCP, MRCP does not require contrast material tobe administered into the ductal system. However,MRCP does not allow any intervention to be per-
formed, such as stone extraction, stent insertion, or
biopsy.
/square6Because of its relative safety, it is useful forscreening patients with a low likelihood of disease.
In those with a higher probability, ERCP is still the
procedure of choice because of its therapeuticoptions.
/square6MRCP has lower resolution than conventional
direct cholangiography and can miss small stones(<4 mm), small ampullary lesions, primary scleros-
ing cholangitis, and strictures of the ducts. MRCPalso has difficulty visualizing small stones in thepancreatic duct.
Q.Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography (PTC).
/square6PTC is an invasive technique requiring transhepatic
insertion of a needle into a dilated bile duct under
ultrasound or MRI guidance, followed by injection
of contrast material to opacify the bile ducts. It isdone under local anesthesia.
/square6PTC is useful in patients who have biliary duct
dilation on ultrasonography or other imaging test
but not candidates for ERCP.
/square6PTC is more accurate than ultrasonography or CTscan for identifying the cause and site of biliary tract
obstruction. However, PTC is technically more
difficult and has more complications.
/square6PTC can also be used for therapeutic interventionslike drainage of infected bile in cholangitis, extrac-
tion of biliary tract stones, dilation of benign biliary
strictures, or placement of a stent across a malignantstricture.
/square6Complications include bacteremia, and hemobilia.
Q.Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS).
/square6Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) is a technique where
an ultrasound transducer is attached to the tip of
an endoscope and passes into the upper GI tract toobtain echo images. EUS examination resemblesstandard endoscopy of the upper gastrointestinaltract.
/square6It provides good resolution images of the gut walland the surrounding organs and blood vessels.
/square6It is useful to evaluate pancreas, bile ducts, for
obtaining FNAC, etc.
Q.Indications and contraindications of liver biopsy.
/square6Liver biopsy can be done by many methods: Percutaneous,
transjugular, laparoscopic, or ultrasound or CT-guided fine needle aspiration (FNA). Percutaneousliver biopsy is the simplest and most commonly per-formed approach.
Indications for Liver Biopsy
/square6Diagnosis, grading and staging of liver diseases,such as chronic hepatitis B or C, primary biliary
cirrhosis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, auto-
immune hepatitis, non-alcoholic steatohepatitis(NASH), hemochromatosis or Wilson’s disease.
/square6Unexplained liver disease or abnormal liver
function tests.
/square6Monitoring the liver following a liver transplant.
/square6Diagnosis of a liver mass.
/square6Pyrexia of unknown origin.

/square6Diseases of Liver and Biliary System437
7Contraindications for Liver Biopsy
/square6Significant blood clotting abnormalities.
/square6Severe anemia.
/square6Severe obstructive jaundice.
/square6Severe ascites.
/square6Severe kidney failure.
/square6Excessive obesity.
/square6Local skin infection at the biopsy site.
/square6Suspected hemangioma or vascular tumor.
/square6Uncooperative patient.
Q.Discuss the metabolism of bilirubin.
Q.Physiological and biochemical basis of jaundice.
/square6Bilirubin is the degradation product of the heme
moiety of hemoproteins. Normal adults produceabout 4 mg bilirubin per kg body weight per day.
70 to 90% of bilirubin comes from degradation ofhemoglobin and the remainder comes from the
degradation of nonhemoglobin hemoproteins suchas myoglobin, the P-450 cytochromes, catalase, andperoxidase.
/square6Heme is converted to biliverdin (green pigment)by hemeoxygenase.  Biliverdin is nontoxic and water-
soluble. Biliverdin is converted to bilirubin bybiliverdin reductase.  Bilirubin is bound to albumin
in plasma and transported to liver.
/square6The total plasma bilirubin concentration in normaladults is less than 1.5 mg/dL. Most of the plasmabilirubin is unconjugated and only a small fractionis conjugated. Unconjugated bilirubin is also calledindirect bilirubin because it reacts very slowly with
diazo reagent used to estimate the amount of
bilirubin in plasma. Conjugated bilirubin is alsocalled direct bilirubin because it reacts fast withdiazo reagent without the addition of agents suchas ethanol or urea. The “indirect”-reacting bilirubin
Figure 7.1 Bilirubin metabolism

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
7438 is calculated by subtracting the direct-reacting
bilirubin from the total.
/square6In the liver, uptake of unconjugated bilirubin fromplasma happens by a facilitated transport process
and to a lesser extent by diffusion. Liver converts
unconjugated bilirubin into conjugated bilirubinmono- and diglucuronides by a specific UDP-glucuronyl transferase. These bilirubin mono- anddiglucuronides are transported into bile by acanalicular membrane ATP–dependent transporter.
Conjugation of bilirubin makes it more soluble and
enhances its elimination from the body. Conjugatedbilirubin is loosely bound to albumin and can beexcreted by the kidneys. Hence bilirubinuria isfound in obstructive or cholestatic jaundice. New-born infants have decreased capacity to conjugate
bilirubin which leads to unconjugated hyper-
bilirubinemia (physiologic jaundice of thenewborn). If severe, this can lead to CNS damage(kernicterus). Exposure to blue light (phototherapy)converts bilirubin to water-soluble photoisomerswhich are easily excreted in bile, thereby decreasing
CNS damage.
/square6Following canalicular secretion, conjugated bili-
rubin enters the biliary tree, reaches the duodenum,and passes down the gastrointestinal tract. In the
gut (ileum and colon), most of the conjugated
bilirubin is converted into urobilinogen by bacteria.Urobilinogen is reabsorbed by the intestine, returnsto the liver through the portal circulation, and isreexcreted into bile (enterohepatic recirculation).Any urobilinogen not taken up by the liver is
cleared by the kidneys.
/square6Urine urobilinogen is increased in hemolysis, which
increases the load of bilirubin entering the gut andtherefore the amount of urobilinogen formed and
reabsorbed, and in liver disease due to reduced
extraction of urobilinogen by the liver leading toincreased excretion by the kidneys. In obstructivejaundice, conjugated bilirubin does not enter thegut; hence there is no formation of urobilinogenleading to reduced excretion of urobilinogen in the
urine.
/square6Gilbert’s syndrome and Crigler-Najjar syndrome
types 1 and 2 are characterized by unconjugatedhyperbilirubinemia due to genetic defects in
bilirubin conjugation. In contrast, Dubin-Johnson
syndrome is characterized by conjugated or mixedhyperbilirubinemia due to defects in excretion ofconjugated bilirubin into the bile.
Q.van den Bergh reaction.
/square6van den Bergh reaction is a method used to estimate
bilirubin concentration in the plasma. This testinvolves the reaction of bilirubin with a diazocompound (diazotized sulfanilic acid), producing
azopigments which can be quantified byspectrophotometry. Conjugated bilirubin reacts
directly with diazo compound without the additionof alcohol hence it is also called direct bilirubin.Unconjugated bilirubin requires the addition ofalcohol and hence called indirect bilirubin.
/square6The indirect and direct bilirubin can be distin-guished based upon their rate of production in thepresence or absence of alcohol. The fractionproduced within one minute without the additionof alcohol represents the concentration of direct
bilirubin. Fast reaction of direct bilirubin is due to
the absence of internal hydrogen bonding andwater solubility. Total bilirubin is that amount thatreacts in 30 minutes after the addition of alcohol.Indirect bilirubin is calculated by subtracting directbilirubin from total bilirubin. Total bilirubin
concentration by this technique is usually below
1 mg/dL.
/square6van den Bergh reaction slightly overestimates directbilirubin because a fraction of unconjugated
bilirubin also gives a direct reaction. Endogenous
substances, such as plasma lipids, and drugs, suchas propranolol, can interfere with the diazo reactionand produce unreliable results. Bilirubin complexedto albumin (delta bilirubin) also may give a directreaction.
Q.Enumerate the causes of tender hepatomegaly.
• Viral hepatitis
• Acute alcoholic hepatitis• Hepatic amebiasis• Liver abscess• Acute fatty liver• Congestive cardiac failure• Hepatocellular ca• Actinomycosis of the liver• Weil’s disease (leptospirosis)
Q. Enumerate the causes of jaundice. How do you
approach a case of jaundice?
/square6Jaundice is defined as yellowish discoloration of
skin, mucous membranes and sclera due to hyper-bilirubinemia. Hyperbilirubinemia may be due toabnormalities in the formation, transport, metabolism,
and excretion of bilirubin. Total serum bilirubin is
normally 0.3–1 mg/dL. Jaundice is clinically
detectable when levels are more than 2.5 mg/dL.
Causes of Jaundice
Predominantly unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia
•Increased production: Hemolysis, breakdown of hematomas,
ineffective erythropoiesis
•Impaired hepatic uptake: Heart failure, portosystemic shunts,
drugs such as rifampin, probenecid
•Impaired conjugation: Gilbert’s syndrome Crigler-Najjar
syndrome, neonates, hyperthyroidism, cirrhosis

/square6Diseases of Liver and Biliary System439
7Predominantly conjugated hyperbilirubinemia
•Hepatic causes:  Drugs, toxins, viral hepatitis, alcoholic liver
disease, hemochromatosis, primary biliary cholangitis,
primary sclerosing cholangitis, steatohepatitis, Wilsondisease , Dubin-Johnson syndrome and Rotor syndrome.
•Extrahepatic causes:  Choledocholithiasis, biliary atresia,
carcinoma of biliary duct, sclerosing cholangitis, choledochal
cyst, external pressure on common duct, pancreatitis, ca headof pancreas, periampulary carcinoma.
Approach to a Case of Jaundice
/square6The cause of jaundice in majority of cases can be diag-
nosed by careful history and physical examination.
History
/square6Enquire about the onset and duration of jaundice.Patients often notice darkening of urine even beforethe onset of jaundice which indicates the actual timeof onset of problem more accurately than onset ofjaundice. Jaundice appearing over a few days to aweek implies acute hepatitis (viral, toxins, lepto-
spirosis, etc). Jaundice appearing over the course
of weeks implies a subacute hepatitis or extra-hepatic obstruction due to malignancy, gallstone,chronic pancreatitis, or stricture of common bileduct. Intermittent jaundice may indicate gallstones,ampullary carcinoma, or drug induced hepatitis.
/square6History of constitutional symptoms such as fever,nausea, vomiting, myalgia, malaise, etc. suggestsviral hepatitis or liver abscess as the cause ofjaundice. Also enquire about changes in stool color,pruritus, steatorrhea, and abdominal pain (includ-ing location, severity, duration, and radiation). Clay
colored stools, pruritus, and pain abdomen are
classically seen in obstructive jaundice. Right hypo-chondrial pain can also be present in acute hepatitis,liver abscess, and hepatocellular carcinoma.
/square6A past history of jaundice may implicate chronichepatitis, cirrhosis, or a genetic hyperbilirubinemia
(i.e. Gilbert’s or Dubin–Johnson syndrome) as the
cause.
/square6History of coagulopathy (e.g. easy bruising orbleeding, tarry or bloody stools) indicates severeliver disease. History of melena and hematemesismay be present in cirrhosis of liver with portal
hypertension.
/square6Arthritis or urticaria may sometimes precede the
onset of jaundice in hepatitis-B infection. Arthritismay also accompany or precede autoimmunehepatitis.
/square6Drug history should be obtained in detail as many
drugs are known to produce hepatic dysfunction
and jaundice (e.g. isoniazid, rifampicin, estrogens,antiepileptics, etc.)
/square6History of contact with others with jaundice, recenttransfusions, needle or narcotic use indicatespotential exposure to hepatitis viruses. Recent
foreign travel to areas of poor sanitation carries arisk of exposure to hepatitis A virus or Entamoeba
histolytica . Farmers, sewage workers, and workers
at slaughter houses are at risk of getting lepto-spirosis.
/square6Any History of of surgery either recent or remotemay have implications in a case of jaundice. Typeof anesthesia (certain anesthetic agents can causehepatitis), hypotension during surgery (ischemichepatitis), injury to bile duct during surgery canpresent with jaundice. Surgery on biliary tract in
remote past can present with jaundice due to biliary
stricture.
/square6A family history of jaundice or liver disease maysuggest hereditary hyperbilirubinemias (i.e.
Crigler–Najjar, Gilbert’s, Dubin-Johnson, or Rotor’s
syndromes), Wilson’s disease, hemochromatosis,and alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency. Family historyof anemia with jaundice may suggest hereditaryspherocytosis.
/square6Personal history should include questions aboutrisk factors for hepatitis such as amount andduration of alcohol use, injection drug use, and highrisk sexual behavior.
Physical
General Examination
/square6Weight loss is usually present in hepatocellularcarcinoma, liver metastases, or cirrhosis.
/square6Look for the presence of stigmata of chronic liverdisease which includes spider nevi, palmar ery-thema, gynecomastia, decreased body hair, caput
medusae, Dupuytren’s contractures, parotid gland
enlargement, and testicular atrophy.
/square6Purpura and ecchymotic patches on the skinindicate significant liver impairment.
/square6Lymph node enlargement especially left supraclavi-cular and periumbilical indicates the possibility of
hepatocellular carcinoma.
/square6Raised JVP can indicate right-sided heart failure,
which can cause hepatic congestion and cirrhosis(cardiac cirrhosis).
/square6Pedal edema is common in cirrhosis of liver withportal HTN.
Systemic Examination
/square6The abdominal examination should provide infor-
mation on the presence of hepatosplenomegaly,
or ascites. Jaundice with ascites indicates eithercirrhosis or malignancy with peritoneal spread.Splenomegaly is also common in cirrhosis of liverwith portal HTN. Right upper quadrant tendernesswith palpable gallbladder (Courvoisier sign)
suggests obstruction of the cystic duct due to malig-
nancy.
/square6CVS examination to rule out cardiac failure espe-cially right heart failure because it can cause
congestive hepatitis and cardiac cirrhosis.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
7440 /square6RS examination: Lung malignancy can metastasize
to liver. Tuberculosis from lungs can involve liver.Pleural effusion can be present in cirrhosis withportal HTN.
/square6Nervous system examination:  Hepatic encephalo-
pathy can occur due to liver failure. Wilson diseasecan involve both CNS and liver.
Investigations
/square6Complete blood count:  Anemia and reticulocytosis is
seen in hemolytic jaundice. Leukocytosis andneutrophilia are common in cholangitis andalcoholic hepatitis. Eosinophilia plus jaundice is
suspicious for toxic hepatitis.
/square6Liver function tests:  These are helpful to confirm the
presence of liver impairment and also to diagnosethe type of jaundice (Fig. 7.2).
/square6Blood urea, creatinine:  Can be elevated.
/square6Blood sugar level:  Hypoglycemia can occur in severe
liver disease due to reduced gluconeogenesis.
/square6Serum electrolytes./square6Urine examination:  Normally bile pigments are
absent in the urine. A jaundiced patient with absenturinary bilirubin indicates hemolytic jaundice or ahepatic defect in bilirubin uptake or conjugation.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen.
/square6Hepatocellular workup:  Viral serologies, autoimmune
antibodies, serum ceruloplasmin, ferritin.
/square6Cholestatic workup:  In addition to ultrasound, CT,
magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography(MRCP), endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreato-graphy (ERCP), percutaneous transhepatic cholan-giography (PTC), endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) arehelpful.
/square6Liver biopsy if indicated.
Treatment
/square6The underlying cause of jaundice and anycomplications should be treated.
/square6Jaundice itself requires no treatment in adults(unlike in neonates).
/square6Severe itching may be relieved with cholestyramine
which is a bile salt binding compound.
Figure 7.2 Approach to a case of jaundice
Figure 7.2 explains how to diagnose the cause of jaundice.
Q.Discuss briefly the congenital hyperbilirubinemic disorders.
TABLE 7.1: Congenital hyperbilirubinemic disorders
Inheritance Defect Type of hyper- Features
bilirubinemia
Gilbert’s syndrome Autosomal dominant Mild deficiency of Unconjugated Benign, asymptomatic jaundice. More
UDP-glucuronyl common in males. Urobilinogen in the urine
transferase is increased but there is no bilirubinuria.
Peripheral blood smear, reticulocyte count
and haptoglobin are normal (suggesting
absence of hemolysis). Hyperbilirubinemiaincreases after fasting. No treatment required
(Phenobarbital can increase the activity
of UDP-glucuronyl transferase). Prognosisexcellent.
(contd. )

/square6Diseases of Liver and Biliary System441
7Q.Discuss the clinical and laboratory differentiation of different types of jaundice.TABLE 7.1: Congenital hyperbilirubinemic disorders ( contd. )
Inheritance Defect Type of hyper- Features
bilirubinemia
Crigler-Najjar Autosomal recessive Complete absence Unconjugated Seen in infants. Bilirubin is very high (20
syndrome type I of UDP-glucuronyl to 25 mg/dL, can be as high as 50 mg/dL).
transferase Stool color is normal, but fecal urobilinogen
excretion is diminished due to the markedreduction in the conjugation of bilirubin.Peripheral blood smear, reticulocyte countand haptoglobin are normal (suggestingabsence of hemolysis). Prognosis poor.Death occurs due to kernicterus, unlessvigorously treated.
Crigler-Najjar Autosomal recessive Partial absence of Unconjugated Usually benign, kernicterus occurs rarely.
syndrome type II UDP-glucuronyl Hyperbilirubinemia can be reduced by
transferase treatment with phenobarbital.
Dubin-Johnson Autosomal recessive Reduced ability to Conjugated Benign, asymptomatic jaundice. Gallbladder
syndrome transport conjugated not visualized on oral cholecystography.
bilirubin into biliary BSP (bromsulphthalein) test shows reducedcanaliculi  clearance. Liver darkly pigmented on gross
examination. Biopsy shows centrilobularbrown pigment. No treatment required.Prognosis excellent.
Rotor’s syndrome Autosomal recessive Faulty excretory Conjugated Similar to Dubin-Johnson syndrome, but
function of liver is not pigmented and the gallbladderhepatocytes is visualized on oral cholecystography.
Prognosis excellent.
TABLE 7.2: Clinical and laboratory differentiation of different types of jaundice
Clinical features Hemolytic Hepatocellular Obstructive
• Color of jaundice Lemon yellow Orange yellow Greenish yellow
• Depth of jaundice Mild Moderate Deep
• Pruritus Absent Sometimes Present• Bleeding tendency Absent Present Present (late)
• Bradycardia Absent Absent Present• Pallor Present Absent Absent• Splenomegaly Present Sometimes Absent• Features of liver cell failure Absent Present Present (late)
• Stool color Normal Normal Light color (clay color)
• Urine color Normal Dark Dark
Laboratory features
• Bilirubin Predominantly unconjugated Mixed Predominantly conjugated
• ALT, AST Normal Markedly increased Minimally increased
• Alkaline phosphatase Normal Increased Markedly increased
• Serum albumin Unchanged Decreased Unchanged
• Prothrombin time Normal Prolonged and does not respond Prolonged in late stages and
to parenteral vitamin K responds to parenteral vitamin K
• Urine bilirubin None Increased Increased
• Urine urobilinogen Increased Increased Absent

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
7442 Q.Describe the etiology, epidemiology, clinical
features, laboratory features and treatment of
hepatitis A. Add a note on its prevention.
Many viruses can cause viral hepatitis. These are asfollows:
/square6Hepatitis viruses : Hepatitis A, B, C, D, E.
/square6Other viruses : Cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus,
herpes simplex virus, yellow fever virus.
Hepatitis A
Etiology
/square6Hepatitis A is caused by hepatitis A virus which is
a RNA virus that belongs to the family of Picorna-
viridae.
/square6It is resistant to freezing, detergents and acids. Itcan be inactivated by heat (>85°C), formalin and
chlorine.
/square6Replication occurs in the liver. The virus is secreted
into the bile and found in stool. Highest titers arefound in stool during the incubation period and
early symptomatic phase of illness.
Epidemiology
/square6It is transmitted almost exclusively by the fecal-oral
route and rarely through blood transfusion.Consumption of shellfish from contaminatedwaterways is a also a rare source of hepatitis Ainfection.
/square6People at risk of acquiring hepatitis A includetravelers to developing countries, children in daycare centers, men who have sex with men, injectiondrug users, hemophiliacs given plasma products,and persons in institutions.
/square6It is more prevalent in low socioeconomic groupsin which a lack of adequate sanitation and poorhygienic practices facilitate spread of the infection.
Clinical Features
/square6Incubation period is 15 to 45 days (mean 30 days).
/square6HAV infection usually results in an acute, self-
limited illness and only rarely leads to fulminant
hepatic failure. Fulminant hepatic failure is likelyto occur when hepatitis A infection is super-imposed on pre-existing chronic hepatitis B orhepatitis C.
/square6Symptomatic infection is more common in adultsthan children. Jaundice occurs in 70% of adultsinfected with HAV but in smaller proportions ofchildren.
/square6Illness begins with the abrupt onset of prodromalsymptoms including, fatigue, malaise, nausea,vomiting, anorexia, fever, and right upper quadrantpain. Dark urine, jaundice, and pruritus developin a few days. Prodromal symptoms decrease as
the jaundice appears./square6Physical examination shows jaundice and hepato-
megaly. There may be splenomegaly, and cervicallymphadenopathy.
/square6Hepatitis A does not lead to chronic infection,
chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis or carrier state.
/square6There can be extrahepatic manifestations such as
vasculitis, arthritis, optic neuritis, transverse myelitis,thrombocytopenia, aplastic anemia, and red cell
aplasia.
Laboratory Findings
/square6Serum aminotransferases are markedly elevated
(Peak levels vary from 400 to 4,000 IU). ALT (SGPT)is more elevated than AST (SGOT). Aminotrans-ferase elevations precede the bilirubin elevation.Bilirubin is elevated (up to 30 mg/dl) and is usuallyequally divided between the conjugated and
unconjugated fractions. ALP is normal or mildly
elevated. Other laboratory abnormalities areincreased CRP, ESR and immunoglobulins.
/square6Prothrombin time (PT) may be prolonged and
signifies extensive hepatocellular necrosis and
worse prognosis
/square6IgM-anti-HAV antibody appears early in thedisease and persists for 4 to 12 months. It can be
used for the diagnosis of acute hepatitis A. IgG
antibodies also appear early in the course andpersists for life. Other viral markers such as HbsAg,anti-HCV and anti-HEV should be done to rule outother causes of viral hepatitis.
/square6Imaging studies such as ultrasound abdomen aredone if there is possibility of an alternative diag-nosis. It may show hepatomegaly in acute hepatitis.
Treatment
/square6The disease is usually self-limited, and treatmentis mainly supportive with hydration, vitamins andantipyretics.
/square6Liver transplantation should be considered forpatients who develop fulminant liver failure.
Prevention of Hepatitis A
/square6Improvement of sanitation, hand washing beforeeating, heating foods appropriately, and avoidanceof water and foods from endemic areas prevent the
transmission of virus. Chlorination and household
bleach (1:100 dilution) inactivate the virus.
/square6Vaccine:  A safe and effective HAV vaccine is
available (HAVRIX by GlaxoSmithKline). It is given
as two injections 6 months apart (1.0 mL intra-
muscular). It is recommended for patients at highrisk of acquiring hepatitis A such as travelers toendemic areas, children in communities with highrates of infection, men who have sex with men,injection drug users, patients with chronic liver
disease and recipients of pooled plasma products,
such as hemophiliacs.

/square6Diseases of Liver and Biliary System443
7/square6Post-exposure prophylaxis:  Vaccine is not effective
for post-exposure prophylaxis because antibodiestake few days to develop. Immune globulin isrecommended for post-exposure prophylaxis ofhousehold and intimate contacts of persons withacute hepatitis A. The dose is 2 mL given intra-
muscularly within 2 weeks of exposure. Concurrent
HAV vaccination is also appropriate.
Q.Describe the etiology, epidemiology, pathogenesis,
clinical features, laboratory features and treatment
of hepatitis B.
Q.Prevention of hepatitis B.
/square6Hepatitis B is an acute systemic infection which
primarily affects liver.
Etiology
/square6Hepatitis B is caused by the hepatitis B virus (HBV)
which is a DNA virus belonging to the family of
hepadnavirus. It has double-stranded DNA, inner
core protein (hepatitis B core antigen, HBcAg), andouter surface coat (hepatitis B surface antigen,HBsAg).
Epidemiology
/square6Incubation period is about 90 days (50–150 days).
/square6The virus infects only humans and higher apes.
/square6It is transmitted by percutaneous, perinatal, andsexual routes.
/square6Persons at risk of developing infection include;spouse of an acutely infected person, unprotected
sex with multiple partners (especially men who
have sex with men), healthcare workers, injectiondrug users, recipients of repeated transfusions,especially with pooled blood concentrates (e.g.hemophiliacs), dentists, prisoners, family membersof chronically infected persons, persons on hemo-
dialysis, being born to an infected mother.
/square6Prevalence is high in sub-Saharan Africa and
Southeast Asia, Down syndrome, lepromatousleprosy, leukemia, Hodgkin’s disease, polyarteritis
nodosa, patients receiving hemodialysis, injectiondrug users, lower socioeconomic groups, and older
age groups.
Pathogenesis
/square6The pathogenesis of HBV-related liver disease islargely due to immune-mediated mechanismsresulting in destruction of HBV-infected hepato-
cytes by cytotoxic T cells. Rarely HBV can cause
direct cytotoxic liver injury.
Clinical Features
/square6Clinical features are similar to hepatitis A.
/square6About 70 percent of patients with acute hepatitis Bhave subclinical or anicteric hepatitis, while30 percent develop icteric hepatitis. The disease ismore severe in patients with underlying liver
disease.
Laboratory Findings
/square6Liver function tests are same as described in
hepatitis A.
/square6Presence of HBsAg confirms the diagnosis ofhepatitis B infection. Presence of IgM anti-HBcindicates acute infection. Presence of serum IgGanti-HBc indicates chronic hepatitis B infection.
Presence of HBeAg is associated with high
infectivity. Serum anti-HBsAg indicates immunityand found during recovery from hepatitis B andafter vaccination.
/square6HBV DNA by PCR is helpful when hepatitis B isstrongly suspected in spite of negative HBsAg. It isalso useful to monitor the disease activity andresponse to treatment.
Treatment
/square6For acute hepatitis B treatment is mainly supportivewhich is same as that of acute hepatitis A. Most ofthe acute hepatitis B cases resolve within 6 monthswithout any specific antiviral therapy. However, ifthe virus is not cleared within 6 months (chronic
hepatitis), then treatment is required.
/square6For fulminant acute hepatitis, antivirals or liver
transplantation may be considered.
/square6For chronic hepatitis B (persistence of HBsAg formore than 6 months) many treatment options withantiviral drugs are available. The antiviral drugseffective against hepatitis B are entecavir, tenofovir,telbivudine, alfa-interferon, lamivudine, and
adefovir. These drugs can be used in combination
also.
Complications
/square6Serum sickness-like syndrome.
/square6Glomerulonephritis with nephrotic syndrome.
/square6Polyarteritis nodosa-like systemic vasculitis.
/square6Fulminant hepatitis (massive hepatic necrosis). Figure 7.3 Structure of hepatitis B virus


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
7444 /square6Chronic hepatitis B (persistence of HBeAg beyond
3 months or HBsAg beyond 6 months). Chronichepatitis B can lead to cirrhosis of liver and hepato-cellular carcinoma.
/square6Atypical pneumonia.
/square6Aplastic anemia.
/square6Transverse myelitis.
Prognosis
/square695–99% of patients recover completely
/square6Fulminant hepatitis: 0.1–1%
/square6Chronic hepatitis: 1–10%
/square6Carrier state: 0.1–30%
Prevention
Pre-exposure Prophylaxis
/square6Recombinant hepatitis B vaccine (e.g. Engerix-B),1 ml (20 μg) given IM at 0, 1, and 6 months.
/square6Alternative schedules have been approved,
including accelerated schedules of 0, 1, 2, and12 months and of 0, 7, and 21 days plus 12 months.Vaccine should be given to deltoid and not glutealregion. A booster dose is required after 5 years. Halfthe dose is given for children.
/square6Vaccination is indicated for high risk groups. Butnowadays hepatitis B vaccination is being given toall.
Post-exposure Prophylaxis
/square6Hepatitis B immune globulin:  0.06 mL/ kg IM should
be given within 1 week after exposure, followedby a complete course of hepatitis B vaccine startedwithin the first week. After sexual exposure immuno-globulin can be given up to 14 days.
/square6For perinatal exposure of infants born to an HBsAg-positive mother, a single 0.5 mL IM dose of immuno-globulin should be given immediately after birth incombination with a complete course of 3 injectionsof hepatitis B vaccine to be started within the first
12 hours of life.
Q.Discuss the clinical features, investigations and
management of chronic hepatitis B.
/square6Hepatitis B is considered chronic when HBsAg
persists for more than 6 months.
/square6Liver injury and pathogenesis of chronic hepatitis
B are immunologically mediated. Antigen-specific
cytotoxic T cells mediate the cell injury in hepatitisB and also account for ultimate viral clearance. Theprogression of acute to chronic hepatitis B isattributed to lack of a vigorous cytotoxic T-cellresponse to hepatitis B antigens.
Epidemiology
/square6Chronic hepatitis B afflicts 400 million people world-
wide. Persons at high risk of chronic hepatitis Binclude men who have sex with men, persons
with multiple sexual partners, hemophiliacs,oncology and renal dialysis patients, and healthcare workers.
/square6Most patients with chronic hepatitis B eventuallyrecover. But some may progress to cirrhosis andend-stage liver disease. Some patients may go intoan inactive carrier state with no symptoms, normalserum aminotransferase levels, and inactive liverdisease on liver biopsy.
Clinical Features
/square6Many patients with chronic hepatitis B are asympto-matic.
/square6Symptomatic patients may present with constitu-
tional symptoms such as fatigue, malaise, low grade
fever, anorexia and jaundice which is persistent orintermittent.
/square6Stigmata of chronic liver disease such as hepato-
megaly, palmar erythema, and spider angioma may
be present.
/square6Some patients may present with features ofcirrhosis with portal HTN.
/square6The extrahepatic manifestations of chronic hepatitisB include mucocutaneous vasculitis, glomerulo-nephritis, and polyarteritis nodosa.
Investigations
/square6HBsAg, HBeAg, and HBV DNA persist, generallyat high levels. There are two general forms ofchronic hepatitis B. HBeAg-positive chronichepatitis B, in which there are high levels of HBVDNA, and less commonly HBeAg-negative form,where there are moderate levels of HBV DNA in
serum.
/square6Aminotransferases (ALT, AST) remain elevated.
But one-third of patients may have normal or near-normal aminotransferases.
/square6Alkaline phosphatase level is normal or marginallyelevated.
/square6Serum bilirubin level is normal to moderatelyelevated.
/square6Hypoalbuminemia is present.
/square6Prothrombin time is prolonged.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen or CT scan are useful to ruleout hepatocellular carcinoma and to guide liver
biopsy.
/square6Liver biopsy may be indicated to assess severity of
disease, predict response to therapy, or rule outhepatocellular carcinoma.
Treatment of Chronic Hepatitis B
Indications for treatment as recommended by WHOinclude the following.
/square6All patients with chronic hepatitis B and cirrhosis
should be treated, regardless of ALT levels, HBeAg
status or HBV DNA levels.

/square6Diseases of Liver and Biliary System445
7/square6Treatment is recommended for patients with
chronic hepatitis B without cirrhosis, but are agedmore than 30 years, with persistently abnormal ALTlevels, and evidence of high-level HBV replication(HBV DNA >20 000 IU/mL), regardless of HBeAgstatus.
/square6Currently, pegylated interferon alfa (PEG-IFN-alpha), entecavir, and tenofovir are the first-lineagents in the treatment of hepatitis B disease. 2ndline drugs (adefovir, lamivudine, telbivudine) can
be considered if the first line drugs are unavailable.
Entecavir
/square6It is considered a first-line treatment for HBV
infection.
/square6Entecavir is a nucleoside analogue and inhibits HBVDNA polymerase. It has a high antiviral potency,
and resistance to it is uncommon.
/square6Adverse effects include exacerbations of hepatitis B
virus infection after discontinuation, lactic acidosisand severe hepatomegaly with steatosis.
Tenofovir
/square6Tenofovir has replaced adefovir (an older
nucleotide analog) as a first-line treatment. It is a
nucleotide analogue (adenosine monophosphate)reverse transcriptase and hepatitis B virus (HBV)polymerase inhibitor. Tenofovir is the most potentoral antiviral for hepatitis B; resistance to it isminimal.
/square6It has few adverse effects. Its main side effects arelactic acidosis and severe hepatomegaly withsteatosis. The dose is one 300 mg once daily orally.
Pegylated Interferon Alpha
/square6This is effective in patients with a low viral loadand elevated serum transaminases. However, it is
not the first choice treatment. It acts by augmenting
the native immune response. Interferon therapy isnot recommended in patients with normal or near-normal serum aminotransferase levels (even ifHBeAg is present) because it is usually ineffectivein this situation. Interferon has to be given by
subcutaneous injection.
/square6It is given for 4–6 months in HBeAg-positive
chronic hepatitis in whom the response is good.Response rates are lower in HBeAg-negative
chronic hepatitis, even with longer duration of
therapy.
/square6Longer-acting pegylated interferons which can begiven once weekly have been developed and are
effective in both HBeAg-positive and HBeAg-
negative chronic hepatitis.
/square6Interferon is contraindicated in the presence ofdecompensated cirrhosis (e.g. ascites, jaundice,
coagulopathy, encephalopathy). In such patients it
can precipitate liver failure.General Measures
/square6All household and sexual contacts of patient shouldbe vaccinated.
/square6Vaccination against hepatitis A also is recommended.
/square6Patients with hepatitis B should avoid all but themost necessary use of immunosuppressive medica-
tions. Severe flares of hepatitis B and even deaths
have followed short courses of corticosteroids orcancer chemotherapy.
Q.Australia antigen; HBsAg; hepatitis B surface
antigen.
/square6Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) is located in
the capsular material of the virus.
/square6It is the serologic hallmark of HBV infection. It canbe detected by radioimmunoassays (RIA) orenzyme immunoassays (EIA).
/square6HBsAg appears in serum 1 to 10 weeks after anacute exposure to HBV, before the onset ofsymptoms.
/square6In patients who recover, HBsAg usually becomesnegative after 3 to 6 months. Persistence of HBsAgfor more than six months indicates chronic hepatitisB. Usually less than 1 percent of patients progressto chronic hepatitis B.
/square6The disappearance of HBsAg is followed by theappearance of anti-HBs indicates recovery fromhepatitis B infection.
/square6Since antibodies against HBsAg are protective
against hepatitis B, HBsAg is used in the manu-
facturing of hepatitis B vaccines.
Q.Chronic hepatitis B carrier.
Q.Conditions associated with hepatitis B carrier state.
/square6After hepatitis B infection, HBsAg disappears from
the blood in 3–6 months in 90% of adults. But in10% the virus persists for more than 6 months; these
persons are called chronic carriers.
/square6The difference between chronic hepatitis and
chronic carrier state can be made by the presenceor absence of liver injury as evidenced by elevated
liver enzymes (ALT, AST). If HBsAg is positive
without liver enzyme elevation then it is carrierstate. If HBsAg is positive along with elevated liverenzymes, then it is chronic hepatitis.
/square6The prevalence of chronic carrier state is low in lowendemicity countries (1% in America, Europe,Australia), 1–6% in intermediate-endemicitycountries (India, Middle East, Russia) and 7–30%in high-endemicity countries (Africa, China,Taiwan).
/square6The carrier state usually lasts indefinitely butHBsAg occasionally disappears spontaneously(1% per year). About 10–20% of chronic carriers areHBeAg-positive and highly infectious.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
7446 /square6Liver biopsy in the majority (80%) of chronic
carriers is nearly normal (asymptomatic carriers)but in about 20% changes of chronic hepatitis arepresent.
/square6LFT (ALT) should be monitored in carriers every6–12 months.
Conditions associated with hepatitis B carrier state
(risk factors for chronic carrier status)
/square6Male gender.
/square6Anicteric acute hepatitis B.
/square6After perinatal transmission.
/square6Patients treated with steroids.
/square6Impaired cell-mediated immunity (e.g. chronicuremia, malignancy, lepromatous leprosy, Down’ssyndrome).
Q.Describe the etiolgy, epidemiology, clinical features,
laboratory features and treatment of hepatitis C.
/square6Hepatitis C is an infection caused by the hepatitis
C virus (HCV) which primarily affects the liver. Itwas previously called non-A, non-B hepatitis.
Etiology
/square6Hepatitis C is caused by hepatitis C virus which isa RNA virus belonging to Flaviviridae family.
Epidemiology
/square6Prevalence is about 170 million cases worldwide.
/square6Frequency is higher among African Americans and
Mexican Americans than white persons.
/square6Most frequent in persons 30–50 years of age.
/square6More frequent in men than women.
/square6Transmitted by percutaneous, perinatal, and sexual
routes (just like hepatitis B).
/square6Persons at risk of acquiring infection are same asthose in hepatitis B.
/square6Breastfeeding does not increase risk.
/square6Unlike hepatitis B, most people with acute hepatitisC cannot clear the virus and either become chroniccarriers or develop chronic hepatitis.
Clinical Features
/square6Incubation period is 15–150 days (mean, 50 days).
/square6Other clinical features are similar to hepatitis A.
Investigations
/square6LFTs are similar to other viral hepatitis.
/square6Diagnosis of hepatitis C can be made by demons-trating the presence of serum anti-HCV antibody.
Diagnosis is confirmed with HCV RNA testing
which is the gold standard for establishing thediagnosis of hepatitis C.
/square6Hepatitis A and hepatitis B should be ruled out by
appropriate tests ( see above)./square6In patients with significant cholestasis, ultrasound
abdomen and imaging of the biliary tree may beindicated to rule out obstruction from stone orneoplasm.
/square6Liver biopsy is rarely necessary.
Treatment
/square6Supportive care.
/square6Earlier only pegylated interferon and ribavirin wereavailable for the treatment of hepatitis C. However,now there are a number of new, highly effective
direct-acting antiviral drugs (DAAs) for hepatitis C
now which are basically many types of proteaseinhibitors. The availability of protease inhibitors haschanged the prognosis of hepatitis C infection.
/square6Antiviral regimens may consist of direct acting anti-viral drugs (DAAs) plus interferons or only DAAs.New treatment regimens can eradicate the virus inmost people.
/square6Current recommendations are to follow patients for3 to 4 months to allow spontaneous HCV clearanceand then treat those who have persistent viremia(i.e. chronic hepatitis C).
/square6Liver transplantation is indicated for patients withfulminant hepatic failure and severe encephalopathy.
Complications
/square6Essential mixed cryoglobulinemia.
/square6Immune complex disease (arthritis, cutaneousvasculitis, glomerulonephritis).
/square6B cell lymphoma.
/square6Fulminant hepatitis (massive hepatic necrosis).
/square6Chronic hepatitis C (50–70%).
/square6Pancreatitis.
/square6Myocarditis.
/square6Atypical pneumonia.
/square6Aplastic anemia.
/square6Transverse myelitis.
/square6Peripheral neuropathy.
Prevention
/square6No active or passive immunization available forhepatitis C.
/square6Universal precautions should be adhered to whilehandling patients.
/square6Other general preventive measures include safesexual practices, using disposable needles, etc.
Q.Chronic Hepatitis C.
/square6Chronic hepatitis C is diagnosed when hepatic
inflammation and necrosis continue for ≥6 months.
/square6Mild chronic hepatitis C is nonprogressive or only
slowly progressive. Severe chronic hepatitis C iscan lead to cirrhosis, liver failure, or hepatocellular
carcinoma.

/square6Diseases of Liver and Biliary System447
7Epidemiology
/square6Chronic hepatitis C develops in up to 85% of patients
with acute hepatitis C. Worldwide 170 millionpeople are infected. It may be the most common
cause of chronic hepatitis. It is the most frequent
indication for liver transplantation.
/square6Most frequent in persons 30–50 years of age.
/square6More frequent in men than women.
Clinical Features
/square6These are same as chronic hepatitis B.
Investigations
/square6Serologic markers of HCV (anti-HCV) infectionremain positive even after 6 months. HCV RNA alsoremains detectable.
/square6Aminotransferases (ALT, AST) remain elevated.But one-third of patients may have normal or near-normal aminotransferases.
/square6Alkaline phosphatase level is normal or marginally
elevated.
/square6Serum bilirubin level is normal to moderately
elevated.
/square6Hypoalbuminemia may be present.
/square6Prothrombin time may be prolonged.
/square6Autoantibodies such as rheumatoid factor can bepresent and needs to be differentiated fromrheumatoid arthritis in patients with arthralgias.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen or CT scan is useful to ruleout hepatocellular carcinoma and to guide liverbiopsy.
/square6Liver biopsy may be indicated to assess severity of
disease, predict response to therapy, or rule out
hepatocellular carcinoma.
Treatment
/square6Earlier treatment options included a combination
of ribavirin and pegylated interferon. Recently,
many protease inhibitors effective against hepatitisC virus have been introduced. These are calleddirectly acting antivirals (DAAs). These proteaseinhibitors are usually used in combination. Theycan be combined with interferon also.
Q.Hepatitis D (Delta hepatitis).
/square6Delta hepatitisis an infection caused by hepatitis D
virus (HDV) which primarily affects the liver.
Etiology
/square6Delta hepatitis is caused by HDV which is adefective RNA virus (delta agent) belonging to the
genus deltavirus.
/square6HDV requires the helper function of HBV (or otherhepadnaviruses) for its replication and expression.
It can infect a person simultaneously with HBV(co-infection) or superinfect a person already
infected with HBV (superinfection).
/square6Because HDV relies absolutely on HBV, the dura-tion of HDV infection is determined by the duration
of HBV infection.
/square6HDV increases the severity of HBV infection and
accelerates the progression of chronic hepatitis tocirrhosis.
Epidemiology
/square6About 10 million people are infected worldwide.Incidence is decreasing now.
/square6HDV infection is endemic among persons with
hepatitis B. 5–8% of hepatitis B chronic carriers have
anti-HDV.
/square6It is endemic in Mediterranean countries (northernAfrica, southern Europe, the Middle East).
/square6HDV infection is common in persons exposedfrequently to blood and blood products (injectiondrug users and hemophiliac persons).
Risk Factors
/square6Persons infected with hepatitis B.
/square6Close personal contact with people with HDV.
/square6Frequent exposure to blood or blood products.
Clinical Features
/square6Incubation period: 30–180 days.
/square6Other clinical features are similar to hepatitis B.
Investigations
/square6Presence of HDV infection can be identified by anti-HDV seroconversion (an increase in titer of anti-
HDV or de novo  appearance of anti-HDV). It may
take 30–40 days for anti-HDV to appear in acuteinfection.
/square6Tests for the presence of HDV RNA are useful for
determining the presence of ongoing HDV replica-
tion and relative infectivity.
/square6Demonstration of intrahepatic HDV antigen in liverbiopsy.
/square6Other tests are similar to other viral hepatitis.
Treatment
/square6Treatment of coexistent hepatitis B.
/square6The only approved treatment for hepatitis D is inter-
ferons.
Prevention
/square6In HBV-negative persons, hepatitis B vaccine can
prevent hepatitis D infection.
/square6In HBV-positive persons, there is no product toprevent HDV superinfection. Avoidance of per-cutaneous exposures and limitation of intimatecontact with persons who have HDV infection arerecommended.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
7448 Q.Hepatitis E.
/square6Hepatitis E is an acute infection caused by hepatitis
E virus (HEV) which primarily affects the liver.
Etiology
/square6Hepatitis E virus is a non-enveloped single-stranded
RNA virus.
/square6Transmitted by fecal-oral route by eating or
drinking contaminated food or water.
/square6HEV is excreted in the stool during the late incuba-
tion period.
Epidemiology
/square6Highest incidence of HEV infection is in Asia,Africa, Middle East, and Central America.
/square6Most epidemics in developing countries are due to
contaminated drinking water (e.g. after monsoon
flooding).
/square6Several reports suggest a zoonotic reservoir forHEV in swine.
Clinical Features
/square6Highest attack rate is between 15 and 40 years of age.
/square6Incubation period: 15–60 days.
/square6Fulminant hepatic failure occurs more frequently
during pregnancy, resulting in high mortality rate
especially in the third trimester. Reasons for thisare unknown.
/square6Other clinical features are similar to viral hepatitis A.
Investigations
/square6Diagnosis is established by detection of the HEV
genome in serum or feces by PCR or by the detec-
tion of IgM antibodies to HEV.
Treatment
/square6Same as acute hepatitis A.
Prevention
/square6A vaccine is available in china which is 95% effectivein preventing the infection..
/square6Travelers to endemic areas should avoid drinking
water of unknown purity, uncooked shellfish, and
uncooked fruits or vegetables.
Q.Define chronic hepatitis.
Q.Discuss the causes, pathology, clinical features,
investigations and management of chronic hepatitis.
Definition
/square6Chronic hepatitis is hepatitis that lasts >6 months.
Etiology
/square6Viruses (hepatitis B, C, D).
/square6Drugs (isoniazid, nitrofurantoin, amiodarone,
methotrexate)./square6Alcoholic steatohepatitis.
/square6Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH).
/square6Metabolic causes (Wilson disease, hemochroma-
tosis, alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency, primary biliarycirrhosis, sclerosing cholangitis).
/square6Autoimmune hepatitis.
/square6Cryptogenic hepatitis.
Clinical Features
/square6Many patients are asymptomatic.
/square6Some may have malaise, anorexia, fatigue, low-grade fever and nonspecific upper abdominaldiscomfort.
/square6Jaundice is usually absent. Signs of chronic liverdisease (e.g. splenomegaly, spider nevi, palmarerythema) or complications of cirrhosis (e.g. portalhypertension, ascites, encephalopathy) may bepresent in advanced cases.
Investigations
/square6Liver function tests show elevation of liver enzymessuch as AST and ALT.
/square6Viral serologic tests.
/square6Autoantibodies, immunoglobulins, α1-antitrypsin
level, and other tests.
/square6Liver biopsy.
Treatment
/square6Supportive care.
/square6Treatment of cause (e.g. corticosteroids for auto-immune hepatitis, antivirals for HBV and HCVinfection, withdrawal of offending drug in druginduced chronic hepatitis).
/square6Corticosteroids and immunosuppressants shouldbe avoided in chronic hepatitis B and C becausethese drugs enhance viral replication.
Prognosis
/square6Drug-induced chronic hepatitis often regressescompletely when the causative drug is withdrawn.Untreated chronic viral hepatitis can lead to cirrhosisor development of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Q.Drug and toxin-induced hepatotoxicity (hepatitis).
/square6Drug and toxin-induced hepatotoxicity is defined
as any degree of liver injury caused by a drug or a
toxic substance.
/square6Many therapeutic agents can cause hepatic injury.
Drug-induced liver disease can mimic viralhepatitis, biliary tract obstruction, or other types
of liver disease.
/square6Mechanism of hepatocellular injury may be divided
into two broad groups: (1) Direct hepatotoxicity,
(2) Idiosyncratic reactions (immune-mediated hyper-
sensitivity).

/square6Diseases of Liver and Biliary System449
7/square6Direct hepatotoxicity:  Here the hepatotoxicity is
predictable, dose dependent, and can affect allindividuals if a high dose is taken. Examples areacetaminophen (paracetamol), alcohol, carbon tetra-
chloride, chloroform, heavy metals, phosphorus,valproic acid, and vitamin A.
/square6Idiosyncratic reactions (immune-mediated hypersensiti-vity): Here the hepatotoxicity is not predictable,
sporadic, and not related to dose. Occasionally, itis associated with features of allergic reaction, such
as fever and eosinophilia. In some patients, liver
damage is from a metabolite that is produced onlyin certain individuals on a genetic basis. Examplesare amiodarone, disulfiram, halothane, isoniazid,pyrazinamide, and streptomycin.
Types of Hepatotoxicity
Hepatocellular (elevated ALT)
• Paracetamol
• Halothane• Isoniazid
• Rifampicin
• Pyrazinamide• Alcohol
• Estrogens
• Anabolic steroids• Erythromycin
• Chlorpromazine
Cholestatic (elevated alkaline phosphatase and total bilirubin)
• Amoxicillin/clavulanate
• Anabolic steroids
• Chlorpromazine• Clopidogrel
• Oral contraceptives
• Erythromycins• Estrogens
• Phenothiazines
Mixed (elevated alkaline phosphatase and ALT)
• Amitriptyline
• Azathioprine
• Carbamazepine• Phenytoin
• Sulfonamides
Treatment
/square6Main treatment is withdrawal of the offending
drug.
/square6N-acetylcysteine is useful in paracetamol toxicity.
/square6Supportive therapy for the specific type of liverinjury.
Q.Define acute liver failure (fulminant liver failure).
Discuss the causes, pathology, clinical features,investigations and management of acute liver
failure.Definition
/square6Acute liver failure also known as fulminant liver
failure is rapid deterioration of liver functionresulting in coagulopathy and encephalopathy in
a previously healthy individual. It includes
fulminant and subfulminant hepatic failure.
/square6Subacute liver failure  (or late-onset hepatic failure )
refers to liver failure developing more slowly after
8 weeks up to 3 to 6 months.
Etiology
/square6Viral hepatitis: Hepatitis A, B, C, D and E, Epstein-
Barr virus, CMV, herpes simplex virus.
/square6Drugs and toxins:  Paracetamol overdose, phos-
phorus poisoning, Amanita phalloides  mushroom
toxin.
/square6Vascular causes:  Portal vein thrombosis, Budd-
Chiari syndrome, ischemic hepatitis.
/square6Metabolic causes:  Wilson disease, acute fatty liver of
pregnancy, Reye’s syndrome.
/square6Miscellaneous:  Malignant infiltration of the liver,
sepsis, and autoimmune hepatitis.
Remember the mnemonics
A: Acetaminophen, hepatitis A, autoimmune hepatitisB: Hepatitis B, Budd-Chiari syndromeC: Cryptogenic, hepatitis C, cytomegalovirusD: Hepatitis D, drugsE: Esoteric causes: Wilson’s disease, Budd-Chiari syndromeF: Fatty Infiltration: Fatty liver of pregnancy, Reye’s syndrome
Clinical Features
/square6Jaundice is often present.
/square6Liver may be enlarged and tender especially in
acute hepatitis. An enlarged liver may be also be
seen with congestive heart failure and Budd-Chiarisyndrome. Liver size may decrease when there issignificant loss of volume due to hepatic necrosis.
/square6Ascites may be present.
/square6Hepatic encephalopathy: This may range from mildalteration of consciousness to deep coma. Recogni-tion of hepatic encephalopathy is central to the
diagnosis of fulminant hepatic failure. Hepatic
encephalopathy is mainly due to development ofcerebral edema.
/square6Coagulopathy:  Since the synthesis of most of the
clotting factors occurs in the liver, liver failure leads
to development of coagulopathy. Patient may havebleeding from any site but upper GI bleed iscommon presenting as hematemesis and melena.
/square6Renal failure is common due to development ofhepatorenal syndrome.
/square6Systemic inflammatory response syndrome withDIC and multiple organ dysfunction is common.
This may occur with or without an underlying
infection. ARDS and respiratory failure contributeto high mortality in fulminant hepatic failure.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
7450 /square6Hypotension and hyperdynamic circulation are
usually present due to peripheral vasodilatation.Adrenal insufficiency is common in liver failure andmay contribute to hypotension.
Investigations
/square6Complete blood count.
/square6Liver function tests including prothrombin time(PT).
/square6Serum ammonia level.
/square6Serum electrolytes.
/square6Blood sugar level.
/square6ABG.
/square6Blood urea and creatinine level.
/square6Serum copper, ceruloplasmin level (if suspectingWilson disease).
/square6Blood cultures:  For patients with suspected infection.
/square6Viral serologies (to rule out acute viral hepatitis).
/square6Drug screening.
/square6Autoimmune markers (for autoimmune hepatitis
diagnosis):  Antinuclear antibody (ANA) and anti-
smooth muscle antibody (ASMA).
Treatment
/square6Treatment of underlying cause is most important.
/square6Maintenance of proper fluid and electrolytebalance.
/square6Support of nutrition (through Ryle’s tube), respira-tory and hemodynamic function.
/square6Prophylactic use of proton pump inhibitors becauseof the high risk of gastrointestinal bleeding.
/square6Management of encephalopathy:  Cerebral edema is the
most common cause of death in acute liver failure.Intracranial pressure can be monitored by anepidural catheter. Cerebral edema can be decreased
by hyperventilation and mannitol (0.5 to 1 mg/kg
body weight 8th hourly). If there is no response toabove measures, pentobarbital coma should beinduced using a bolus of 3 to 5 mg/kg intra-venously. Since there is evidence that ammoniaplays major role in the development of hepatic
encephalopathy, elevated ammonia levels should
be reduced with enteral administration of lactulose.Bowel wash can reduce intestinal bacterial load anddecrease the production of ammonia. Administra-tion of antibiotics such as neomycin or rifaximinorally can sterilize the bowel and decrease ammonia
production by bacteria. Sedatives should be
avoided if possible.
/square6Sedatives should be avoided unless needed in theintubated patient because these agents can
aggravate or precipitate encephalopathy
/square6Management of renal failure:  Hemodialysis should be
considered for renal failure.
/square6Management of coagulopathy:  If there is active
bleeding clotting factors should be replaced bytransfusion of fresh frozen plasma (FFP). Vitamin
K should be given parenterally to help in thesynthesis of clotting factors. Recombinant factorVIIa may be used intravenously in patients whodo not respond to FFP.
/square6Liver transplantation is the definitive treatment inliver failure. It should be considered in all patientswith fulminant hepatic failure.
Prognosis
/square6Prognosis is poor and mortality can be as high as 80%.
Q.Reye syndrome.
/square6Reye syndrome is a rare form of acute encephalo-
pathy and fatty infiltration of the liver that tends
to occur after some acute viral infections, particu-
larly when salicylates are used.
/square6The exact cause is unknown, but usually followschickenpox or influenza infection. Use of salicylates
(aspirin) during the above infections is a major
precipitating factor for the development of Reyesyndrome.
/square6Pathologically fatty degeneration of liver, astrocyte
edema and loss of neurons in the brain, and edema
and fatty degeneration of the kidneys is seen.Hepatic mitochondrial dysfunction results inhyperammonemia, which is thought to induceastrocyte edema, resulting in cerebral edema andincreased intracranial pressure (ICP).
/square6It is usually seen in children <18 years. Acuteencephalopathy with cerebral edema develops.Clinical features include nausea, vomiting,headache, excitability, delirium, and combativenesswith frequent progression to coma.
/square6Incidence has now decreased as aspirin use inpatients with varicella or influenza has decreased.
/square6The mortality rate in Reye’s syndrome is approxi-mately 50%.
/square6Treatment is mainly supportive and includes intra-venous hydration, infusions fresh-frozen plasma,
and intravenous mannitol to reduce cerebral edema.
Q.Discuss fatty liver (hepatic steatosis) and its causes.
Q.Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD).
/square6Abnormal accumulation of lipids in the liver is
called fatty liver or hepatic steatosis.
/square6When fatty liver is due to alcohol consumption, itis known as alcoholic fatty liver.
/square6When fatty liver is not due to alcohol, it is known
as nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD).
NAFLD is subdivided into nonalcoholic fatty liver(NAFL) and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH).In NAFL, hepatic steatosis is present withoutinflammation, whereas in NASH, hepatic steatosisis associated with hepatic inflammation.

/square6Diseases of Liver and Biliary System451
7/square6Fatty liver is a benign disease and carries good
prognosis. However, if the underlying cause is nottreated (e.g. alcohol) it may progress and result insignificant fibrosis and even cirrhosis.
Causes of NAFLD
• Diabetes mellitus
• Obesity• Dyslipidemia• Dysbetalipoproteinemias• Protein-energy malnutrition• Starvation• Prolonged parenteral nutrition• Jejunoileal bypass• Rapid weight loss• Inflammatory bowel disease• Drugs (methotrexate, vitamin A, glucocorticoids)
Clinical Features
/square6The signs and symptoms of fatty liver depend on
the severity and the underlying cause. Manypatients are asymptomatic. Liver is enlarged, firmand usually nontender. However, mild tendernessmay be present in some patients.
/square6Rapid accumulation of fat (example, totalpareneteral nutrition, hepatotoxins) may lead tomarked liver tenderness, due to stretching ofGlisson’s capsule.
/square6The clinical presentation of fatty liver from hepato-toxins is similar to that of fulminant hepatic failurewith jaundice, hepatic encephalopathy, prolongedprothrombin time and increased aminotransferases.
Investigations
/square6Liver function tests are usually normal or showmild elevations of alkaline phosphatase or amino-
transferases.
/square6Fatty liver can be detected by CT, MRI, or ultra-
sound.
/square6If there is doubt about the diagnosis, liver biopsywill show increased fat content, presence of anyfibrosis, and possibly the underlying primarydisorder.
Treatment
/square6Lifestyle changes are recommended for all patientswith NAFLD (such as regular exercise, diet control).
/square6Underlying cause should be treated (e.g. control ofdiabetes, weight loss in obesity, etc.).
/square6Adequate nutrition should be provided.
Q.Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH).
/square6Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is a subtype
of NAFLD that develops in patients who are notalcoholic and is characterized by fat accumulation
and inflammation in the liver.Risk Factors
/square6Obesity, type 2 diabetes mellitus, dyslipidemia,
and/or metabolic syndrome.
Pathophysiology
/square6There is steatosis due to triglyceride accumulation,inflammation, and fibrosis. Steatosis is due to
reduced synthesis of very low density lipoprotein
(VLDL) and increased hepatic triglyceride synthesis.Inflammation may result from lipid peroxidativedamage to cell membranes. These changes can stimu-late hepatic stellate cells, resulting in fibrosis. NASHcan progress to cirrhosis and portal hypertension.
Clinical Features
/square6NASH most often occurs in patients between 40 and
60 years of age but can occur in all age groups.
/square6Most patients are asymptomatic.
/square6Some have fatigue, malaise, or right upper quadrant
abdominal discomfort. Hepatomegaly is present inmost patients.
/square6Splenomegaly may be present due to development
of cirrhosis and portal hypertension.
Investigations
/square6Liver function tests show elevation of AST and ALT.
Alkaline phosphatase and gamma glutamyl
transpeptidase (GGT) may also be high.
/square6Serologic tests to rule out hepatitis B and C.
/square6FBS, PPBS, HbA1C.
/square6Lipid profile.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen, CT, and particularly MRI,
can identify fatty liver.
/square6Liver biopsy shows fat droplets and inflammation.
Treatment
/square6For NASH, there is no specific treatment. Elimina-tion of causes and control of risk factors such asdiscontinuation of drugs or toxins, weight loss, and
treatment for dyslipidemia or hyperglycemia is the
main treatment.
/square6Thiazolidinediones and vitamin E can help correctbiochemical and histologic abnormalities in NASH.
/square6Many other treatments such as ursodeoxycholicacid, metformin, and betaine are not effective.
Q.Alcoholic liver disease (ALD).
/square6Alcoholic liver disease (ALD) is defined as liver
damage, caused by over consumption of alcohol,leading to fat accumulation, liver inflammation, and
liver scarring.
/square6ALD is a spectrum of disease and comprises of three
pathological forms of liver damage. These are:(1) Alcoholic fatty liver, (2) alcoholic hepatitis, and
(3) alcoholic cirrhosis.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
7452 /square6Alcoholic fatty liver or steatosis:  At this stage, fat
accumulates in the liver parenchyma.
/square6Alcoholic hepatitis:  Here, there is inflammation of
liver parenchyma. Appropriate treatment along
with alcohol abstinence can reverse this stage.
Recurrent episodes can occur and are oftenassociated with binge alcohol intake. More severecases may end up in liver failure.
/square6Alcoholic cirrhosis:  Liver damage at this stage is
irreversible and leads to complications of cirrhosisand portal hypertension.
Etiology
/square6Alcohol is a major hepatotoxin. Liver tolerates mildalcohol consumption, but as the consumption ofalcohol increases, it interferes with the metabolic
functions of liver leading to slowly accumulating
damage. The initial stage involves the accumulationof fat in the liver cells, commonly known as fattyliver or steatosis. If the consumption of alcohol doesnot stop at this stage, it sometimes leads to alcoholichepatitis. With continued alcohol consumption,
the final stage known as cirrhosis occurs which
is characterized by hepatic fibrosis and nodules.
/square6Quantity and duration of alcohol intake are thehighest risk factors for the development of the liver
disease. Women are more susceptible than men.
Concurrent infection with hepatitis B or hepatitis Cincreases the chances of liver damage.
Pathophysiology
/square6Alcohol is converted into the acetaldehyde byalcohol dehydrogenase. Acetaldehyde is then
converted to acetate by aldehyde dehydrogenase.
/square6These oxidative reactions generate hydrogen, which
converts nicotinamide-adenine dinucleotide (NAD)to its reduced form (NADH), increasing the redox
potential (NADH/NAD) in the liver.
/square6The increased redox potential inhibits fatty acid
oxidation and gluconeogenesis, promoting fataccumulation in the liver.
/square6In addition to the above mechanism there isincreased oxidative damage to the liver by activa-tion of microsomal enzyme oxidation system(MEOS) by alcohol, and reduction in protective
antioxidants (e.g. glutathione, vitamins A and E),
caused by alcohol-related undernutrition.
/square6Acetaldehyde can bind to liver cell proteins,forming neoantigens and lead to inflammation.
Accumulation of neutrophils and other white blood
cells attracted by lipid peroxidative damage andneoantigens also leads to inflammation. Thisinflammation leads to alcoholic hepatitis andcontinued inflammation leads to cell necrosis andapoptosis resulting in hepatocyte loss. Subsequent
attempts at regeneration result in fibrosis and
nodules leading to cirrhosis. Stellate (Ito) cellswhich are present in liver sinusoids get activated
and produce excessive amount of fibrous tissuewhich contributed to fibrosis seen in cirrhosis.
Clinical Features
/square6Patients develop problems during their 30s or 40s.
/square6Alcoholic fatty liver is often asymptomatic. Liver may
be enlarged and smooth, but is not usually tender.
/square6Alcoholic hepatitis presents with fatigue, fever,
jaundice, right upper quadrant pain, tender hepato-megaly, and sometimes a hepatic bruit. Severe
alcoholic hepatitis may present with features of
liver failure such as ascites, encephalopathy,variceal bleeding, and hypoglycemia.
/square6Cirrhosis, if compensated, may be asymptomatic.
If it is decompensated features of liver cell failure
and portal hypertension are present which includehepatic encephalopathy, coagulopathy, ascites,variceal bleeding, and splenomegaly.
Investigations
/square6Liver function tests: Alterations depend on the stageof liver disease. In alcoholic hepatitis, elevations ofliver enzymes is moderate (<300 IU/L). The ratio
of aspartate aminotransferase (AST) to alanine
aminotransferase (ALT) is ≥2. The basis for low ALT
is a dietary deficiency of pyridoxal phosphate(vitamin B
6), which is needed for ALT to function.
/square6Complete blood count (CBC).
/square6Ultrasound abdomen.
Treatment
/square6Abstinence from alcohol.
/square6Supportive care.
/square6Corticosteroids or pentoxifylline for severe alcoholichepatitis.
/square6Rarely liver transplantation.
Q.Discuss the etiology, pathology, clinical features,
investigations, complications and management of
cirrhosis of liver.
Q.Child-Turcotte-Pugh scoring system.
/square6Cirrhosis refers to a late stage of progressive hepatic
fibrosis characterized by distortion of the hepatic
architecture and the formation of regenerative
nodules.
/square6It represents the final common pathway of manytypes of chronic liver injury.
Causes of Cirrhosis
Infectious diseases
• Hepatitis B, C, D• Cytomegalovirus• Epstein-Barr virus• Schistosomiasis

/square6Diseases of Liver and Biliary System453
7Drugs and toxins
• Alcohol (Laennec’s cirrhosis)• Amiodarone• Arsenicals• Oral contraceptives (Budd-Chiari)• Pyrrolizidine alkaloids and antineoplastic agents (veno-
occlusive disease)
Inherited and metabolic disorders
• Alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency• Wilson’s disease• Hemochromatosis• Galactosemia• Gaucher’s disease• Glycogen storage disease• Cystic fibrosis
Biliary disorders
• Primary biliary cirrhosis• Biliary atresia• Primary sclerosing cholangitis• Chronic biliary obstruction• Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis
Cardio vascular causes
• Chronic right heart failure (cardiac cirrhosis)• Budd-Chiari syndrome• Long standing portal vein thrombosis
Others
• Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NASH)• Sarcoidosis• Scleroderma• Autoimmune hepatitis• Cryptogenic
Epidemiology
/square6Alcoholic cirrhosis is the most common type of
cirrhosis seen all over the world. Post-hepatitic
cirrhosis especially due to hepatitis B or C is thesecond most common cause of cirrhosis.
/square6Cirrhosis is more common in males but primary
biliary cirrhosis is more common in females.
/square6Cirrhosis is the most common indication for liver
transplantation.
Pathophysiology
/square6Cirrhosis is the final common pathway of manytypes of chronic liver injury.
/square6Irreversible chronic injury of the hepatic paren-chyma leads to extensive fibrosis, loss of the normalliver architecture and formation of regenerativenodules. The changes in cirrhosis affect the wholeliver. Destruction of the liver architecture causesdistortion and loss of the normal hepatic vascula-
ture with the development of portosystemic
vascular shunts.
/square6Multiple cells play a role in liver cirrhosis includinghepatocytes and sinusoidal lining cells such as
stellate cells, sinusoidal endothelial cells, and
Kupffer cells. Activation of the hepatic stellate celldue to inflammatory cytokines is the central event
leading to hepatic fibrosis. When activated, thequiescent fat-storing stellate cells become multi-functional cells, capable of collagen production,contraction and cytokine synthesis.
/square6Sinusoidal endothelial cells normally synthesizeboth nitric oxide (NO) and endothelin-1 which acton stellate cells causing relaxation or contractionof the sinusoids, and thus regulate sinusoidal bloodflow. In patients with cirrhosis, there is increase in
endothelin-1 production and decrease in NO
production. This leads to increased intrahepaticvasoconstriction. Both hepatic fibrosis and intra-hepatic vasoconstriction lead to portal hypertension.
/square6In systemic and splanchnic circulation, the oppositeeffect happens, with an increase in the productionof NO leading to systemic and splanchnic vaso-dilation and hyperdynamic circulation. Thisactivates renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system(RAAS), leading to sodium and water retention.
Thus, in cirrhosis with portal hypertension, there
is depletion of NO intrahepatically but an excessof NO extrahepatically in the splanchnic andsystemic circulation, which lead to sinusoidal vaso-constriction and splanchnic (systemic) vasodilation.
/square6Splanchnic vasodilation leads to decreased per-fusion pressure in kidneys, which activates RAASsystem, leading to retention of sodium and waterand renal vascular constriction. Renal hypo-perfusion leads to renal failure which is called
hepatorenal syndrome.
/square6There is increased estrogen level in cirrhosis due
to liver dysfunction which leads to formation ofspider nevi and palmer erythema. Hyperestroge-
nemia also contributes to gynecomastia in males.
/square6Hypogonadism can develop in cirrhosis leading to
decreased libido and impotence in males with lossof secondary sexual characteristics and feminiza-
tion. Women can develop amenorrhea and irregular
menstrual bleeding as well as infertility.
/square6Cirrhosis can be classified histologically into twotypes: (1) Micronodular cirrhosis is characterized
by small nodules less than 3 mm in diameter,
(2) Macronodular cirrhosis is characterized bylarger nodules which are more than 3 mm in dia-meter. Differentiation between these morphologictypes of cirrhosis has limited clinical value.
Figure 7.4 Nodular and shrunken liver in cirrhosis

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
7454 Clinical Features
Symptoms
/square6May be asymptomatic.
/square6Anorexia, weight loss, fatigue/weakness.
/square6Hematemesis, melena due to bleeding esophageal
variceal bleeding.
/square6Abdominal distension due to ascites.
/square6Women may report menstrual irregularities due toendocrine alterations.
General Examination
/square6Muscle wasting.
/square6Pallor due to GI blood loss.
/square6Jaundice.
/square6Spider angiomas.
/square6Bleeding manifestations such as purpura andecchymosis.
/square6Palmar erythema.
/square6Pruritus.
/square6Decreased body hair.
/square6Gynecomastia.
/square6Testicular atrophy.
/square6Flapping tremors (in hepatic enecephalopathy).
/square6Parotid gland enlargement.
/square6Edema.Figure 7.5 Clinical features of cirrhosis of the liver
/square6Clubbing may be present in primary biliary cirrhosis.
/square6Signs of virilization in women.
/square6Melanosis:  Gradual darkening of the exposed areas
of the skin.
Abdomen
/square6Liver is shrunken, firm and nodular.
/square6Splenomegaly may be present.
/square6Ascites as evidenced by bulging flanks, shifting
dullness and fluid thrill.
/square6Caput medusa (dilated veins around the umbilicus).
CVS
/square6Look for evidence of right heart failure (cardiac
cirrhosis) such as raised JVP, right sided S3, S4,dilated heart, etc.
RS
/square6Pleural effusion (especially right sided) maydevelop in severe ascites.
NS
/square6Patient can be in altered sensorium due to hepaticencephalopathy, electrolyte imbalance, hypogly-cemia, etc.

/square6Diseases of Liver and Biliary System455
7Investigations
Complete Blood Count
/square6Anemia may be present due to blood loss, folate
deficiency and hypersplenism. Pancytopenia dueto hypersplenism.
Liver Function Tests
/square6Hypoalbuminemia and increased globulin levels(reversal of A:G ratio). Bilirubin level and amino-transeferases may be mildly elevated. ALP is mildlyelevated. Prothrombin time (PT) may be prolonged.
Urea, Creatinine, Serum Electrolytes
/square6Urea and creatinine are usually normal unless thereis development of hepatorenal syndrome.
/square6Metabolic disturbances such as hyponatremia,
hypokalemia and hypoglycemia may be present.
Hypoglycemia is due to impaired gluconeogenesisby the liver.
Investigations to Identify the Underlying Cause
/square6Hepatitis serologies (HBsAg, anti-HCV, anti-HDV).
/square6Iron, total iron-binding capacity and ferritin ifhemochromatosis is suspected.
/square6Antimitochondrial antibody (AMA) if primarybiliary cirrhosis is suspected.
/square6Antinuclear antibody, anti smooth-muscle antibody
if autoimmune etiology is suspected.
/square6Serum copper and ceruloplasmin levels if Wilson
disease is suspected.
/square6Alpha-1antitrypsin levels if deficiency is suspected.Imaging
/square6Abdominal ultrasound with Doppler may shownodular liver, splenomegaly and dilated portal veinwith collateral vessels.
/square6CT or MRI is rarely required.
Liver Niopsy (Percutaneous, Transjugular, or Open)
/square6This is the test for definitive diagnosis of cirrhosisbut not routinely required except in cases of doubtabout diagnosis and etiology. It shows regeneratingnodules and fibrosis.
Treatment
/square6Diet:  Should provide adequate calories and protein
(1–1.5 g/kg/d). Reduce protein intake to 60–80 g/dif there is hepatic encephalopathy. Restrict sodiumif there is fluid retention. Benefit of branched-chainamino acids to prevent or treat hepatic encephalo-
pathy is uncertain. Vitamin supplementation is
advisable especially Vit K.
/square6All patients with cirrhosis should receive the HAV,HBV, and pneumococcal vaccines and a yearly
influenza vaccine.
/square6Portal hypertension can be reduced by non-
selective beta blockers such as propranolol ornadolol. Nitrates can be used for patients in whom
beta-blockers are contraindicated. Esophageal
varices should be treated by endoscopic variciealligation.
/square6Ascites and edema is treated by diuretics (spirono-
lactone and frusemide). Correction of hypo-
albuminemia by albumin transfusions also helpsTABLE 7.3: Clues to specific etiology
Type of cirrhosis Clue
• Alcoholic cirrhosis History of prolonged or excessive alcohol consumption
Rule out other causes of cirrhosis since only 10–15% of individuals with excessive
alcohol intake develop cirrhosis
• PBC (primary biliary cirrhosis) Middle-aged women with unexplained pruritus or elevated ALP
Positive serum antimitochondrial antibody liver biopsy should be performed to confirm
diagnosis
• Secondary biliary cirrhosis History of previous biliary tract surgery or gallstones
History of recurrent bouts of ascending cholangitisHistory of right upper quadrant painClinical and laboratory evidence of prolonged obstruction to bile flowUltrasound abdomen and cholangiography may demonstrate the underlying pathologic
process
• Posthepatitic cirrhosis Positive viral serology• Cryptogenic cirrhosis No identifiable cause of cirrhosis
Liver biopsy also rules out any specific cause
• Cardiac cirrhosis Signs and symptoms of heart failure usually overshadow liver disease
Presence of firm, enlarged liver with signs of chronic liver disease in patients with
valvular heart disease, constrictive pericarditis, or cor pulmonale of long duration(>10 years) should suggest cardiac cirrhosis
• Metabolic, hereditary, drug-related, Specific history, clinical and lab features may be present
and other types of cirrhosis Specific lab tests and liver biopsy required to confirm the diagnosis

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
7456 edema and ascites. Paracentesis is indicated for
tense ascites. Transjugular intrahepatic porto-systemic shunt (TIPS) is helpful in the treatment ofsevere refractory ascites.
/square6Lactulose syrup is used daily (15 ml at night) topevent hepatic encephalopathy.
/square6Complications of cirrhosis such as hepaticencephalopathy and variceal bleed should betreated as per standard guidelines.
/square6Liver transplantation can be considered in suitablepatients.
Prognosis
/square6The overall prognosis in cirrhosis is poor. Only 25%of patients survive 5 years from diagnosis.
Prognosis is more favorable if the underlying cause
can be corrected, such as alcohol abuse. Complica-tions such as variceal bleed can cause unexpecteddeath.
/square6Indicators of poor prognosis in cirrhosis:  Presence of
jaundice, ascites, encephalopathy, renal impaire-ment, hyponatremia (<130 mEq/L), elevatedhepatic venous pressure gradient, albumin <3 g/dL,
bilirubin >3 mg/dL, cachexia, upper gastro-
intestinal bleeding.
/square6The Child-Pugh score is a tool to assess prognosisin cirrhosis.
Child-Turcotte-Pugh Scoring System to Assess theSeverity of Liver Disease/square6Hepatorenal syndrome
/square6Hepatopulmonary syndrome
/square6Hepatocellular carcinoma.
Q.What is biliary cirrhosis? Discuss the etiology,
pathology, clinical features, investigations, andmanagement of primary biliary cirrhosis.
Q.Secondary biliary cirrhosis.
/square6Biliary cirrhosis is cirrhosis of liver due to injury or
prolonged obstruction of intrahepatic or extra-
hepatic biliary system.
/square6It is associated with impaired biliary excretion,destruction of liver parenchyma, and progressive
fibrosis.
/square6Biliary cirrhosis can be divided into 2 types:
–Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC):  Here cirrhosis is
due to chronic inflammation and fibrous oblitera-tion of intrahepatic bile ductules.
–Secondary biliary cirrhosis (SBC):  Here cirrhosis is
due to prolonged obstruction of extrahepatic bile
ducts.
/square6Although PBC and SBC are separate entities, manyclinical features are similar.
Primary Biliary Cirrhosis
/square6Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) is liver cirrhosis due
to chronic inflammation and fibrous obliteration of
intrahepatic bile ductules.
Epidemiology
/square6PBC is common in Europe and America but is rarein Africa and Asia.
/square6Female are affected more commonly (female tomale ratio 9:1).
/square6It is also more common amongst cigarette smokers.
Etiology and Pathology
/square6Its cause is unknown but probably an autoimmunedisorder because it is associated with otherautoimmune disorders such as sicca syndrome,autoimmune thyroiditis, type 1 diabetes, etc.
/square6The condition is strongly associated with thepresence of antimitochondrial antibodies (AMA),which are diagnostic. Antinuclear antibodies (ANA)are also positive in these cases.
/square6The main pathology is chronic granulomatousinflammation of the portal tracts, which destroyssmall and middle-sized intrahepatic bile ducts. Thisin turn leads to fibrosis and cirrhosis of the liver.
Clinical Features
/square6Most patients are women.
/square6Many patients are asymptomatic for years.
/square6The condition typically presents with an insidious
onset of itching and/or tiredness. Itching may/square6A total score of 5–6 is considered grade A (well-
compensated disease).
/square6Score 7–9 is grade B (significant functionalcompromise).
/square6Score 10–15 is grade C (decompensated disease).
/square6These grades correlate with one- and two-yearpatient survival: Grade A-100 and 85 percent;grade B-80 and 60 percent; and grade C-45 and35 percent.
Complications
/square6Variceal bleeding
/square6Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
/square6Hepatic encephalopathyParameter Points assigned
12 3
Ascites Absent Slight Moderate
Bilirubin, mg/dL <2 2–3 >3
Albumin, g/dL >3.5 2.8–3.5 <2.8
Prothrombin timeSeconds over control <4 4–6 >6
OR INR <1.7 1.7–2.3 >2.3
Encephalopathy None Grade 1–2 Grade 3–4

/square6Diseases of Liver and Biliary System457
7precede jaundice by months or years. Over a period
of months to years, itching and jaundice worsen.
/square6As cirrhosis develops, signs of hepatocellular failure
and portal hypertension develop and ascites
appears.
/square6Steatorrhea can occur due to impaired fat
absorption due to impaired bile excretion into the
duodenum. There is malabsorption of fat-solublevitamins such as Vit D leading to osteomalacia orosteoporosis causing bone pain or fractures (hepaticosteodystrophy).
/square6Impaired excretion of cholesterol through bile leadsto elevation of serum cholesterol and subcutaneouslipid deposition around the eyes (xanthelasmas)and over joints and tendons (xanthomas).
/square6Physical examination may reveal scratch markson the skin due to itching, hyperpigmentation,xanthelasmas and xanthomas, hepatomegaly,
splenomegaly, and clubbing of the fingers.
Investigations
/square6LFTs show a cholestatic pattern. There is elevation
of the serum ALP (alkaline phosphatase). Serum5′-nucleotidase activity and γ-glutamyl trans-
peptidase levels are also elevated. Serum bilirubinis usually normal and aminotransferase levels areminimally increased.
/square6Hypercholesterolemia is common.
/square6The antimitochondrial antibody is present in mostpatients.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen shows normal extrahepaticbiliary ducts.
/square6Liver biopsy is only necessary if there is diagnostic
uncertainty.
Treatment
/square6There is no specific treatment for PBC.
/square6Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) has been shown to
improve biochemical markers of cholestasis andjaundice. It also slows disease progression but does
not change the final outcome. The hydrophilic
UDCA improves bile flow, replaces toxic hydro-phobic bile acids in the bile acid pool, and reducesapoptosis of the biliary epithelium. UDCA shouldbe given in doses of 13 to 15 mg/kg per day.
/square6Immunosuppressants such as corticosteroids,azathioprine, penicillamine and ciclosporin have allbeen tried in PBC but none is effective.
/square6Relief of symptoms: itching can be controlled byUDCA and cholestyramine (an oral bile salt–sequestering resin). Other drugs helpful for itchingare rifampicin, opiate antagonists (naloxone ornaltrexone), ondansetron, and ultraviolet light.Steatorrhea can be reduced by a low-fat diet and
substituting medium-chain triglycerides for dietary
long-chain triglycerides. Fat-soluble vitamins A, D,E, and K should be supplemented. Patients should
be screened periodically for osteoporosis andosteomalacia by bone densitometry and treated asneeded with calcium supplements, vitamin D and/or bisphosphonate agents (e.g. alendronate) ifosteoporosis is present.
/square6Liver transplantation is the only treatment whichoffers a cure for PBC. It should be considered inliver failure and intractable pruritus. Recurrence ofPBC after liver transplantation is rare.
Secondary Biliary Cirrhosis
/square6This is cirrhosis of liver due to prolonged obstruc-tion of extrahepatic bile ducts.
/square6Obstruction may be due to gallstones, benign bileduct strictures or sclerosing cholangitis. Carcinomasrarely cause secondary biliary cirrhosis becausepatients die before cirrhosis develops.
/square6Clinical features and biochemical findings are sameas primary biliary cirrhosis. In addition there maybe recurrent episodes of cholangitis associated withfever and right upper quadrant pain. Cholangitisrequires treatment with antibiotics, which can be
given continuously if attacks recur frequently.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen and cholangiography (PTC
or ERCP) can identify the site and cause of obstruc-tion.
/square6Treatment involves relief of obstruction to bile flow,by either endoscopic or surgical means. Antibioticsshould be given for episodes of cholangitis.
Q.Cardiac cirrhosis.
Definition
/square6Cardiac cirrhosis is cirrhosis of liver due to prolonged,
severe right-sided congestive heart failure. Othercardiac disorders which can produce cirrhosis arevalvular heart disease and constrictive pericarditis.
Pathogenesis
/square6Right-sided heart failure leads to retrogradetransmission of elevated venous pressure and
congestion of the liver. Hepatic sinusoids become
dilated and the liver becomes tensely swollen.
/square6Prolonged passive congestion and ischemia fromreduced cardiac output leads to necrosis of centri-
lobular hepatocytes and fibrosis. Ultimately
extensive fibrosis leads to cirrhosis.
/square6Gross examination of the liver shows alternatingred (congested) and pale (fibrotic) areas, a pattern
referred to as “nutmeg liver.”
Clinical Features
/square6Features of heart failure are more prominent than
cirrhosis. Patients complain of dyspnea, orthopnea,
and PND. Signs of congestive cardiac failure such

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
7458 as raised JVP, lung crepitations, S3 gallop, tricuspid
regurgitation murmur, peripheral edema andenlarged heart are usually present.
/square6Hepatomegaly is common. Other features of
cirrhosis may be present.
Investigations
/square6LFTs are similar to other causes of cirrhosis.
/square6ECG and echocardiogram show features of right
heart failure or other cardiac disease.
Treatment
/square6Underlying cardiac disorder must be treated.Mainstay of treatment is diuretics. Loop diuretics
(furosemide) or spironolactone can be used.
/square6Treatment of cirrhosis is same as other types of
cirrhosis ( see cirrhosis).
Q.Describe the anatomy of the portal venous system.
How do you define and classify portal hyper-tension?
Q.Discuss the etiology, pathology, clinical features,
investigations, complications and management of
portal hypertension.
Definition
/square6Portal hypertension is chronic elevation of the portal
venous pressure more than 10 mm Hg or 15 cm ofsaline (normal, 5–10 mmHg or 10–15 cm of saline).
Anatomy of the Portal Venous System
/square6The portal vein is formed by the union of thesuperior mesenteric vein and the splenic vein.
/square6Portal vein divides into right and left branches atthe hepatic hilum which further divide intosegmental branches. These end up into hepaticsinusoids. From sinusoids, blood drains into hepaticveins (right, left and middle) and then into theinferior vena cava (IVC).
/square6The portal venous system drains blood from theentire gastrointestinal (GI) tract starting from theesophago-gastric junction down to the upper one-third of the rectum, spleen and pancreas. The veins
of the portal system are valveless.
Etiology
Prehepatic
• Portal vein obstruction (e.g. portal vein thrombosis)• Increased blood flow through portal vein (splanchnic arterio-
venous fistula, massive splenomegaly)
Intrahepatic
• Cirrhosis• Drug toxicity (e.g. vinyl chloride, arsenic, vitamin A,
6-mercaptopurine)
• Malignant or metastatic hepatic diseases• Myeloproliferative diseases• Nodular regenerative hyperplasia• Sarcoidosis• Schistosomiasis• Wilson’s disease
Posthepatic
• Hepatic vein thrombosis (Budd-Chiari syndrome)• Cardiac disease (e.g. constrictive pericarditis, cardiomyo-
pathy)
• Inferior vena cava obstruction
Pathology
/square6Portal venous pressure depends on portal blood
flow and portal vascular resistance. Increased
vascular resistance is the main cause of portal
hypertension.
/square6Increased portal vascular resistance leads todecreased portal blood flow to the liver and
development of collateral vessels, allowing portal
blood to bypass the liver and enter the systemiccirculation directly (portosystemic shunting).
/square6Collateral vessels are seen in the esophagus,
stomach, rectum, anterior abdominal wall, and in
the renal, lumbar, ovarian and testicular vascula-ture. As collateral vessel formation progresses,more and more portosystemic shunting takes place.
/square6Dilatation of collateral vessels in the lower end ofesophagus leads to varices.
/square6Increased portal pressure leads to congestion of thespleen and splenomegaly.
/square6Rarely increased blood flow through portal vien cancause portal HTN (example massive splenomegalyfrom which there is high blood flow into the portalvein).
Clinical Features
/square6The clinical features of portal hypertension result
mainly from portal venous congestion and
collateral vessel formation.
/square6Splenomegaly is present usually (mild to moderate).If splenomegaly is absent, diagnosis of portal
hypertension is unlikely. Splenomegaly results in
hypersplenism which can cause thrombocytopeniaor even pancytopenia.
Figure 7.6 Anatomy of the portal venous system

/square6Diseases of Liver and Biliary System459
7/square6Dilated veins may be seen on the anterior abdominal
wall. Dilated veins radiating from the umbilicus arecalled caput medusae. Venous hum may be heardover a large umbilical collateral vein (Cruveilhier-Baumgarten syndrome).
/square6Dilated veins in the esophagus and stomach(gastroesophageal varices) can bleed and causehematemesis and melena.
/square6Rectal varices can also cause bleeding and are oftenmistaken for haemorrhoids.
/square6Fetor hepaticus results from portosystemicshunting of blood, which allows mercaptans to pass
directly to the lungs.
/square6Severe portal HTN can lead to ascites.
Investigations
/square6Blood tests: Anemia may be present due to hyper-
splenism and bleeding varices. Liver function tests
are usually normal in patients with non-cirrhoticportal hypertension but may be altered in cirrhosis.
/square6Endoscopy : Upper GI endoscopy shows gastro-
esophageal varices.
/square6Ultrasonography : Ultrasonography (USG) of the liver
and portal venous system helps to establish thediagnosis of portal HTN. It shows dilated collateralsaround the gastroesophageal junction and splenichilum, splenomegaly, and dilated portal vein and
splenic vein. It can also help in diagnosing the cause
of portal HTN such as cirrhosis, portal vein throm-bosis, etc. Doppler USG can assess the direction andvelocity of blood flow in the portal vein.
/square6Liver biopsy : It is indicated in selected cases to
diagnose the cause of portal HTN.
/square6Portal venography: Demonstrates the site and often
the cause of portal venous obstruction and isperformed prior to surgical intervention.
Complications of Portal Hypertension
/square6Variceal bleeding
/square6Congestive gastropathy
/square6Hypersplenism
/square6Ascites
/square6Renal failure
/square6Hepatic encephalopathy
Treatment
Reduction of Portal Pressure
/square6Nonselective beta-blockers such as propranolol ornadolol reduce portal pressure through splanchnicvasoconstriction and reduced cardiac output. Drugsshould be titrated to a target pulse rate of 60/minor reduction of resting pulse by 25%. Nitrates
(isosorbide mononitrate and dinitrate can be used
if beta-blockers are contraindicated./square6Portosystemic shunt surgeries such as protocavalshunt, splenorenal shunt, etc. are done lesscommonly now with the availability of TIPS.
/square6TIPS (transjugular intrahepatic portosystemicshunt): Here, a portal-systemic shunt is placedthrough internal jugular vein percutaneously. Itdecompresses the portal circulation.
/square6Wherever possible, underlying cause of portal HTNshould be treated.
/square6Liver transplantation is helpful in selected patients.
Treatment of Complications
/square6Complications such as variceal bleed, encephalo-pathy, ascites, etc. should be treated as per standardguidelines.
Q.Discuss the diagnosis, differential diagnosis, and
management of acute variceal bleeding.
Q.TIPS (transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic stent).
/square6Variceal bleeding occurs from esophageal varices
that are usually located within 3–5 cm of theesophago-gastric junction, or from gastric varices.
/square6Higher grade of varices (grade 3 and 4), red spotsand red stripes, high portal pressure and liverfailure, aspirin and other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are associated withincreased risk of variceal bleeding.
/square6Variceal bleeding can be severe and mortality frombleeding esophageal varices is high (up to 50% inthose with advanced liver disease).
Diagnosis of Variceal Bleed
/square6Hematemesis: Vomiting of fresh or altered blood(“coffee grounds” appearance).
/square6Melena:  Altered (black) blood passed by rectum.
/square6Hyperactive bowel sounds and an elevated blood
urea (due to volume depletion and blood proteins
absorbed in the small intestine) and low hemo-
globin suggest upper GI bleeding.
/square6Hemodynamic changes:  Significant variceal bleed
may lead pallor, tachypnea, tachycardia, and hypo-
tension.
/square6Nasogastric tube lavage reveals fresh or altered
blood in the stomach
/square6Upper GI scopy can confirm the diagnosis.
Differential Diagnosis of Variceal Bleed
/square6Peptic ulcer.
/square6Mallory–Weiss tears.
/square6Gastroduodenal erosions.
/square6Erosive esophagitis.
/square6Cancer.
/square6Aortoenteric fistulae.
/square6Vascular lesions.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
7460 Management of Acute Variceal Bleeding
/square6Variceal bleeding is a life-threatening emergency.
Patients should be admitted to an intensive careunit. Blood pressure, pulse rate, urine output, and
mental status should be monitored.
/square6Intravascular volume replacement should be donewith IV fluids and blood transfusion.
/square6Replacement of clotting factors with fresh-frozenplasma is important in patients with coagulopathy.
/square6The measures used to control acute varicealbleeding include endoscopic therapy (banding or
sclerotherapy), balloon tamponade, esophagealtransection, TIPS and sphlanchnic vasoconstrictors.
Variceal Banding
/square6This is the treatment of choice in acute varicealbleeding. It stops variceal bleeding in 80% ofpatients and can be repeated if bleeding recurs. Thisis a technique in which varices are sucked into an
endoscope accessory, and occluded with a tight
rubber band. The occluded varix subsequentlysloughs with variceal obliteration. It should berepeated at regular intervals to obliterate all varices.Banding is more effective than sclerotherapy, withfewer side effects and is the treatment of choice.
Sclerotherapy
/square6In this technique, varices are injected with a scleros-
ing agent to obliterate them. It is less preferred now
because of the availability of band ligation. Sclero-therapy can cause transient dysphagia, chest pain,esophageal perforation and esophageal strictures.
Splanchnic Vasoconstrictors
/square6Terlipressin and octreotide reduce the portalpressure and can stop variceal bleeding. Terli-pressin dose is 2 mg IV 6-hourly until bleeding stops
and then 1 mg 6-hourly for a further 24 hours.
/square6Octreotide is given as 50 μg IV bolus followed by
an infusion of 50 μg per hour.
Balloon Tamponade
/square6This technique employs a Sengstaken-Blakemore
tube with two balloons which exert pressure in thefundus of the stomach and in the lower esophagusrespectively when inflated.
/square6The tube is passed through the mouth into thestomach and gastric balloon is inflated with200–250 ml of air, which controls gastric varicealbleed. Then esophageal balloon is inflated to
compress the esophageal varices.
/square6Pressure in the esophageal balloon should bemonitored with a sphygmomanometer and should
not exceed 40 mmHg.
/square6Balloon tamponade will almost always stopesophageal and gastric fundal variceal bleeding, butthis is only a temporary measure. Definitive therapy
such as banding or sclerotherapy should bearranged as early as possible.
Transjugular Intrahepatic Portosystemic Stent (TIPS)
/square6TIPS can be used for acute bleeding not respondingto sclerotherapy or banding.
/square6This technique involves placing a stent betweenportal and hepatic vein in the liver to reduce portalpressure. It is done under radiological guidance viathe internal jugular vein. Patency of the portal veinmust be confirmed before the procedure byangiography. Any coagulation defect should be
corrected by fresh frozen plasma, and prophylactic
antibiotics are given. Successful shunt placementstops and prevents variceal bleeding.
/square6Shunt narrowing or occlusion can happen whichcan cause rebleeding from varices. It can becorrected by angioplasty.
/square6Although TIPS is better than endoscopic therapyin preventing rebleeding, survival is not improved.There is a higher risk of hepatic encephalopathywith TIPS since the portal blood is shunted directlyinto systemic circulation.
Esophageal Transection
/square6This operation is used when other measures cannotcontrol variceal bleeding and transjugular intra-hepatic portosystemic stenting (TIPS) is notavailable.
/square6Transection of the varices can be done with astapling gun but the procedure carries significantoperative morbidity and mortality.
Shunt Surgery
/square6Emergency portosystemic shunt surgery has amortality of 50% or more and is done rarely now.
/square6Portosystemic shunts are now reserved for patientsin whom all other treatments have failed.
/square6Non-selective portacaval shunts can divert majorityof the portal blood away from liver, leading to a
high risk of postoperative liver failure and hepatic
encephalopathy. Selective shunts (such as the distalsplenorenal shunt) are associated with lessencephalopathy. Survival is not prolonged by shuntsurgeries.
Prevention of Recurrent Bleeding
/square6Recurrent bleeding happens in almost all thepatients who have bled previously. Hence, follow-ing preventive measures are needed.
/square6Band ligation.
/square6Sclerotherapy.
/square6Portosystemic shunt surgery.

/square6Diseases of Liver and Biliary System461
7/square6Beta-adrenoceptor antagonists:  Propranolol or nadolol
reduce portal venous pressure and preventrecurrent variceal bleeding.
Q.List the drugs used to reduce portal venous pressure.
Sphlanchnic vasoconstrictors
• Vasopressin• Terlipressin
• Somatostatin
• Octreotide
Non-selective beta blockers
• Propranolol
• Nadolol
Nitrates
• Isosorbide mononitrate and dinitrate
Q.Define hepatic encephalopathy (portosystemic
encephalopathy or hepatic coma). Discuss thepathogenesis, clinical features, investigations, and
treatment of hepatic encephalopathy.
/square6Hepatic encephalopathy (HE) is a reversible neuro-psychiatric syndrome occurring in patients withadvanced liver failure.
/square6Its severity ranges from inversion of sleep rhythmand mild intellectual impairment to coma.
Pathophysiology
/square6Hepatic encephalopathy is thought to be due to abiochemical disturbance of brain function.
/square6It happens due to some biochemical ‘neurotoxins’(ammonia, aminobutyric acid, amino acids,mercaptans and fatty acids) produced in the gut,which are normally metabolized by the healthyliver. In the presence of liver failure and porto-
systemic shunting these nitrogenous substances
enter systemic circulation and brain. Ammonia isthe most important of these and it has multipleneurotoxic effects. It can alter the transit of aminoacids, water, and electrolytes across astrocytes andneurons. It can impair amino acid metabolism and
energy utilization in the brain. Ammonia can also
inhibit the generation of excitatory and inhibitorypostsynaptic potentials.
/square6Disruption of the blood–brain barrier is a featureof acute hepatic failure and may lead to cerebraledema and encephalopathy.
/square6Precipitating factors for hepatic encephalopathy.
– Bleeding into the intestinal tract increases the
amount of protein in the bowel and precipitatesencephalopathy.
– Other precipitants include constipation, alkalosis,
hypokalemia, sedatives, large volume ascitic tap,infection, and portosystemic shunts (includingTIPS).Clinical Features
/square6Early hepatic encephalopathy may not be clinicallyrecognizable except for mild cognitive, psycho-motor, and attention deficit on standardized tests.
/square6Alteration of sleep cycle characterized by day timesleepiness and night time insomnia is an early
symptom (inversion of sleep rhythm).
/square6As the severity of hepatic encephalopathy increases,it leads to confusion, restlessness, drowsiness, dis-
orientation, stupor, and finally coma. Convulsionscan sometimes occur.
/square6Examination usually shows a flapping tremor(asterixis), inability to perform simple mentalarithmetic calculations and draw objects such as astar (constructional apraxia). As the conditionprogresses, hyper-reflexia and bilateral extensor
plantar responses may be seen.
/square6Focal neurological signs may be rarely present inhepatic encephalopathy. However, other causes
such as stroke should be ruled out in such patients.
/square6Signs of liver cell failure such as fetor hepaticus(sweet musty odour to the breath due to the presenceof mercaptans), jaundice, spider naevi, coagulationdefects may be present.
Clinical grading of hepatic encephalopathy
• Grade 1: Euphoria or depression, mild confusion, slurred
speech, disordered sleep rhythm
• Grade 2: Lethargy, moderate confusion• Grade 3: Marked confusion, incoherent speech, sleeping but
arousable
• Grade 4: Coma; initially responsive to noxious stimuli, later
unresponsive
• Flaps are present in grades 2 and 3, and absent in grades 1
and 4 hepatic encephalopathy.
Differential Diagnosis of Hepatic Encephalopathy
/square6Subdural hematoma.
/square6Drug or alcohol intoxication.
/square6Delirium tremens.
/square6Wernicke’s encephalopathy.
/square6Primary psychiatric disorders.
/square6Hypoglycemia.
/square6Neurological problems.
/square6Wilson’s disease.
Investigations
/square6Diagnosis is made by clinical features. However,
following tests may be helpful in doubtful situations.
/square6Serum ammonia level is increased. But the severityof hepatic encephalopathy does not correlate with
ammonia level.
/square6Electroencephalogram (EEG) shows diffuse slowingof the normal alpha waves with eventual develop-
ment of delta waves.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
7462 /square6Serum electrolytes, urea, creatinine, glucose, etc.
should be done to rule out other causes of alteredsensorium.
/square6Brain imaging (CT or MRI) is required if stroke is
suspected.
Treatment
/square6Lactulose is given orally, initially at a dose of 30 mL
three or four times daily. The dose should then betitrated so that two or three soft stools per day areproduced. Lactulose is a non-absorbable syntheticdisaccharide. It is digested by bacteria in the colonto short-chain fatty acids, resulting in acidification
of colon contents. This acidification favors the
formation of ammonium ion (NH
4+) from ammonia.
Ammonium is not absorbable, and excreted in thestools. Lactulose also inhibits intestinal bacteria byformation of acidic environment which decreasesammonia production by bacteria. Lactulose can also
be given rectally as retention enema.
/square6Rifaximin 400 mg three times daily controls ammonia-
producing intestinal bacteria. Alternative antibioticsare metronidazole, neomycin and vancomycin.
/square6Flumazenil (benzodiazepine antagonist) is effectivein some patients with severe hepatic encephalopathy.
/square6Opioids and sedatives should be avoided.Oxazepam can be given to control agitation as it isnot metabolized by the liver.
/square6Dietary protein should be restricted. Vegetable
protein is better tolerated than meat protein.
Gastrointestinal bleeding should be controlled andblood should be purged from the gastrointestinaltract. This can be done by nasogastric aspirationand by giving lactulose to induce diarrhea.
/square6Chronic or refractory hepatic encephalopathyrequires liver transplantation.
Q.Hepatorenal syndrome.
Definition
/square6The hepatorenal syndrome refers to the develop-
ment of acute renal failure in a patient who hasadvanced liver disease, in the absence of identifiable
specific causes of renal dysfunction.
/square6Hepatorenal syndrome is diagnosed only when
other causes of renal failure (including prerenalazotemia and acute tubular necrosis) have been
excluded.
Pathogenesis
/square6The exact cause of this syndrome is not clear, but
altered renal hemodynamics appears to beinvolved. There is intense renal vasoconstriction,perhaps in response to the splanchnic vasodilationaccompanying cirrhosis. Kidneys are histologicallynormal. If these kidneys are transplanted to people
without liver disease, they function normally.Clinical Features
/square6Worsening azotemia.
/square6Hyponatremia.
/square6Progressive oliguria.
/square6Hypotension.
/square6It is often precipitated by severe gastrointestinal
bleeding, sepsis, or vigorous diuresis or paracentesis.
/square6Based upon the speed of onset of renal failure,two forms of hepatorenal syndrome have beenrecognized. Type 1 hepatorenal syndrome ischaracterized by progressive oliguria, a rapid riseof the serum creatinine and a very poor prognosis
(without treatment median survival is less than
1 month). Type II hepatorenal syndrome is moreslowly progressive and chronic.
Criteria for the diagnosis of hepatorenal syndrome
• Chronic or acute liver disease with advanced hepatic failure
and portal hypertension.
• A plasma creatinine concentration above 1.5 mg/dL that
progresses over days to weeks.
• The absence of any other apparent cause for the renal disease,
including shock, ongoing bacterial infection, current or
recent treatment with nephrotoxic drugs, and the absence
of ultrasonographic evidence of obstruction or parenchymalrenal disease.
• A urine sodium concentration below 10 mEq/L (off diuretics),
a urine osmolality above that of the plasma, and protein
excretion less than 500 mg/day.
• Lack of improvement in renal function after volume
expansion with 1.5 liters of isotonic saline and, if pertinent,
withdrawal of diuretics.
Treatment
/square6There is no effective treatment for hepatorenal
syndrome so far.
/square6Intravenous albumin infusion may help in some cases.
/square6Splanchnic vasoconstrictors such as terlipressin,and octreotide can be tried and have shown benefit.
Noadrenaline infusion which causes splanchnic
vasoconstriction has also shown benefit.
/square6Prolongation of survival has been associated withuse of the molecular adsorbent recirculating system
(MARS), a modified dialysis method that selectively
removes albumin-bound substances.
/square6TIPS has been reported to improve renal function
in some patients but its use cannot be universally
recommended.
/square6Liver transplantation is the treatment of choice forhepatorenal syndrome.
Q.Define ascites. Discuss the causes and approach
to a case of ascites.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of a case of ascites.
Q.Puddle sign.

/square6Diseases of Liver and Biliary System463
7Ascites refers to the accumulation of excess fluid in
the peritoneal cavity.
Causes of Ascites
• Cirrhosis with portal HTN
• Cardiac failure• Renal failure• Hypoproteinemia (nephrotic syndrome, protein-losing
enteropathy, malnutrition)
• Intra-abdominal malignancy• Pancreatitis• Abdominal tuberculosis• Hepatic venous occlusion (Budd-Chiari syndrome, veno-
occlusive disease)
• Rare causes (Meigs’ syndrome, lymphatic obstruction,
vasculitis, hypothyroidism)
Clinical Features
Symptoms
/square6Abdominal distension.
/square6Dyspnea and orthopnea due to pushed up
diaphragm.
/square6Epigastric and retrosternal burning sensation dueto gastroesophageal reflux due to increased intra-abdominal pressure.
/square6Low grade fever and weight loss suggests tuber-culous etiology.
/square6Presence of exertional dyspnea, orthopnea and
PND suggests heart failure.
Signs
/square6At least 1 litre fluid should be present to be clinically
detectable.
/square6Presence of jaundice and dilated veins over theabdomen indicate cirrhosis of liver with portal HTN.
Other stigmata of live disease such as spider naevi,
palmar eryrthema, gynecomastia, etc. may bepresent.
/square6Diffuse abdominal distension with fullness in the
flanks. Skin appears shiny.
/square6Umbilicus is flush with the skin or everted.
/square6Shifting dullness present on percussion. Horse shoe
shaped dullness is present in supine position.
/square6Fluid thrill is present in tense ascites.
/square6Puddle sign : This is useful to detect even minimal
ascites (as low as 120 ml). Patient is put in proneposition for 5 minutes. Then he is put in knee elbowpostion. Diaphragm of stethoscope is applied to themost dependent part of the abdomen. One flank is
flicked with a finger repeatedly while auscultating.
Move the diaphragm gradually to opposite flank.A change in percussion note indicates presence offluid.
/square6Tenderness may be present in the abdomen andpoints towards an infectious etiology such astuberculosis or peritonitis./square6Herniae, abdominal striae, divarication of the rectiand scrotal edema may be present.
/square6Pleural effusions may be present in some patientsusually on the right side.
/square6In cases of ascites due to heart failure, signs of heartcongestive heart failure such as raised JVP, basallung crepitations and third heart sound may bepresent.
/square6In cases of malignant ascites, sometimes a mass maybe palpable per abdomen.
Investigations
Ultrasound Abdomen
/square6This is the easiest and most sensitive test to detectascites. It can also show the underlying cause ofascites in many cases such as cirrhosis of liver, intra-
abdominal malignancy, portal HTN, etc.
Ascitic Fluid Analysis
/square6Appearance:  Clear or straw coloured in case of
transudates. Turbid appearance is seen in infectionsand malignancy. White color appearance is seen inchylous ascites. Dark brown color indicates biliarytract perforation. Black fluid may indicate thepresence of pancreatic necrosis or metastatic
melanoma.
/square6Cell count:  Normal ascitic fluid contains fewer than
500 WBCs/ μL and fewer than 250 polymorpho-
nuclear leukocytes (PMNs)/ μL. High WBC count
is found in infections. A PMN count of greater than
250 cells/ μL is highly suggestive of bacterial
peritonitis. Presence of high percentage of lympho-cytes indicates tuberculous etiology.
/square6Seruma scites albumin gradient (SAAG):  The SAAG
is the best single test for classifying ascites intotransudative (SAAG >1.1 g/dL) and exudative(SAAG < 1.1 g/dL) causes. SAAG >1.1 g/dL istypical of cirrhosis of liver with portal HTN. SAAGis calculated by subtracting the ascitic fluid albumin
value from the serum albumin value.
/square6Total protein:  Total ascitic fluid protein greater than
or equal to 2.5 g/dL indicates exudative ascites. Anelevated SAAG and a high protein level are
observed in most cases of ascites due to hepatic
congestion. The combination of a low SAAG and ahigh protein level is characteristic of malignantascites.
/square6Culture/Gram stain/AFB stain:  It is useful to identify
the infecting organism in cases of ascites due tointra-abdominal infections.
/square6Malignant cytology:  Useful in cases of suspected
malignant ascites.
/square6Ascitic fluid amylase:  It is typically >1000 mg/dL in
pancreatic ascites.
/square6Adenosine deaminase (ADA):  It is usually more than
40U/L in tuberculuos ascites.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
7464 Chest X-ray
/square6Pleural effusion may be present in cases of massive
ascites.
CT Abdomen
/square6Useful to diagnose or rule out cirrhosis, malignancy,tuberculosis, etc.
ECG/Echocardiogram
/square6To rule out congestive cardiac failure.
Treatment
/square6Treat the underlying cause.
/square6Diuretics are helpful in reducing ascites especiallyin portal HTN. Spironolactone or furosemide canbe used.
/square6Sodium intake should be restricted to 20 to 30 mEq/d.
/square6Therapeutic paracentesis may be performed inpatients who require rapid symptomatic relief forrefractory or tense ascites.
/square6The transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt(TIPS) is useful in cirrhotic patients with refractoryascites.
Q.Discuss the pathogenesis and management of
ascites in cirrhosis.
Pathogenesis of Ascites in Cirrhosis
/square6The accumulation of ascitic fluid represents a state
of total-body sodium and water excess. The exactcause of ascites formation is not understood, butmost likely it is multifactorial. The followingmechanisms may play a role.
/square6Renal retention of sodium and water:  Cirrhosis of liver
leads to accumulation of nitric oxide which causessplanchnic and peripheral arterial dilatation leadingto a decrease in effective circulating blood volume.This apparent decrease in intravascular volume(underfilling) is sensed by the kidney, leading toactivation of renin-angiotensin system with secon-dary hyperaldosteronism, increased sympatheticactivity, and increased atrial natriuretic hormonesecretion. All these changes lead to salt and waterretention.
/square6Increased hydrostatic pressure in portal venous system:Splanchnic vasodilatation also leads to increasedportal venous blood flow. This combined effect ofincreased portal blood flow and portal HTN leadsto increased hydrostatic pressure in portalcirculation leading to oozing out of fluid fromcapillaries into the peritoneum.
/square6Hypoalbuminemia:  Decreased serum albumin in
cirrhosis leads to decreased oncotic pressure in thesplanchnic circulation and ascites formation.Investigations
Ascitic Fluid Analysis
/square6Ascitic fluid is clear or straw colored in cirrhosis. It
is usually transudate unless complicated by SBP.Cell count is less than 250.
/square6The ascites protein concentration and the serum-
ascites albumin gradient (SAAG ratio) is used to
distinguish ascites due to transudation from ascitesdue to exudation. Cirrhotic patients usually havetransudate with a SAAG ratio of >1.1.
Ultrasound Abdomen
/square6It confirms the diagnosis especially when smallamounts are present.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen can also point towards theunderlying cause of ascites such as cirrhosis,pancreatitis, etc.
Treatment
/square6Salt restriction:  2 gm per day.
/square6Fluid restriction:  1 litre /day.
/square6Diuretics: Spironolactone is the initial drug of choice
(50–400 mg/d). Furosemide (40–160 mg/d) can beadded if not responding to spironolactone alone.
Spironolactone can cause painful gynecomastia and
hyperkalemia. Diuresis is improved if patients arerested in bed while the diuretics are acting, perhapsbecause renal blood flow increases in the horizontalposition.
/square6Paracentesis:  Therapeutic pracentesis is done in
severe ascites. Albumin infusion should be givenduring large volume paracentesis. This should befollowed by maintenance diuretic therapy andsodium restriction.
/square6Shunts:  Portacaval shunt, peritoneovenous shunt
and TIPS can reduce ascites but do not improve lifeexpectancy.
Q.Refractory ascites.
/square6Patients who do not respond to doses of 400 mg
spironolactone and 160 mg furosemide are consi-dered to have refractory or diuretic-resistant ascites.
Differential Diagnosis of Refractory Ascites
/square6Malignant ascites.
/square6Nephrogenic ascites (end-stage renal disease).
/square6Budd-Chiari syndrome (hepatic vein thrombosis).
Treatment Options
/square6Liver transplantation.
/square6Serial therapeutic paracentesis.
/square6Colloid replacement.
/square6Extracorporeal ultrafiltration and reinfusion.
/square6Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic stent-
shunt (TIPS).

/square6Diseases of Liver and Biliary System465
7/square6Peritoneovenous shunt.
/square6Surgical portasystemic shunts.
Q.Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP).
/square6Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis (SBP) is defined
as an ascitic fluid infection without an evident intra-
abdominal surgically treatable source. Patients withcirrhosis are very susceptible to infection of ascitic
fluid.
/square6The source of infection cannot usually be deter-
mined, but most organisms isolated from asciticfluid or blood cultures are of enteric origin and
Escherichia coli  is the organism most frequently
found. The bacteria are transported from the lumenof intestine into peritoneal cavity due to loss of
defense mechanisms which normally contain the
bacteria within the lumen.
Clinical Features
/square6Abdominal pain, rebound tenderness, absent bowelsounds and fever in a patient with obvious features
of cirrhosis and ascites.
/square6Abdominal signs are mild or absent in about one-
third of patients, and in these patients hepaticencephalopathy and fever are the main features.
/square6Hypotension and hypothermia suggests advanced
infection and such patients usually do not survive.
Investigations
/square6Blood count shows leukocytosis.
/square6Ascitic fluid analysis:  Cloudy fluid, total leukocyte counts
is >500/mm3 and neutrophil count is >250/mm3.
/square6Ascitic fluid Gram stain and culture can identify
the organism which is usually E. coli .
/square6Finding of multiple organisms on culture should
arouse suspicion of a perforated viscus.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen to rule out other causes ofperitonitis such as hollow viscus perforation.
Treatment
/square6Broad-spectrum antibiotics, such as cefotaxime 2 g
IV every eight hours for 5 to 10 days. Ceftriaxone
and ceftazidime have similar efficacy. Intravenousor oral quinolone is an alternative.
/square6Recurrence of SBP is common and may be reduced
by prophylactic quinolones such as norfloxacin
(400 mg daily) or ciprofloxacin (250 mg daily).
Q.Discuss the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features,
investigations and management of acute cholangitis.
Q.Charcot’s triad.
/square6Acute cholangitis refers to infection of the bile duct
which is characterized by fever, jaundice, and
abdominal pain.
/square6Cholangitis was first described by Charcot.Etiology
/square6Escherichia coli  is the most common organism causing
cholangitis.
Pathogenesis
/square6Acute cholangitis is caused mainly by bacteria.
/square6The organisms ascend from the duodenum. Hemato-genous spread from the portal vein is a rare source
of infection.
/square6The most important predisposing factor for acute
cholangitis is biliary obstruction and stasissecondary to biliary calculi or stricture.
/square6High intrabiliary pressure due to obstruction ofbiliary tree promotes the migration of bacteria fromthe portal circulation into the biliary tract andsubsequent colonization.
/square6The sphincter of Oddi normally prevents duodenalreflux into the biliary tree and ascending bacterialinfection. When there is sphincter of Oddi dys-function or after endoscopic sphincterotomy,
choledochal surgery, or biliary stent insertion,
pathogenic bacteria enter the biliary tree and leadto infection.
Clinical Features
/square6Charcot triad: Refers to fever, right upper quadrant
pain, and jaundice. It occurs in only 50 to 75 percentof patients with acute cholangitis.
/square6Confusion and hypotension can occur in severecholangitis.
/square6Septic shock in severe cases can lead to multi-organ
failure.
Investigations
/square6Leukocytosis with neutrophilia.
/square6LFT shows cholestatic pattern with elevation of
alkaline phosphatase, and predominantly directhyperbilirubinemia.
/square6Serum amylase may be elevated due to associatedpancreatitis.
/square6Blood cultures can sometimes identify the orga-nism.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen my show common bile ductdilatation and stones.
/square6Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography
(ERCP).
/square6Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography
(MRCP) is a noninvasive alternative to ERCP toevaluate biliary tree.
/square6Endoscopic ultrasound is another means tovisualize common duct stones.
Treatment
/square6The mainstays of therapy are antibiotics andestablishment of biliary drainage.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
7466 General Measures
/square6Intravenous fluids, antipyretics, correction of
coagulopathy, and frequent monitoring of vitalsigns for evidence of sepsis.
Antibiotics
/square6Broad spectrum antibiotics to cover gram-negative
bacteria and enterococcus. Effective antibiotics
include: Ampicillin plus gentamicin, carbapenems(imipenem or meropenem) and fluoroquinolones(levofloxacin). Metronidazole can be added to coveranaerobes, in sick patients. Antibiotics should begiven for 1 to 2 weeks.
Biliary Drainage
/square6If there is no response to antibiotic therapy, biliary
drainage should be considered. Biliary drainage
can be achieved by ERCP, a direct percutaneousapproach, or open surgical decompression. Endo-scopic sphincterotomy with stone extraction and/or stent insertion is now the treatment of choice forestablishing biliary drainage in acute cholangitis.
Q.Discuss the etiology, pathology, clinical features,
investigations, and management of Budd-Chiari
syndrome.
/square6Budd-Chiari syndrome refers to obstruction ofhepatic venous outflow. Obstruction can beanywhere from the small hepatic veins inside theliver to the inferior vena cava and right atrium.
/square6Most common cause is thrombosis of the hepaticveins and/or the intrahepatic or suprahepaticinferior vena cava.
/square6Regardless of the cause, patients with Budd-Chiarisyndrome develop postsinusoidal portal hyper-tension, which leads to complications similar tothose observed in patients with cirrhosis.
Etiology
• Myeloproliferative diseases
• Malignancy (hepatocellular carcinoma is most common)• Infections of the liver (amebiasis, hydatid cyst)• Oral contraceptives• Pregnancy
• Membranous webs of the inferior vena cava and/or the
hepatic veins
• Hypercoagulable states
– Factor V Leiden mutation– Prothrombin gene mutation
– Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
– Antithrombin III deficiency– Protein C deficiency– Protein S deficiency– Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
• Behcet’s disease• IdiopathicPathology
/square6Initially hepatic congestion affecting the centrilobular
areas occurs. This is followed by centrilobular fibrosisand eventually cirrhosis.
Clinical Manifestations
/square6Budd-Chiari syndrome is more common in women,and usually presents in the third or fourth decade.
/square6Presentation can be categorized as acute or chronic.
/square6In acute form, patients usually present with severeright upper quadrant pain, tender hepatomegaly,jaundice and ascites. Fulminant hepatic failure canalso occur.
/square6More gradual occlusion causes gross ascites andoften upper abdominal discomfort.
/square6Peripheral edema occurs when there is inferior venacava obstruction.
/square6Cirrhosis and portal hypertension develop inchronic form.
Investigations
/square6LFT: In acute Budd-Chiari, LFT shows acute
hepatitis pattern with AST and ALT elevation.
/square6Ascitic fluid analysis: Usually shows exudative
pattern.
/square6Doppler ultrasound:  It shows occlusion of the hepatic
veins and reversed flow or associated thrombosis
in the portal vein.
/square6CT scan and MRI may also demonstrate occlusionof the hepatic veins and inferior vena cava.
/square6Liver biopsy:  It shows centrilobular congestion with
fibrosis depending upon the duration of the illness.
/square6Venography:  This is the gold standard for diagnosis.
However, since it is invasive, it is done if CT andMRI are unable to show hepatic venous occlusion.
Treatment
/square6Treat the underlying cause.
/square6Medical management involves thrombolysis, ifthrombosis is of recent origin, and anticoagulation.For anticoagulation, heparin is given initiallyfollowed by oral anticoagulation. Ascites is treatedwith diuretics.
/square6TIPS (transjugular intrahepatic portosystemicshunt) followed by anticoagulation: This creates analternative venous outflow tract. Can be used inextensive hepatic vein occlusion.
/square6For caval webs or hepatic venous stenosis, decom-pression via percutaneous transluminal balloonangioplasty with intraluminal stents can maintainhepatic outflow.
/square6Surgical shunts, such as portacaval shunts, are lesscommonly performed now that TIPS is available.
/square6Liver transplantation and life-long anticoagulationshould be considered for progressive liver failure.

/square6Diseases of Liver and Biliary System467
7Q.Enumerate the tumors of liver.
Q.Discuss the etiology, pathology, clinical features,
investigations, and management of hepatocellular
carcinoma (hepatoma).
Tumors of Liver
Benign
• Hemangioma• Hepatic adenoma• Focal nodular hyperplasia
Malignant
• Primary (hepatocellular carcinoma, fibrolamellar  hepato-
cellular carcinoma, sarcomas)
• Secondaries
Hepatocellular Carcinoma
/square6This is the most common primary liver tumor.
Risk Factors
• Chronic hepatitis B and C infection
• Cirrhosis due to any etiology
• Environmental toxins (aflatoxin)• Hemochromatosis• Tobacco and alcohol abuse• Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH)
Pathology
/square6Macroscopically, the tumor appears as a single mass
or multiple nodules. Blood supply is from hepatic
artery and it tends to spread by invasion into theportal vein and its radicles. Lymph node metastases
are common but lung and bone metastases are
rare.
/square6Microscopically, hepatocellular carcinoma can bedivided into 3 types: Well-differentiated, mode-
rately differentiated, and poorly differentiated.
Tumor cells resemble hepatocytes when welldifferentiated.
/square6Integration of the hepatitis B virus genome into the
host genome is the primary mechanism of cancer
development in hepatitis B infection.
Clinical Features
/square6Many patients are asymptomatic and detected
through screening programmes.
/square6Weight loss, anorexia and abdominal pain.
/square6Variceal hemorrhage can occur due to underlying
cirrhosis.
/square6Examination may reveal ascites, jaundice, hepato-megaly or a right hypochondrial mass. A bruit may
be heard over the tumor due to increased blood
supply.
Screening
/square6Screening for hepatocellular carcinoma, by ultra-sound scanning at 3–6-month intervals, is useful inhigh-risk patients. This may identify tumor at early
stage which may be curable by surgical resection,local ablative therapy or transplantation.
Investigations
Blood tests
/square6Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) level is increased in
hepatocellular carcinoma. However, it may also
increase in active hepatitis due to hepatitis B andC, and in acute hepatic necrosis (e.g. due toparacetamol toxicity).
/square6ALP is usually elevated but other LFTs may benormal.
Ultrasound
/square6This will detect lesions as small as 2–3 cm. It may also
show other underlying pathologies like cirrhosis.
CT
/square6On CT, hepatocellular carcinoma appears hyper-
vascular. It can define the extent and spread oftumors to other organs.
Liver biopsy
/square6This can confirm the diagnosis of hepatocellular ca
and exclude metastatic tumor. There is a small riskof seedling of tumor cells along the needle tract.
Management
Surgical therapy
/square6Hepatic resection : Small localized tumors can be
removed by resection in patients with good liver
function. Patients with cirrhosis are not suitable forresection because of high risk of liver failure.However, it can be considered in some cirrhoticpatients with small tumors and good liver function.
/square6Liver transplantation: This can be considered in
patients with underlying cirrhosis or decompen-sated liver disease.
Local ablative therapies
/square6Transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE)
is the most commonly offered therapy. TACE isperformed by selectively cannulating the feeding
artery to the tumor and delivering high local doses
of chemotherapy, including doxorubicin, cisplatin,or mitomycin C.
/square6Another newly developed local treatment is
TheraSphere which delivers low-dose brachy-
therapy to the tumor. TheraSphere uses 20–40micrometer glass beads that are loaded withradioactive yttrium and delivered angiographically.
/square6Radiofrequency ablation:  Under ultrasound guidance,
a conducting needle is placed within the tumor andelectric current is given. The electric current leadsto agitation of the ions in the tissue, heat generation,and desiccation of the tissues surrounding the probe.
/square6Percutaneous ethanol injection is used rarely andhas been replaced by radiofrequency ablation.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
7468 Sorafenib
/square6This is a new drug shown to be useful in hepato-
cellular carcinoma. Lenvatinib has been approved asthe second agent for first-line treatment of advanced
HCC. Effect of lenvatinib is similar to sorafenib.
Prevention
/square6Hepatitis B vaccination can prevent cancer due to
hepatitis B infection.
Q.Alpha-fetoprotein.
/square6Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) is a protein produced by
the liver and yolk sac of a developing baby duringpregnancy. AFP levels go down soon after birth.
/square6The normal values in males or non-pregnantfemales is generally less than 40 micrograms/liter.
/square6AFP levels can increase in the following conditions.
– Hepatocellular carcinoma
– Cancer in testes, ovaries, biliary (liver secretion)
tract, stomach, or pancreas
– Cirrhosis of the liver
– Malignant teratoma
/square6AFP can also be used to monitor tumor recurrence
after treatment. Elevation of AFP after remissionsuggests tumor recurrence. Failure of the AFP value
to return to normal by approximately 1 month after
surgery suggests the presence of residual tumor.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investiga-
tions, and management of pyogenic liver abscess.
/square6Pyogenic liver abscess is a type of liver abscess
caused by bacteria. Pyogenic liver abscess is curablebut fatal if untreated.
Etiology
• Biliary obstruction causing ascending cholangitis and abscess
formation (most common cause)
• Infection via portal system (appendicitis, pylephlebitis)• Hematogenous via hepatic artery (infective endocarditis,
urosepsis)
• Direct extension from adjacent sites• Trauma (penetrating or non-penetrating injuries)• Infection of liver tumour or cyst• Cryptogenic (unknown cause)
Pathogenesis
/square6Liver abscesses are common in older and immuno-
suppressed patients.
/square6Infection can reach the liver in several ways.
Commonest route is ascending infection due tobiliary obstruction (cholangitis) or direct spread
from an empyema of the gallbladder.
/square6Single abscess is common in the right lobe. Multiple
abscesses are usually due to infection secondary tobiliary obstruction./square6Common organisms are E. coli , streptococci, and
Bacteroides. Multiple organisms are present in one-
third of patients.
Clinical Features
/square6Patients appear ill with fever, chills and rigors.There may be weight loss. Liver abscess can present
as PUO without any localizing symptoms.
/square6Abdominal pain is usually present and felt in the
right upper quadrant, often radiating to the right
shoulder.
/square6Examination shows tender hepatomegaly. Icterusmay be present.
Investigations
/square6Leukocytosis.
/square6Bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase are elevated.Serum albumin is often low.
/square6Blood culture may grow the causative organism.
/square6Ultrasound or CT abdomen is the most usefulinvestigation and shows 90% or more of sympto-
matic abscesses.
/square6Needle aspiration under ultrasound guidance
confirms the diagnosis and provides pus for culture.
/square6Chest X-ray may show a raised right diaphragmand lung collapse or an effusion at the base of the
right lung.
Management
/square6Management involves antibiotic therapy and abscessdrainage.
/square6Pending identification of the organism, empiricalantibiotic therapy which covers gram-positive,
gram-negative and anaerobes should be started.
combination of third generation cephalosporin such
as ceftriaxone (covers gram-positive and gram-
negative) and metronidazole (covers anaerobes) can
be started. Antibiotics should be given for at least
4 to 6 weeks.
/square6Needle aspiration or drainage through a catheter
is required, if the abscess is large (>5 cm) or if it
does not respond to antibiotics.
/square6Surgical drainage is required for chronic persistent
abscess.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investiga-
tions, and management of amebic liver abscess.
/square6Amebic liver abscess is the most common extra-
intestinal manifestation of amebiasis. Amebae reach
the liver by ascending the portal venous system.
/square6It is more common in men.
/square6A single abscess is found in the right lobe of theliver in most patients, although multiple abscesses
can be present in some.
Etiology
/square6Entamoeba histolytica.

/square6Diseases of Liver and Biliary System469
7Clinical Features
/square6Fever and abdominal pain in the right upper
quadrant.
/square6Concurrent diarrhea or past history of dysenterymay be present.
/square6Examination shows hepatomegaly and point
tenderness over the liver. Jaundice may be present
in some.
Diagnosis
/square6Leukocytosis.
/square6Elevated alkaline phosphatase and hepatic trans-aminases.
/square6Fecal microscopy may show Entamoeba histolytica
in some patients.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen can identify the location, size
and number of abscesses.
/square6CT or MRI are more accurate than ultrasound.
/square6Serologic testing—anterior amebic antibodies will
be positive in most patients with amebic liverabscess.
/square6Aspiration—this is required if there no response to
antibiotic therapy after three to five days, if a cyst
appears to be at imminent risk of rupture, or to ruleout other diagnoses. Aspiration is done under
ultrasound or CT guidance. Amebic liver abscess
has “anchovy sauce” appearance. Trophozoitesmay be seen on microscopy of the aspirate.
Treatment
/square6Both tissue and luminal agents are used in thetreatment of amebic liver abscess.
/square6The most commonly used tissue agent is metro-
nidazole (500 to 750 mg orally three times daily for
minimum 10 days). Intravenous therapy is notrequired as it is well absorbed orally. Other alterna-
tives are tinidazole, ornidazole and nitazoxanide.
Chloroquine also has amebicidal activity but israrely used.
/square6Luminal agents are used to kill intraluminal
organisms. These are paromomycin or diloxanide
furoate.
/square6Aspiration may be required if there is no responseto medical therapy.
Q.Liver transplantation.
/square6Liver transplantation is the treatment of choice for
patients with end-stage liver disease.
/square6The outcome following liver transplantation has
improved significantly over the last decade.
However, the number of liver transplants is limitedby the availability of donors.Indications
• Fulminant hepatic failure
• Metabolic diseases (hemochromatosis, galactosemia)
• Decompensated cirrhosis
• Hepatocellular carcinoma• Hepatic trauma
Procedure
/square6Liver is obtained either from cadavers or from living
donors. Full liver can be transplanted fromcadavers. Only a portion of the liver is taken fromliving donors.
/square6Patients should be maintained on immuno-suppression after transplantation. Less immuno-suppression is needed for liver transplantation thanfor kidney and heart/lung transplantation. Steroids
along with tacrolimus or cyclosporine are used for
immunosuppression.
Contraindications for Liver Transplantation
/square6Sepsis.
/square6Extrahepatic malignancy.
/square6Active alcohol or other substance abuse.
/square6Advanced cardiopulmonary disease.
Complications
Early Complications
/square6Acute rejection.
/square6Surgical complications (hepatic artery thrombosis,anastomotic biliary strictures).
/square6Infections (pneumonia, wound infections, CMVhepatitis).
Late Complications
/square6Recurrence of original disease in the graft.
/square6Complications due to the immunosuppressivetherapy such as infections and renal impairmentfrom cyclosporin.
/square6Chronic vascular rejection.
Q.Enumerate the causes of hemochromatosis.
Q.Discuss the etiology, pathology, clinical features,
investigations, and management of hereditary
(primary) hemochromatosis.
/square6Hemochromatosis is a condition where the totalbody iron is increased and deposited in variousorgans leading to organ damage including liver.
/square6It may be hereditary (primary) or secondary.
Causes of Hemochromatosis (Iron Overload States)
Hereditary
• Hereditary hemochromatosis types 1 to 4• Transferin and ceruloplasmin deficiency

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
7470Secondary
• Repeated blood transfusion
• Ineffective erythropoeisis (thalassemia, sideroblastic anemia)
• Liver disease
• Dietary iron overload (prolonged oral iron therapy)• African iron overload (Bantu siderosis)
• Porphyria cutanea tarda
Pathogenesis
/square6Hereditary hemochromatosis is caused by muta-
tions in the HFE gene or other related genes whichcause increased intestinal iron absorption and ironoverload. There are 4 types of hereditary hemo-
chromatosis, types 1 through 4, depending on the
gene that is mutated. Type 1 is due to HFE genemutation. It is inherited as an autosomal recessivedisease.
/square6Transferin and ceruloplasmin deficiency causesimpaired transportation of iron from the organswhich gets deposited in various organs.
/square6Excess iron is deposited throughout the body andtotal body iron may reach 20–60 gm (normal 4 gm).Important organs involved are liver, pancreatic
islets, endocrine glands and heart.
/square6Excess iron is hazardous, because it produces freeradical formation. Free radicals can produce DNA
cleavage, impaired protein synthesis, and impair-ment of cell integrity and cell proliferation, leadingto cell injury and fibrosis.
Clinical Features
/square6Males are affected more commonly (90% of patientsare male) as iron loss in menstruation and preg-nancy protects females.
/square6Symptomatic disease usually presents in men aged40 years or over.
/square6Many organ systems are involved producing theirown clinical manifestations.
/square6Liver involvement:  Cirrhosis, hepatocellular ca.
/square6Heart: Cardiomyopathy, heart failure, conduction
defects.
/square6Pancreatic islets:  Diabetes mellitus.
/square6Joints:  Arthropathy.
/square6Skin:  Leaden-grey pigmentation.
/square6Testicles:  Atrophy and impotence
/square6Skin pigmentation along with diabetes is called
‘bronzed diabetes’.
/square6Hemochromatosis patients are prone to develophepatocellular ca and other malignancies.
Investigations
/square6Serum ferritin and iron are increased. TIBC is low.
/square6CT may show features suggesting excess hepaticiron./square6Liver biopsy:  Can confirm the diagnosis. It shows
heavy iron deposition and hepatic fibrosis. Ironcontent of the liver can be measured directly.
/square6Genetic testing:  Mutations involving the HFE gene
can be identified. If HFE gene mutation is absent,mutations of other genes should be suspected.
Management
/square6Venesection (phlebotomy):  It is the main treatment for
hereditary hemochromatosis. It can also be used for
secondary hemochromatosis. It is the simplest,
cheapest, and most effective way to removeaccumulated iron. Weekly venesection of 500 mlblood (250 mg iron) is done until the serum iron isnormal; this may take 2 years or more. Thereafter,maintenance venesection is continued as required
to keep the serum ferritin normal.
/square6Chelation therapy  is mainly used for secondary
hemochromatosis. Deferoxamine is the drugtraditionally used for iron chelation therapy andhas to be given subcutaneously. Deferasirox anddeferiprone are new agents which can be givenorally.
/square6Diabetes and cirrhosis are treated as per standard
guidelines.
/square6First-degree family members should be screened
for hemochromatosis by genetic testing and serumferritin levels.
Prognosis
/square6Hemochromatosis patients without cirrhosis havea normal life expectancy. Cirrhosis due to hemo-chromatosis has better prognosis than other formsof cirrhosis. Development of hepatocellular carci-
noma in cirrhotic patients is the main cause of death.
Q.Discuss the etiology, pathology, clinical features,
investigations, and management of Wilson disease
(hepatolenticular degeneration).
/square6Wilson disease is a rare autosomal recessive disorderof copper metabolism. Here, total body copper isincreased, and excess copper is deposited in variousorgans causing damage.
Etiology and Pathology
/square6It is caused by a variety of mutations in the gene
ATP7B on chromosome 13. ATP7B is a P-type
ATPase that is responsible for transport of copperacross cellular membranes using ATP as an energysource.
/square6Normally dietary copper is absorbed from thestomach and proximal small intestine, taken up bythe liver, incorporated into ceruloplasmin, andsecreted into the blood. Any excess copper is
excreted into the bile.

/square6Diseases of Liver and Biliary System471
7/square6In Wilson disease, there is failure of synthesis of
ceruloplasmin. An impairment in biliary excretionleads to the accumulation of copper in the liver.Over time the liver is progressively damaged andeventually becomes cirrhotic.
Clinical Features
/square6Most patients present below the age of 40 years.
/square6Various organs can get damaged due to excesscopper accumulation. Most important organsinvolved are liver and nervous system.
/square6Liver disease usually occurs in younger age group.It can manifest in many ways such as acutehepatitis, fulminant liver failure, chronic hepatitisand cirrhosis. Wilson disease should be suspectedin any case of recurrent acute or chronic liverdisease of unknown cause in a patient under
40 years.
/square6Neurological damage causes basal ganglion
syndromes and dementia. Clinical features includea variety of extrapyramidal features, particularly
tremor, choreoathetosis, dystonia, parkinsonism
and dementia.
/square6Kayser-Fleischer rings are greenish-brown dis-coloration of the corneal margin usually first seen
at the upper margin due to copper deposition. They
are best seen by slit-lamp examination and dis-appear with treatment.
/square6Other manifestations include renal tubular damage
and osteoporosis.
Investigations
/square6Low serum ceruloplasmin and high serum copper
level. However, advanced liver failure from anycause can reduce the serum ceruloplasmin, andoccasionally it is normal in Wilson disease.
/square624 hour urinary copper excretion:  >40 μg/day is highly
suggestive of Wilson disease.
/square6AST and ALT are usually elevated.
/square6Liver biopsy:  Copper content is high. There may be
fatty infiltration and portal fibrosis.
/square6Genetic testing:  This is limited by the presence of
multiple mutations.
Management
/square6Lifelong therapy is required in patients with Wilson
disease and treatment should be given in twophases: Removing the tissue copper that hasaccumulated and then preventing re-accumulation.
/square6Copper removal is achieved by the administrationof potent chelators such as penicillamine andtrientine. Trientine is preferred because of fewer sideeffects. Side effects of penicillamine include rashes,
protein-losing nephropathy, lupus-like syndrome
and bone marrow suppression. Oral zinc is alsouseful and acts by preventing copper absorption./square6Prevention of reaccumulation during the main-tenance phase can be achieved with lower dose ofpenicillamine or trientine or zinc. Treatment shouldnot be stooped suddenly as it may precipitate liverfailure and it should continue even through preg-nancy.
/square6Patients should be advised to avoid copper-richfoods such as liver, kidney, shellfish, nuts, beans,peas, chocolate, and mushrooms.
/square6First degree relatives should be screened for Wilsondisease and treatment should be given to affectedindividuals, even if they are asymptomatic.
/square6Liver transplantation is indicated for fulminanthepatic failure and decompensated liver diseasethat are unresponsive to drug therapy.
Prognosis
/square6The prognosis is excellent, if treatment is startedbefore there is irreversible damage.
Q.Discuss the etiology, pathology, clinical features,
investigations, complications and management of
acute cholecystitis.
Etiology
/square6Acute cholecystitis is usually due to obstruction of
the gallbladder neck or cystic duct by a gallstone.Rarely, obstruction may be due to mucus, parasiticworms or a tumor.
/square6Acalculous cholecystitis refers to gallbladderinflammation without gallstones and usually occursin critically ill patients.
Pathology
/square6Obstruction leads to inflammation of the gall-bladder wall. This leads to mucosal damage whichreleases phospholipase, converting biliary lecithinto lysolecithin, which is a mucosal toxin. Initially
gallbladder contents are sterile, but eventually
secondary bacterial infection occurs. Infection withgas-forming organisms can cause emphysematouscholecystitis in elderly and diabetes patients.
Clinical Features
/square6Patients complain of abdominal pain in the rightupper quadrant or epigastrium. Pain may radiateto the right shoulder or back. Pain is steady andsevere.
/square6There may be nausea, vomiting, and anorexia.
/square6There is often a history of fatty food ingestion beforethe onset of pain.
/square6Examination shows a febrile, sick looking patientwith tachycardia and tachypnea.
/square6There is right hypochondrial tenderness, and
occasionally a gallbladder mass is palpable.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
7472 /square6There may be guarding in the right hypochondrial
area.
/square6Murphy’s sign:  While palpating gallbladder just
below the liver edge, patient is asked to take deepinspiration, causing the gallbladder to descendtoward the examining fingers. Patients with acute
cholecystitis experience increased pain and may
have an inspiratory arrest.
Investigations
/square6Leukocytosis.
/square6AST, ALT and amylase may be mildly elevated.
/square6Plain X-ray of the abdomen and chest:  May show radio-
opaque gallstones, and rarely gas in the gallbladder
due to emphysematous cholecystitis or gallbladderperforation. Chest X-ray is also useful to rule outright lower lobe pneumonia which can producereferred pain in the right hypochondrium andmimic acute cholecystitis.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen:  This is the most useful
investigation and detects gallstones and gallbladderthickening due to cholecystitis.
/square6Cholescintigraphy (also known as HIDA scan-hepatic iminodiacetic acid scan) is indicated if thediagnosis is not sure even after ultrasonography. Itinvolves IV injection of technetium labeled HIDA,which is selectively taken up by hepatocytes and
excreted into bile. If the cystic duct is patent, this
agent will enter the gallbladder, leading to itsvisualization. The test is positive if the gallbladderdoes not visualize, which is invariably due to cysticduct obstruction, usually from edema associatedwith acute cholecystitis or an obstructing stone.
/square6CT scan abdomen:  It can easily demonstrate
gallbladder wall edema associated with acutecholecystitis. CT is useful when complications ofacute cholecystitis (such as emphysematous
cholecystitis or gallbladder perforation) are
suspected or when other diagnoses are considered.
Complications
/square6Gangrene.
/square6Perforation.
/square6Cholecystoenteric fistula.
/square6Gallstone ileus.
/square6Emphysematous cholecystitis.
Management
Medical
/square6Bedrest, analgesics, intravenous hydration.
/square6Keep the patient NBM (nil by mouth). Nasogastricaspiration through a Ryle’s tube is needed if thereis persistent vomiting.
/square6Antibiotics:  A cephalosporin (such as cefuroxime)
plus metronidazole are given intravenously.Surgical
/square6Surgery is required if cholecystitis progresses inspite of medical therapy and when complicationssuch as empyema or perforation develop. Laparo-
scopic cholecystectomy is the procedure of choice.
Q.Chronic cholecystitis.
/square6Chronic cholecystitis refers to chronic inflammation
of the gallbladder.
/square6It is usually due to gallstones.
/square6Clinical features are recurrent upper abdominalpain, often at night and following a heavy meal.Clinical features are similar to acute calculouscholecystitis but milder.
/square6Treatment is is elective laparoscopic cholecystec-tomy.
Q.Acute cholangitis.
/square6Acute cholangitis is caused by bacterial infection
of bile ducts. It is usually due to ascending infection
from duodenum.
/square6The most important predisposing factor for acutecholangitis is biliary obstruction and stasis due tobiliary calculi, strictures or tumors. It can also occurafter ERCP.
/square6It is characterized by fever, rigors, jaundice, andabdominal pain. Fever, right upper quadrant pain,and jaundice constitute Charcots triad. Confusionand hypotension can be there in severe cholangitis.
/square6Investigations show leukocytosis, elevated ALP,and elevated direct bilirubin. Liver enzymes may
be mildly elevated. Blood culture may grow the
causative organism. Ultrasound abdomen maydetect gallbladder or common bile duct stones.
/square6Treatment is with antibiotics (metronidazole500 mg IV every eight hours PLUS a third genera-tion cephalosporin, such as ceftriaxone 1 g IV every24 hours. Underlying cause should be treated.
Q.Gallstone disease (cholelithiasis).
/square6Gallstone formation in the gallbladder is a common
disorder. Gallstones are the commonest cause of
gall bladder disease.
/square6Gallstones are classified into cholesterol stones,pigment stones, and mixed stones. Mixed stones
are the commonest.
/square6Gallstones contain varying quantities of calciumsalts, including calcium bilirubinate, carbonate,phosphate and palmitate, which are radio-opaque.
Epidemiology
/square6Gallstones are more common in developedcountries. They are less frequent in India, the FarEast and Africa. It is more common in females.

/square6Diseases of Liver and Biliary System473
7/square6Cholesterol stones are most common in developed
countries, whereas pigment stones are morefrequent in developing countries.
Etiology
/square6There are many risk factors for development of gall-stones
Increased cholesterol secretion
• Female gender• Pregnancy• Obesity
• Rapid weight loss
Impaired gallbladder emptying
• Pregnancy• Gallbladder stasis• Fasting• Total parenteral nutrition
• Spinal cord injury
Defective bile salt synthesis
• Old age (impaired bile acid synthesis)• Cirrhosis of liver (impaired bile acid synthesis)
Excessive intestinal loss of bile salts
• Ileal resection/disease
Miscellaneous
• Hemolysis (increased bilirubin)• Infected bile
Pathogenesis
/square6Cholesterol is held in solution in bile by its
association with bile acids and phospholipids in the
form of micelles and vesicles. Excess cholesterol,or deficiency of bile acids leads to precipitation ofcholesterol and cholesterol stone formation.Similarly excess bilirubin in the bile can precipitateand lead to pigment stone formation.
/square6‘Biliary sludge’ refers to gelatinous bile thatcontains numerous microspheroliths of calciumbilirubinate granules and cholesterol crystals. Itmay progress to gallstone formation in manypatients.Clinical Features
/square6Majority of patients with gallstones are asymptomatic.
/square6Gallstones can cause epigastric discomfort, fattyfood intolerance, dyspepsia and flatulence. Otherpresentations are biliary colic, acute and chroniccholecystitis.
Complications
/square6Empyema of the gallbladder.
/square6Porcelain gallbladder (due to precipitation ofcalcium salts in the gallbladder wall).
/square6Choledocholithiasis.
/square6Pancreatitis.
/square6Fistulae between the gallbladder and duodenumor colon.
/square6Gallstone ileus.
/square6Cancer of the gallbladder.
Investigations
/square6Plain X-ray abdomen will show radio-opaque
gallstones.
/square6Ultrasonography can demonstrate both radio-
opaque and radiolucent gallstones and also otherabnormalities.
/square6Oral cholecystography and CT can also be used.
/square6MRCP can demonstrate gallstones and their
complications.
Management
/square6Asymptomatic gallstones usually do not require
treatment.
/square6Symptomatic gallstones are best treated by openor laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
/square6Gallstones can be fragmented in the gallbladder (bylithotripsy) or removed mechanically from thecommon bile duct (by endoscopic sphincterotomy).
/square6Medical dissolution of gallstones can be achievedby oral administration of the bile acids chenodeoxy-cholic or ursodeoxycholic acid. Radiolucent gall-stones and stones smaller than 15 mm are suitablefor medical therapy.

8
474Q.Describe the structure of a nephron. What are the
functions of kidneys?
/square6Nephron is the functional unit of kidney. Each
kidney contains ~1 million nephrons.
/square6Each nephron consists of the glomerulus, proximalconvoluted tubule, loop of Henle and distalconvoluted tubule. Filtration of blood occurs at theglomerulus. The collecting ducts of multiplenephrons drain into the renal pelvis and ureter.
/square6Intralobular branches of the renal artery give riseto the glomerular afferent arterioles which supplythe capillaries within the glomerulus. The efferentarteriole supplies the distal nephron.Diseases of
Kidney and Urinary Tract
Functions of the Kidneys
Homeostasis
/square6Maintenance of volume and composition of body
fluids.
/square6Maintenance of acid–base balance.
Excretory Function
/square6Excretion of metabolic end products (includingammonia, urea and creatinine from protein, anduric acid from nucleic acids), drugs and toxins.
Endocrine Functions.
/square6Production of erythropoietin, which is importantfor RBC production.
/square6Vitamin D metabolism:  It hydroxylates 25-hydroxy-
cholecalciferol to 1-25-dihydroxycholecalciferol
which is the active form of vitamin D.
/square6Secretion of renin from the juxtaglomerularapparatus in response to hypotension and changes
in sodium content of fluid in the distal convoluted
tubule.
/square6Erythropoietin is produced by the medullaryinterstitial cells in response to hypoxia. Erythro-
poietin stimulates erythropoiesis in the bone
marrow.
Q.What are the signs and symptoms of kidney and
urinary tract disease? How do you approach a
suspected case of kidney disease?
/square6Signs and symptoms of kidney disease may bespecific or nonspecific. In the initial stages of kidneydisease, patients may be asymptomatic.
History
/square6Fever occurs in urinary tract infection and pyelo-
nephritis.
 Figure 8.1 Structure of a nephron

/square6Diseases of Kidney and Urinary Tract475
8/square6Anuria—total absence or <50  mL urine output per
day. Suggests renal failure or urinary outflowobstruction.
/square6Oliguria refers to urine output of less than 500 mLper day. It also suggests renal failure or urinary
outflow obstruction.
/square6Polyuria is urine output exceeding 3 litres per day.
It suggests recovering renal failure or some meta-bolic cause such as hyperglycemia, hypercalcemia,hypokalemia, etc.
/square6Loin pain suggests pyelonephritis or renal calculi.
/square6Severe colicky pain radiating from loin to groinsuggests ureteric colic due to ureteric calculi.
/square6Lower limb swelling associated with early morningfacial puffiness suggests renal failure or nephroticsyndrome.
/square6Dysuria, increased frequency, urgency suggesturinary tract infection. Suprapubic pain is seen in
cystitis.
/square6Impaired urinary flow, hesitancy, dribbling of
urine, incomplete emptying of bladder suggestsbladder outflow obstruction. Urinary retention,incontinence/enuresis suggests sphincter or
bladder wall dysfunction.
/square6Passing red colored urine indicates hematuria
which can be seen in glomerulonephritis, uretericstone, Henoch-Schönlein purpura, renal cellcarcinoma, etc.
/square6Passing turbid and frothy urine suggests proteinuria.
/square6Passing yellow colored and foul smelling urinesuggests urinary tract infection.
Vital Signs
Blood pressure
/square6Hypertension is seen in  acute or chronic kidney
disease.
General Examination
/square6Pallor may be seen due to anemia which is due todecreased erythropoietin production in chronickidney disease.
/square6JVP may be elevated due to fluid overload state inrenal failure.
/square6Pedal edema and facial puffiness may be seen innephrotic syndrome and fluid overload due to
oliguric or anuric renal failure.
/square6Petechiae and bleeding tendency may be seen due
to platelet dysfunction due to uremia.
Abdomen
/square6Loin pain tenderness (suggests pyelonephritis).
/square6Suprapubic tenderness suggests cystitis.
/square6Abdomen may be distended due to urinary retention.
/square6Sometimes uremia can present as acute abdomen.
CVS
/square6Pericardial rub may be seen in uremic pericarditis/square6Pericardial effusion is seen in fluid overload statedue to renal failure.
RS
/square6Pulmonary edema and pleural effusion may be seenin cases of acute or chronic renal failure causingfluid overload states.
Nervous System
/square6Uremia can cause peripheral neuropathy.
/square6Uremic encephalopathy can occur when there issignificant rise in blood urea.
/square6Electrolyte and fluid imbalances which are commonin renal disease can affect nervous system function.
Investigations
/square6Blood urea and creatinine: They are elevated in renal
disease.
/square6Urine analysis: It can show proteinuria (suggests glo-
merular disease), hematuria (disease anywhere inthe urinary tract), pyuria (seen in glomerulonephritis
and UTI), RBC casts (seen in glomerulonephritis).
/square6Ultrasound abdomen:  It shows any structural abnor-
malities of kidneys and urinary tract. Size of thekidneys, masses, cysts, stones, etc. can be detected
by ultrasound abdomen. Shrunken kidneys are seen
chronic kidney disease.
/square6CT abdomen:  It can show more details of the findings
that are found in ultrasound abdomen. Contrast
agent should not be given in renal failure because
it is nephrotoxic.
/square6Serum electrolytes: Hyponatremia is seen due to fluid
overload. Hyperkalemia is common in both acute
and chronic renal failure. Hypocalcemia is seen in
chronic kidney disease due to reduced synthesis of1-25-dihydroxycholecalciferol.
/square6Other routine tests: Such as complete blood count,
blood sugar, LFT have to be done.
/square6Kidney biopsy:  Is required in many types of primary
and secondary glomerulonephritis and also insuspected renal cell carcinoma.
Diagnosis of Renal Disease using above Information
/square6Using the history, clinical examination findings and
investigation data, we have to first narrow down the
cause of kidney disease into three types: Prerenal,intrinsic renal, and postrenal problems ( see below).
Examples
Prerenal disease Hypovolemic shock, cardiac failure,
hypotension
Intrinsic renal disease Glomerulonephritis, interstitial
nephritis, nephritic syndrome,diabetic nephropathy
Postrenal disease Renal calculi, prostate hyperplasia,
bladder outlet obstruction, urethralstricture

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
8476 Q.Juxtaglomerular apparatus.
/square6Juxtaglomerular apparatus is located between the
afferent arteriole and the returning distal convo-
luted tubule of the same nephron. It plays a role in
maintaining the volume status of the body.
/square6The distal convoluted tubule of each nephron comesto lie between the afferent and efferemt arteriole of
its own glomerulus. The epithelium of distal
convoluted tubule is modified in this region, i.e.tubular cells become tall and columnar to form themacula densa.  The adjacent part of the afferent
arteriole is thickened by specialized myoepithelialcells called juxtaglomerular cells  which have the
capacity to secrete renin. The interstitial cells
between the distal convoluted tubule and thejunction of afferent and efferent arteriole are knownas mesangial  or lacis cells. These three components:
(1) The macula densa, (2) juxtaglomerular cells and(3) the mesangial cells constitute the juxtaglomerular
apparatus.
/square6Macula densa (of distal tubule) sense the decreased
Na delivery to the tubule.
/square6Mesangial cells regulate the selective vasoconstric-tion/vasodilation of the renal afferent and efferentarterioles with mesangial cell contraction.
/square6Renin is secreted by juxtaglomerular cells wheneverthere is reduction in the pressure inside the afferentarterioles or decreased sodium delivery to distaltubule. Renin activates angiotensinogen to angio-tensin which undergoes further modification toangiotensin II. Angiotensin II causes constrictionof efferent arteriole and systemic vessels, thereby
increasing glomerular filtration pressure and blood
pressure. Angiotensin II also releases aldosteronefrom the adrenal cortex, which leads to sodium
and water retention, thereby restoring circulatingvolume and blood pressure.
Q.Glomerular filtration rate.
/square6Glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is the volume of
blood filtered through the kidney per minute. It is
expressed in mL/min. Normal GFR in young,
healthy adults is about 120 to 125 mL/min and
declines with age. GFR also decreases due to diseaseor damage to kidneys.
/square6The best method for GFR measurement is inulinclearance. Inulin is neither absorbed nor secretedby the renal tubule and, therefore, it is the ideal formeasuring GFR. However, its measurement iscumbersome and, therefore, it is mostly used inresearch settings. For this reason, the estimated GFR
(eGFR), which represents the best routinely avail-
able measurement of kidney function, is usuallyused.
/square6Estimated GFR (eGFR) can be calculated by using
serum creatinine or cystatin C levels. There are
various creatinine- and cystatin C-based formulasfor estimating GFR which can be used bedside.Some of the formulas that are used are chronickidney disease epidemiology collaboration (CKD-EPI) creatinine equation and modification of diet
in renal disease (MDRD) study equation and
Cockcroft-Gault formula. Cockcroft-Gault formulahas been found to be less accurate in estimating GFR.
/square6The estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) isused to screen for and detect early kidney damage,
to help diagnose chronic kidney disease (CKD), and
to monitor kidney status. Calculation of GFR.
Figure 8.2 Juxtaglomerular apparatus

/square6Diseases of Kidney and Urinary Tract477
8Q.Define the terms “azotemia, uremia, anuria, oliguria,
polyuria, proteinuria and hematuria”.
/square6Azotemia —it refers to the biochemical elevation  of
urea and ceatinine in the blood. It can be due to
prerenal, renal and postrenal causes. All types ofazotemia are characterized by decrease in GFR.
/square6Uremia— this refers to azotemia plus clinical
manifestations of raised urea and creatinine.
/square6Anuria— total absence or <50  ml urine output per
day.
/square6Oliguria— urine output of less than 500 ml per day.
/square6Polyuria— urine output exceeding 3 litres per day.
Q.Causes of anuria.
•Bilateral ureteric obstruction
• Prostatic or urethral obstruction• Bilateral renal arterial occlusion• Acute tubular necrosis (ATN)• Shock• Rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis (RPGN)
Q.Causes of polyuria.
•Osmotic diuresis:  Hyperglycemia, hypercalcemia,
administration of mannitol and radiocontrast agents
•Diabetes insipidus:  Central and nephrogenic diabetes
insipidus
•Excessive intake of water:  Psychogenic polydipsia, hypo-
thalamic disease
•Renal disorders:  Medullary cystic diseases, resolving ATN
or obstruction
•Drugs:  Diuretics
Q. Define proteinuria. Enumerate the causes of
proteinuria.
/square6Proteinuria  is excretion of abnormal amount of
protein in the urine. Normal protein excretion isless than 150 mg per day. Out of this 150 mg,albumin fraction is less than 30 mg. Albuminexcretion between 30 and 300 mg per day is calledmicroalbuminuria. Albumin excretion above 300 mg
per day is called macroalbuminuria.
Causes of Proteinuria
Glomerular proteinuria
• Glomerular diseases
• Diabetic nephropathy
• Reflux nephropathy and other tubulointerstitial diseases
Overflow proteinuria:  Multiple myeloma
Transient proteinuria:  Fever or heavy exercise
Orthostatic proteinuria:  Increase in protein excretion in upright
position but normal protein excretion when supine
Hemodynamic causes
• Congestive heart failure
• Renovascular hypertensionQ.Define hematuria. Enumerate the causes of hema-
turia. How do you approach a case of hematuria?
/square6Hematuria  is defined as three or more RBCs per
high-power field (HPF). Hematuria may be grossly
visible (macroscopic hematuria) or detectable only onurine examination (called microscopic hematuria).
/square6Red urine does not always indicate hematuria. Red
urine without hematuria is seen in hemoglobinuria,
myoglobinuria, beeturia (due to excess beetrootingestion), rhubarburia, medications (phenazo-pyridine, methyldopa, senna) and porphyria.
Causes of Hematuria
•Glomerular diseases
• Stones• Cancer of urinary tract (kidney, bladder, prostate)• Urinary tract infection• Vigorous exercise• Sickle cell anemia• Bleeding disorders• Trauma• BPH• Endometriosis
Approach to a Case of Hematuria
History
/square6Clues suggesting the site of bleeding.
– If hematuria is seen at the beginning of micturi-
tion and later urine becomes clear, bleeding from
urethra is suggested.
– If hematuria is present throughout micturition
uniformly, site of bleeding may be in the bladderor above.
– Hematuria at the end of micturition (terminal
hematuria) suggests bleeding from prostate orbladder base.
/square6Concurrent pyuria and dysuria suggest urinarytract infection as a cause of hematuria.
/square6A recent upper respiratory infection suggests post-
infectious glomerulonephritis or IgA nephropathy.
/square6A positive family history of renal disease suggests
hereditary nephritis or polycystic kidney disease,or sickle cell disease.
/square6Unilateral flank pain, which may radiate to thegroin, suggests a stone.
/square6Presence of hesitancy and dribbling in an old mansuggests BPH.
/square6Recent vigorous exercise or trauma may suggestthese as the causes of hematuria.
/square6History of bleeding from multiple sites suggests a
bleeding disorder or excessive anticoagulant
therapy.
/square6Cyclic hematuria in women during menstruationsuggests endometriosis of the urinary tract.However, contamination with menstrual bloodshould be ruled out.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
8478 Physical Examination
/square6Vitals:  Fever indicates pyelonephritis or UTI.
Hypertension indicates glomerulonephritis.
/square6General examination : Pedal edema suggests
glomerulonephritis. Presence of rash suggestsHenoch-Schönlein purpura, connective tissuedisease or SLE.
/square6CVS : Presence of a murmur should raise the
suspicion of infective endocarditis especially in thepresence of fever.
/square6RS: Presence of crepitations and rhonchi can occur
in Goodpasture’s syndrome.
/square6Abdomen : Look for any mass (cancer, obstruction)
and bruit (renal ischemia). Per-rectal examination
is done to look for any prostate enlargement.
Lab Tests
/square6Urine microscopy:  It shows presence of RBCs. The
presence of RBC casts suggests bleeding from thekidney most often due to glomerulonephritis. Dys-morphic RBCs (with irregular outer cell membrane)and acanthocytes (RBCs with membrane protrusionsrepresenting early form of dysmorphic RBCs)
suggest hematuria of glomerular origin. Uniform
RBCs or presence of clots suggests bleeding fromlower urinary tract.
/square6Urine cytology:  It is done if cancer of urinary tract is
suspected.
/square6Cystoscopy:  It is subsequently done if malignant
and/or atypical/suspicious cells are identified.
/square6Imagings:  These include plain radiograph of KUB
region, intravenous pyelography (IVP), retrogradepyelography, ultrasonography, MRI, and CT scan.
/square6Renal biopsy:  It is required in hematuria of glome-
rular origin along with the presence of proteinuriaand renal failure.
/square6Other tests  that are done are renal function tests,
urine for AFB, platelet count, coagulation studies
and autoantibodies (ANA, ANCA).
Q.Tamm-Horsfall protein.
/square6Tamm-Horsfall protein or uromodulin is secreted
by thick ascending limb of loop of Henle. It coatsthe luminal surface of the cell membrane.
Significance of Tamm-Horsfall protein
/square6Tamm-Horsfall protein protects against urinary
tract infection by binding to fimbriated Escherichia
coli, which is the main cause of urinary tract
infection.
/square6Tamm-Horsfall protein forms the matrix of allurinary casts. The casts may contain only the matrix(hyaline casts) or can include degenerated cells orfiltered proteins (granular casts), or intact cells that
are present in the tubular fluid (red, white, or
epithelial cell casts)./square6Tamm-Horsfall protein may coaggregate with lightchains in multiple myeloma and cause cast nephro-pathy, in which dense intratubular casts occludethe flow of urine and cause renal failure.
/square6Mutations in the gene encoding for Tamm-Horsfallprotein cause familial juvenile hyperuricemicnephropathy and medullary cystic kidney disease.These two disorders are characterized by hyper-uricemia, medullary cysts, interstitial nephritis, andprogressive renal failure.
Q.Discuss the role of ultrasound in the diagnosis of
renal diseases.
/square6Ultrasound is often the first and only method
required for renal imaging.
/square6It can show renal size and position.
/square6It can identify obstruction in the urinary tract bydetecting dilatation of the collecting system.
/square6It can identify the location and size of renal calculi.
/square6It can distinguish tumor, abscess and cyst.
/square6It can show other abdominal, pelvic and retroperito-neal pathology.
/square6It can image the prostate and bladder, and estimatecompleteness of emptying in suspected bladder
outflow obstruction.
/square6In chronic renal disease ultrasonographic density
of the renal cortex is increased and cortico-medullary differentiation is lost.
/square6Renal biopsy and cyst puncture can be done underultrasound guidance.
/square6Doppler ultrasound is used to show blood flow in
extrarenal and intrarenal blood vessels.
Q.Discuss the indications, contraindications and
complications of renal biopsy.
/square6Renal biopsy is used to establish exact diagnosis and
also to judge the prognosis and need for treatment.
/square6It is done percutaneoulsy under ultrasoundguidance.
Indications
/square6Unexplained acute renal failure.
/square6Chronic renal failure with normal-sized kidneys.
/square6Unexplained nephrotic syndrome in adults.
/square6Nephrotic syndrome in children that has atypicalfeatures or is not responding to treatment.
/square6Unexplained nephritic syndrome.
/square6Isolated glomerular hematuria or proteinuria.
Contraindications
/square6Coagulation abnormalities or thrombocytopenia.
/square6Uncontrolled hypertension.
/square6Small hyperechoic kidneys (indicate chronic irrever-sible disease).

/square6Diseases of Kidney and Urinary Tract479
8/square6Solitary kidney (relative contraindication).
/square6Hydronephrosis.
/square6Active renal or perirenal infection.
/square6Skin infection over the biopsy site.
/square6Uncooperative patient.
Complications
/square6Pain at biopsy site.
/square6Hematuria, usually minor but may produce clot
colic and obstruction.
/square6Bleeding around the kidney, occasionally massiveand requiring angiography with intervention, orsurgery.
/square6Arteriovenous fistula.
/square6Rarely, puncture of the liver, pancreas, or spleenmay occur.
Q.Define acute kidney injury (acute renal failure).
Discuss the causes, clinical features, investigations
and management of acute kidney injury.
Definition
/square6Acute kidney injury  (AKI) earlier known as acute
renal failure refers to rapid decrease in renalfunction over hours to days, causing an
accumulation of nitrogenous products in the blood
(azotemia).
/square6It is usually reversible and accompanied by areduction in urine volume.
Causes
Prerenal
•Decreased perfusion of kidneys:  Heart failure, septic shock,
hepatorenal syndrome, renal artery occlusion/stenosis
•Volume depletion: Hemorrhage, vomiting, diarrhea,
pancreatitis, burns
•Drugs: ACE inhibitors, NSAIDs
Intrarenal
•Acute tubular necrosis : Ischemia ( causes are the same as
for prerenal ARF, but generally the insult is more severe),
infection (acute pyelonephritis), toxins ( radiocontrast,
aminoglycosides, amphotericin, etc.), hemoglobinuria,
myoglobinuria.
•Glomerular diseases:  Acute glomerulonephritis, RPGN
•Interstitial nephritis: Drugs, infections
•Vascular:  Vasculitis, malignant hypertension
Postrenal
•Obstruction to urine flow:  Stone, tumor, prostate enlarge-
ment, urethral stenosis.
Pathogenesis
/square6Glomerular filtration occurs due to the pressure
gradient from the glomerulus to the Bowman space.Glomerular pressure depends on renal blood flow(RBF) and is controlled by the combined resistancesof afferent and efferent arterioles. Almost all the
causes of AKI cause reduction in RBF which is thecommon pathologic pathway for decreasing
glomerular filtration rate (GFR). The etiology of AKIconsists of 3 main mechanisms: Prerenal, renal(intrinsic), and postrenal.
/square6Prerenal causes are the most common cause of acuterenal failure. All prerenal causes act through renalhypoperfusion. If hypoperfusion is rapidlyreversed, renal parenchymal damage does notoccur. If hypoperfusion persists, ischemia canresult, causing intrinsic renal failure.
/square6Renal causes of AKI either damage glomerulus(glomerulonephritis) or tubules (ATN). Myoglobi-nuria (derived from rhabdomyolysis) and hemo-globinuria (derived from hemolysis) can cause
direct damage to tubular cells. ACE inhibitors
prevent efferent renal arteriolar constriction out ofproportion to the afferent arteriole leading todecrease in GFR. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatorydrugs (NSAIDs) prevent afferent arteriolarvasodilation by inhibiting prostaglandin-mediated
signals.
/square6Postrenal causes are the least common cause of
acute renal failure. It occurs when urinary flow fromboth kidneys, or a single functioning kidney, is
obstructed. This leads to elevated intraluminal
pressure in the nephron, causing a decrease in GFR.If the obstruction is relieved, this type of renalfailure is reversible.
Clinical Features
/square6Uremia can cause the following features:
– Nausea, vomiting, malaise, and altered senso-
rium.
– Neurologic examination may show features of
encephalopathy with flapping tremors andconfusion. Seizures can occur.
– Platelet dysfunction can lead to bleeding.
/square6In ATN clinical course can be divided into 3 phases;
oliguric phase, maintenance phase and diuretic
phase.
/square6Oliguric phase:  This is characterized by anuria or
oliguria. Signs and symptoms of fluid overload can
occur such as pedal edema, ascites, pleural and
pericardial effusions. Pericardial friction rub can bepresent. Pericardial effusions may result in cardiactamponade. Oliguric phase lasts an average of10–14 days (can vary from a few hours to 4 weeks).
/square6Maintenance phase:  This is characterized by low GFR
and low urine output continues during this phase.It may last for days to weeks.
/square6Diuretic phase:  This is characterized by polyuria and
is due to defective urine concentrating ability oftubules. Patient may develop dehydration, hypo-natremia and hypokalemia during this phase. Afterdiuretic phase kidney function usually recovers.
/square6Arrhythmias can occur due to electrolyte imbalancesuch as hyper- and hypokalemia.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
8480 /square6The lung examination may show crepitations due
to volume overload.
/square6There may be signs and symptoms of underlyingdisorder causing renal failure.
Investigations
Complete Blood Count
/square6Low hemoglobin may be present in prerenal AKIdue to hemorrhage. Peripheral blood smear mayshow schistocytes in conditions such as hemolyticuremic syndrome (HUS) or thrombotic thrombo-cytopenic purpura (TTP).
Urea and Creatinine
/square6These are elevated. In prerenal AKI, there is dis-proportionate elevation of urea in relation to
creatinine (urea creatinine ratio is usually >20:1).
Urine Analysis
/square6Urine is acellular and contains transparent hyaline
casts in prerenal AKI.
/square6RBC and WBC are present in AKI due to glomerulo-nephritis. RBC casts indicate glomerular injury or
rarely interstitial nephritis.
/square6WBC casts and nonpigmented granular casts suggest
interstitial nephritis, whereas broad granular casts arecharacteristic of chronic kidney disease and probably
reflect interstitial fibrosis and dilatation of tubules.
/square6Pigmented “muddy brown” granular casts and
casts containing tubule epithelial cells are charac-teristic of ATN. RBC and WBC may also be present
in intraluminal obstruction or prostatic disease, but
casts are typically absent.
/square6Eosinophiluria (>5% of urine leukocytes) suggestsallergic interstitial nephritis.
/square6Abundant uric acid crystals suggest acute uratenephropathy.
/square6Proteinuria of >1 g/d suggests glomerular damageor excretion of myeloma light chains.
/square6Hemoglobinuria or myoglobinuria should raise thepossibility of renal failure due to hemolysis and
rhabdomyolysis.
Serum Electrolytes
/square6Abnormalities include hyperkalemia, hypocalcemia
and hyperphosphatemia.
ECG
/square6May reveal changes of hyperkalemia and also anycardiac problems.
Tests to Rule Out Infections
/square6Anti-streptolysin O titre is elevated in post-strepto-coccal glomerulonephritis.
/square6Other serology: If clinically suspected, e.g. hepatitis B,hepatitis C, leptospirosis, syphilis, hantavirus.Autoimmune Workup
/square6If diagnosis is not clear from above investigationsconsider ANA, ANCA, complement levels, etc. torule out connective tissue disorder.
Emerging Biomarkers
/square6Creatinine elevation is a late marker for renal
failure; hence, search is on for other markers which
can predict renal failire early. Urinary neutrophilgelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) has beenshown to be a strong predictor of early AKI.Another marker is serum cystatin C, which thoughnot as sensitive as creatinine level for detecting AKI,
can identify a subset of AKI patients at higher risk
for adverse outcomes.
Renal Ultrasound and Renal Doppler
/square6This is done urgently if renal failure due to obstruc-tion is suspected. Renal Doppler  can identify patency
of renal arteries and veins.
Chest X-ray
/square6May show evidence of pulmonary edema.
Renal Biopsy
/square6Renal biopsy is indicated when renal function doesnot return for a prolonged period and a prognosisis required to develop long-term management.
Management
/square6Correct the underlying cause of the AKI.
/square6Treat fluid and electrolyte abnormalities. Loopdiuretics such as frusemide or torsemide can beused if there is fluid overload. On the other hand,fluids should be given if there is hypovolemia
causing renal failure. Hyperkalemia should be
corrected by anti-hyperkalemia measures such assalbutamol nebulization, potassium binding resins,etc.
/square6Correct metabolic acidosis with oral or IV bicarbo-nate.
/square6Nephrotoxic drugs such as NSAIDs, amino-glycosides, etc. should be avoided.
/square6Restriction of water (unless there is hypovolemia),Na, phosphate, and K intake, but provision ofadequate protein.
/square6Hemodialysis is required for the following ifconservative measures fail.
Indications for Hemodialysis
• Urea >180 mg/dl and creatinine >8 mg/dl.
• Refractory fluid overload with pulmonary edema.• Resistant hyperkalemia.• Severe metabolic acidosis (pH less than 7.1).• Signs of uremia, such as pericarditis, neuropathy, or altered
mental status.

/square6Diseases of Kidney and Urinary Tract481
8Q.Define chronic kidney disease (CKD). Discuss the
causes, clinical features, investigations and manage-
ment of CKD.
/square6Chronic kidney disease (CKD)  (earlier known as
chronic renal failure) is defined as either kidneydamage or a decreased glomerular filtration rate(GFR) of less than 60 mL/min/1.73 m
2 for 3 or more
months.
/square6CKD can be divided into the following stages.
Stage 1 Kidney damage with normal or increased GFR (>90
mL/min/1.73 m2)
Stage 2 Mild reduction in GFR (60–89 mL/min/1.73 m2)
Stage 3 Moderate reduction in GFR (30–59 mL/min/1.73 m2)
Stage 4 Severe reduction in GFR (15–29 mL/min/1.73 m2)
Stage 5 Kidney failure (GFR <15 mL/min/1.73 m2 or dialysis)
/square6CKD stages 1 and 2 cannot be diagnosed based on
GFR alone as GFR can be normal in these stages.Stage 5 CKD is also known as end stage renaldisease (ESRD).
Etiology of CKD/CRF
Primary glomerular diseases
• Focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGN)
• Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis (MPGN)
• IgA nephropathy
• Membranous nephropathy
Secondary glomerular diseases
• Diabetic nephropathy
• Hypertension
• Amyloidosis
• Postinfectious glomerulonephritis
• HIV-associated nephropathy
• Collagen-vascular diseases
• Sickle cell nephropathy
Tubulointerstitial nephritis
• Drugs
• Heavy metals
• Analgesic nephropathy
• Reflux/chronic pyelonephritis
• Idiopathic
Obstructive nephropathies
• Prostate enlargement
• Calculus
• Retroperitoneal fibrosis
• Tumor
Vascular diseases
• Renal artery stenosis
• Vasculitis
Hereditary diseases
• Polycystic kidney disease
• Medullary cystic disease
• Alport’s syndromeClinical Features
Fluid and Electrolyte Imbalance
/square6In most patients with stable CKD, there is retention
of sodium and water leading to fluid overload.Fluid overload manifests as peripheral edema,acites, pleural and pericardial effusions. It contri-butes to development of hypertension also. Rarelyhyponatremia is seen (dilutional hyponatremia),
and responds to water restriction.
/square6Hyperkalemia is seen in CKD, as potassium
excretion is impaired. Rarely hypokalemia is seenas a result of renal potassium wasting in diseases
such as Fanconi’s syndrome, renal tubular acidosis,
or other forms of hereditary or acquired tubulo-interstitial disease. However, even in these conditions,as the GFR declines, hyperkalemia becomes common.
Acid–base Disturbance
/square6Metabolic acidosis is common due to inability to
excrete acid load due to less ammonia formation in
the kidneys. In severe metabolic acidosis, patientmay have deep respiration (Kussmaul’s respiration),anorexia, nausea, vomiting, hiccoughs, pruritus,muscular twitching, fits, drowsiness and coma.
Uremia
/square6Uremia refers to a constellation of signs and symp-toms seen in renal failure. Manifestations of theuremic state include anorexia, nausea, vomiting,growth retardation, peripheral neuropathy, andCNS features such as altered sensorium, seizures,and coma.
/square6Bleeding may occur due to abnormal plateletadhesion and aggregation due to uremia.
/square6Pericarditis and pericardial effusion also occur inuremia and is an indication for dialysis.
Disturbances in Calcium and Phosphate Metabolism
Renal osteodystropy
/square6Kidney is the site of formation of 1-25-dihydroxy-cholecalciferol (active Vit D). Diminished active VitD formation in CKD leads to hypocalcemia andhyperphosphatemia (due to phosphate retention).Hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia stimulatePTH production. Increased PTH (hyperpara-
thyroidism) stimulates bone turnover and leads to
osteitis fibrosa cystica characterized by marrowfibrosis and bone cysts.
Anemia
/square6Anemia is due to reduced renal erythropoietinproduction. It is normocytic and normochromic.
Hypertension
/square6Hypertension is due to volume expansion and/oractivation of the renin-angiotensin system.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
8482 Dyslipidemia and Atherosclerosis
/square6Abnormal lipid metabolism is common in patients
with CKD. Typically triglyceride and cholesterol
levels are increased and add to the risk for cardio-
vascular disease.
Endocrine Dysfunction
/square6CKD has effects on many endocrine systems.
/square6Growth hormone —there is end-organ resistance to
GH action due to increased levels of insulin growth
factor binding proteins. This contributes to growth
impairment especially in children.
/square6Thyroid function —there is low T3 and T4, normal
TSH level, and normal or decreased thyroid
hormone-binding globulin levels. These findings
are consistent with the “Sick euthyroid syndrome”
seen in other chronic diseases.
/square6Gonadal hormones —there are abnormalities in
gonadal hormones in both male and female
patients, which result in delayed puberty in two-
thirds of adolescents with ESRD. Males have
reduced testosterone levels and elevated LH and
FSH. Females have reduced serum estrogen,
elevated LH and FSH, and loss of the LH pulsatile
pattern. These disturbances result in anovulation.
Growth Impairment
/square6Growth failure is common in childhood CKD, and
is multifactorial. It is due to metabolic acidosis,decreased ca loric intake, renal osteodystrophy, and
alterations in growth hormone metabolism.
Investigations
/square6Urea and creatinine are elevated. The level of serum
creatinine correlates with the degree of renal
impairment.
/square6Urine analysis:  It shows fixed specific gravity of
around 1.010 (isosthenuria, because of loss of urine
concentrating ability of kidneys) and presence of
broad casts. WBCs are present in the urine in UTI,
papillary necrosis, BPH and renal tuberculosis.
Eosinophils are present in allergic tubulointerstitial
disease. RBC casts are seen in glomerulonephritis.
/square6Serum electrolytes:  Hyperkalemia, hypocalcemia,
and hyperphosphatemia are seen. Bicarbonate
levels are reduced.
/square6Anemia is seen which is usually normocytic normo-
chromic.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen:  Usually shows bilateral small
sized kidneys. Ultrasound can also rule out obstruc-
tion, polycystic kidney disease, etc.
/square6Chest X-ray:  May show pulmonary edema and
pericardial effusion.
/square6ECG: May show signs of hyperkalemia or cardiac
disease.
/square6Renal artery Doppler:  If renal artery stenosis is
suspected./square6Hepatitis B, C and HIV serology if dialysis is needed
(vaccination against hepatitis B if no previousinfection; isolation of dialysis machine if positive).
/square6ANA if connective tissue disease is suspected.
/square6ANCA if vasculitis is suspected.
/square6Renal biopsy to establish the diagnosis in selected
cases.
Management
Management of CKD involves the following issues.
/square6Treatment of underlying cause of CKD.
/square6Correction of reversible factors contributing to renal
failure.
/square6Preventing or slowing the progression of CKD.
/square6Treatment of complications of renal failure.
/square6Renal replacement therapy.
Treatment of Underlying Cause
/square6Identify the underlying cause of renal failure andinstitute treatment for that. For example, control ofdiabetes, hypertension, immunosuppression inglomerulonephritis, etc.
Reversible Factors in Chronic Renal Failure
• Hypertension
• Renal artery stenosis• Hypotension• Hypovolemia• Cardiac failure• Urinary tract obstruction• Urinary tract infection• Systemic infections• Nephrotoxic drugs
Slowing the Progression of CKD
/square6ACE inhibitors have been shown to slow the pro-
gression of CKD in diabetics. ACE inhibitors should
be used, where tolerated. Monitor creatinine and
potassium after starting on ACE inhibitors as therecan be worsening of GFR and hyperkalemia. Angio-tensin II receptor antagonists also have similar effect.
/square6Restriction of dietary protein intake also delays the
progression of CKD.
Treatment of the Complications of Renal Failure
/square6Anemia:  Recombinant human erythropoietin is
effective in correcting the anemia of CKD. Severeanemia should be corrected by blood transfusion.
/square6Volume overload:  Should be treated by a combination
of dietary sodium restriction and diuretic therapy,usually with a loop diuretic given daily.
/square6Hyperkalemia:
– Avoid potassium rich foods such as coconut
water, fruit juices, etc.
– Loop diuretics such as frusemide to increase
urinary potassium losses.

/square6Diseases of Kidney and Urinary Tract483
8– Potassium binding agents (Kayexalate 5 grams
with each meal).
– Salbutamol nebulizations.
– 50% dextrose 100 ml with 10 units of insulin
infusion 8th hrly. This will push the potassiuminto the cells and dereases serum potassium.
– Bicarbonate infusion or orally will also decrease
potassium.
/square6Metabolic acidosis:  Sodium bicarbonate (in a daily
dose of 0.5 to 1 mEq/kg per day) should be given
to maintain serum bicarbonate concentration above
22 mEq/L. Sodium citrate may be used in patientsunable to tolerate sodium bicarbonate.
/square6Hyperphosphatemia:  This is treated by oral phosphate
binders to maintain serum phosphorus levels less
than 5 mg/dl. Calcium carbonate or calcium acetatecan be used as phosphate binders, but have the riskof causing hypercalcemia. The nonabsorbable agentsevelamer is a cationic polymer that binds phos-phate through ion exchange. Sevelamer controls the
serum phosphate concentration without inducing
hypercalcemia./square6Renal osteodystrophy:  This is treated by calcitriol (1, 25-
dihydroxyvitamin D) and control of phsopate levels.
/square6Hypertension:  It is controlled by a combination of
antihypertensives and diuretics. ACE inhibitors or
angiotensin II receptor blocker can be used initially
if creatinine is not high. Other antihypertensivesare calcium channel blockers, clonidine, betabolockers and alpha blockers.
/square6Abnormal lipids:  Hypercholesterolemia is almost
universal in patients with significant proteinuria,and increased triglyceride levels are also commonin patients with CKD. This can be controlled withHMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (e.g. atorvastatin,rosuvastatin).
/square6Bleeding : It is due to abnormal platelet function .
Dialysis can partially correct the bleeding tendency.
Renal Replacement Therapy
/square6If conservative measures are inadequate, hemo-dialysis must be planned.
/square6Renal transplantation can be considered in suitablepatients.
Q.Distinguishing acute kidney injury (AKI) from chronic kidney disease (CKD).
TABLE 8.1: Distinguishing acute kidney injury (AKI) from chronic kidney disease (CKD)
Feature AKI CKD
Onset Over hours to days Over weeks to months
Reversibility Usually reversible Irreversible
Common cause Usually prerenal or postrenal Usually intrinsic renalPast history of kidney disease Usually absent Usually presentUrine volume Oliguria or anuria Polyuria or nocturia except in advanced stagesKidney size on ultrasound Usually normal size Small size with loss of corticomedulary
differentiation
Dialysis Required for short period Required repeatedly
Renal transplan tation Not required Required
Eye-band keratopathy Absent Seen in CKD
Broad waxy casts in urine Absent Usually present
Presence of anemia Absent Present
Hypocalcemia Ansent PresentUrine specific gravity High Low or fixedRenal osteodystrophy Absent Present
Peripheral neuropathy Absent May be present
Q.Enumerate the causes of CKD with normal or
enlarged kidneys.
Usually CKD is associated with bilateral small contrac-
ted kidneys. But rarely CKD may have normal sizedor enlarged kidneys the causes of which are as follows.
/square6Diabetic nephropathy.
/square6Polycystic kidney disease.
/square6Myeloma.
/square6Rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis.
/square6Infiltrative diseases.
/square6Amyloidosis.
/square6Obstruction.Q.Renal diet.
/square6Patients with kidney disease need to modify their
diet because their kidneys have limited ability to
excrete sodium, potassium, phosphorus, and excess
fluid. In addition, high protein intake leads to
formation of more nitrogenous waste products
which accumulate in the body due to kidney
disease. Diet should be low in sodium, potassium,
phosphorus, and protein. Hence, following
modifications in the diet should be done.
/square6Limit total sodium content to 400 mg per meal and150 mg per snack.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
8484 /square6All fruits are rich in potassium especially bananas.
Coconut water and ragi are also rich in potassium.Hence intake of fruits, ragi, and coconut watershould be limited to prevent hyperkalemia.
/square6Intake of phosphorous rich foods such as meat,cheese, canned fish should be limited.
/square6Protein rich foods include almost all the non-vegetarian foods and should be limited in quantity.
/square6Fluid intake should be restricted.
Q.Describe the pathophysiology, clinical findings, and
management of uremia.
/square6The literal meaning of uremia is “urine in the blood”.
Uremia refers to a clinical condition associated with
worsening renal function, characterized by fluid,
electrolyte, hormone imbalances and various meta-bolic abnormalities. Uremia usually develops in thesetting of chronic and end-stage renal disease(ESRD), but may also occur as a result of acutekidney injury.
/square6Uremic symptoms occur when creatinine clearanceis less than 15 ml/min.
Etiology
/square6CKD due to any reason.
/square6Acute kidney injury.
Pathophysiology
/square6Kidney failure leads to disturbances of acid-basehomeostasis, fluid and electrolyte regulation,hormone production and secretion, and wasteelimination. All these abnormalities can result inmetabolic disturbances and also lead to anemia,
hypothyroidism, hypertension, acidemia, hyper-
kalemia, and malnutrition.
/square6Anemia in kidney disease is usually due todecreased erythropoietin production by the failing
kidneys. Other factors contributing to anemia are
iron or vitamin deficiencies, hyperparathyroidism,hypothyroidism, and decreased lifespan of RBCs.
/square6The buildup of uremic toxins in the blood may lead
to platelet dysfunction and development of
coagulopathy.
/square6Metabolic acidosis is a major complication asso-ciated with uremia and ESRD because renal tubular
cells are the primary regulators of acid–base balance.
As kidney failure progresses, there is decreasedsecretion of hydrogen ions and impaired excretionof ammonium, and eventually build-up of phos-phate and additional organic acids (e.g. lactic acid,sulfuric acid, hippuric acid). This increased anion-
gap metabolic acidosis leads to hyperventilation,
lethargy, anorexia, muscle weakness, and congestiveheart failure (due to a decreased cardiac response).
/square6Hyperkalemia may also occur in the setting of both
acute or chronic renal failure. This conditionbecomes a medical emergency when serum
potassium reaches a level greater than 6.5 mEq/L.This level may be exacerbated with excessivepotassium intake or use of certain medications (e.g.potassium-sparing diuretics, angiotensin-convert-ing enzymes (ACE) inhibitors, angiotensin-receptor
blockers, beta blockers, NSAIDs). Acidosis resulting
from renal failure may additionally contribute tothe development of hyperkalemia.
/square6Hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, and elevated
parathyroid hormone levels may additionally occur
as a result of renal failure. Hypocalcemia occurs dueto decreased production of active vitamin D (1,25dihydroxyvitamin D) which is responsible forgastrointestinal (GI) absorption of calcium andphosphorus and suppression of parathyroid
hormone excretion. Hyperphosphatemia occurs
because of impaired phosphate excretion in thesetting of renal failure. Both hypocalcemia andhyperphosphatemia stimulate hypertrophy ofthe parathyroid gland and resultant increasedproduction and secretion of parathyroid hormone.
Altogether, these changes in calcium metabolism
can result in osteodystrophy (renal bone disease)and may lead to calcium deposition throughout thebody (i.e. metastatic calcification).
/square6Declining renal function can result in decreasedinsulin clearance, necessitating a decrease in dosageof antihyperglycemic medications to avoid hypo-glycemia. Uremia may also lead to impotence inmen or infertility (e.g. anovulation, amenorrhea) inwomen as a result of dysfunctional reproductive
hormone regulation.
/square6The buildup of uremic toxins may also contribute
to uremic pericarditis, and pericardial effusionsleading to abnormalities in cardiac function.
Together with metastatic calcification as a result of
declining renal function, these may contribute toworsening of underlying valvular dysfunction orsuppression of myocardial contractility.
Clinical Features of Uremia
/square6Symptomatic uremia tends to occur once creatinineclearance decreases below 10 mL/min unlesskidney failure develops acutely, in which case, some
patients may become symptomatic at higher
clearance rates.
/square6Uremic fetor, ammonia or urine-like odor of thebreath may occur in uremic patients.
/square6Gastrointestinal disturbances include anorexia,nausea, vomiting, and gastrointestinal bleeding.
/square6Fluid overload leads to facial puffiness, pedaledema, ascites, pleural and pericardial effusion.Pulmonary edema and pleural effusion may causebreathlessness.
/square6Fatigue is common and is usually due to anemia,fluid and electrolyte disturbances.

/square6Diseases of Kidney and Urinary Tract485
8/square6Neuromuscular disturbances are insomnia, flapp-
ing tremors, myoclonus, restless leg syndrome,peripheral neuropathy, seizures and coma.
/square6Fatigue as a result of anemia is considered one of
the major components of the uremic syndrome.
/square6Cardiovascular abnormalities are hypertension,
atherosclerosis, valvular stenosis and insufficiency,chronic heart failure, and angina may all develop
as a result of a buildup of uremic toxins and meta-
static calcification associated with uremia andESRD.
/square6Bleeding manifestations may occur due to platelet
dysfunction.
Investigations
/square6Complete hemogram.
/square6Urea, creatinine.
/square6Serum sodium, potassium, calcium, phosphate,
parathyroid hormone, albumin, and bicarbonate
level.
/square6Urine analysis.
/square6ECG.
/square6Renal ultrasound.
/square6CT brain if patient presents with altered mental
status to rule out intracranial pathology such ashemorrhage.
/square6Other investigations based on clinical assessment.
Treatment
/square6Dialysis is indicated in a patient with symptomaticuremia (e.g. nausea, vomiting, hyperkalemia,metabolic acidosis).
/square6Renal transplantation may be considered for allpatients with CKD.
/square6Iron replacement and erythropoietin to correctanemia.
/square6Hyperparathyroidism, hypocalcemia and hyper-phosphatemia can be treated with oral calcium
carbonate or calcium acetate, oral vitamin D
therapy, and oral phosphate binders.
/square6Nephrotoxic medications (e.g. NSAIDs, amino-glycoside antibiotics) should be avoided in all
patients with renal disease.
Q.Describe the pathophysiology, laboratory diagnosis
and treatment anemia in CKD.
/square6Anemia is common in CKD. It starts when GFR
drops to below 60 mg/ml. Anemia is rare whenthe GFR is above 80 mg/ml. As the GFR worsens,the anemia gets more severe.
Etiology Causes of Anemia in CKD
/square6Erythropoietin (EPO) deficiency
/square6Iron deficiency
/square6Blood loss/square6Shortened RBC survival
/square6Vitamin B12 and folic acid deficiency
/square6Bone marrow suppression
/square6Inflammation
/square6Hyperparathyroidism
Clinical Features
/square6Clinical features are similar to other causes ofanemia.
Investigations
/square6CBC.
/square6Peripheral blood smear.
/square6Iron indices (iron, ferritin, TIBC, transferrinsaturation)
/square6Vitamin B12 and folate levels.
Treatment
/square6Treatment is considered when hemoglobin is less
than 10 gm/dl. In all patients with CKD, the goal
of hemoglobin is less than 11.5 g/dl because highervalues have shown higher mortality.
/square6Erythropoietin stimulating agents (ESAs) together
with iron supplementation is the treatment of
choice in anemia of CKD.
/square6Recombinant human erythropoietin and darbe-poetin alfa are the two ESAs generally used in the
management of anemia in CKD. Darbepoetin alfa
has longer half-life and allows less frequent dosing.
/square6Iron supplementation is also very important in CKD.Due to decreased absorption of oral iron, intra-
venous iron is preferable in hemodialysis patients.
Q.Renal osteodystrophy [CKD-mineral and bone
disorder (CKD-MBD)].
/square6The term renal osteodystrophy refers to the patho-
logical changes in bone structure that occur inchronic kidney disease (CKD). However, this termis now being replaced by the new term ‘CKD-mineral and bone disorder (CKD-MBD)’ because
the new term defines the entire mineral, bone,
hormonal, and calcific cardiovascular abnormalitiesthat are seen in CKD.
/square6Renal osteodystrophy consists of a mixture of
osteomalacia, osteitis fibrosa cystica (due to
secondary hyperparathyroidism), osteoporosis andosteosclerosis.
Pathogenesis
/square6CKD leads to diminished conversion of cholecalci-ferol to its active metabolite, 1-25-dihydroxy-cholecalciferol in the kidneys. In addition, CKD alsoleads to increased phosphate level in the blood.Diminished 1-25-dihydroxycholecalciferol leads to
hypocalcemia.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
8486 /square6Both hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia stimu-
late parathyroid glands which lead to secondaryhyperparathyroidism. Another factor contributingto hyperparathyroidism in CKD is decreasedfibroblast growth factor 23. FGF-23 is responsiblefor decreasing phosphate levels in the body, and a
decrease in FGF-23 can lead to secondary hyper-
parathyroidism.
/square6Secondary hyperparathyroidism leads to osteitisfibrosa cystica. Osteomalacia is another consequence.
/square6Vascular calcification especially of coronary arteriesis another important feature of CKD-MBD whichhas been ignored earlier. This can lead to acutecoronary events contributing to increased mortality
in CKD patients.
Clinical Features
/square6Can be asymptomatic.
/square6If symptomatic, signs and symptoms include bone
pain, joint pain, bone deformation and bone fracture.
Investigations
/square6Blood tests will show decreased calcium andcalcitriol (vitamin D
3) and increased phosphate and
parathyroid hormone.
/square6X-rays will show chondrocalcinosis at the knees and
pubic symphysis, osteopenia, osteitis fibrosa cysticaand bone fractures.
Management
/square6Serum calcium and phosphate levels should be kept
as near to normal as possible. Hypocalcemia is
corrected by giving calcium supplements and activeVit D
3. Hyperphosphatemia is controlled by
avoiding phosphate rich foods (milk, cheese, eggs)and by giving phosphate-binding drugs with food.
/square6Parathyroidectomy may be needed in severe bonedisease with autonomous parathyroid function.
/square6Regular hemodialysis improves the prognosis of
these patients. Kidney transplantation has been
shown to reverse the disease process.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of nephrotic syndrome.
/square6Nephrotic syndrome is defined as proteinuria of
more than 3 gm/day due to a glomerular disorderaccompanied by hypoalbuminemia and edema.
Etiology
Idiopathic or primary nephrotic syndrome
• Minimal change disease
• Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS)
• Membranous nephropathy
• Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis
• Other proliferative and sclerosing glomerulonephritidesSecondary nephrotic syndrome
• Diabetes mellitus• SLE and other collagen diseases• Amyloidosis• Vasculitis (Wegener’s granulomatosis, rapidly progressive
glomerulonephritis, Goodpasture’s syndrome, etc.)
• Infections (post-streptococcal, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, HIV
infection, filariasis)
• Drugs (penicillamine, NSAIDs, lithium, street heroin)• Malignancy (Hodgkin’s lymphoma, leukemia)• Pregnancy-related (includes pre-eclampsia)• Unilateral renal artery stenosis
• Massive obesity-sleep apnea
• Reflux nephropathy
Pathophysiology
/square6Nephrotic syndrome is characterized by proteinuria,
hypoalbuminemia and peripheral edema.
/square6Proteinuria occurs because of damage to glomerularcapillary endothelial cells, the glomerular basement
membrane (GBM), or podocytes, which normally
filter serum protein selectively by size and charge.
/square6Hypoalbuminemia is due to urinary protein loss.Catabolism of filtered albumin by the proximal
tubule as well as redistribution of albumin within
the body also contribute to hypoalbuminemia.
/square6Salt and water retention in nephrotic syndrome canbe explained by two different mechanisms. In the
classic theory, proteinuria leads to hypoalbuminemia,
a low plasma oncotic pressure, and intravascularvolume depletion leading to underperfusion of thekidneys. This stimulates renin-angiotensin systemcausing increased renal sodium and water reten-tion. Decreased oncotic pressure in the capillaries
also causes fluid leakage and edema.
/square6Another mechanism may be primary renal sodium
retention at a distal nephron site, perhaps due toaltered responsiveness to hormones such as atrial
natriuretic factor.
Clinical Features
/square6Nephrotic syndrome occurs at any age but is more
prevalent in children, mostly between ages 1½ and4 yr.
/square6Peripheral edema is the hallmark of the nephrotic
syndrome. Initially it is noted in the dependent areas
such as the lower extremities, but later becomesgeneralized. Early morning facial puffiness is seenin most patients even before the development ofgeneralized edema.
/square6Patients can experience dyspnea due to pulmonaryedema and pleural effusion.
/square6Ascites may be present.
/square6Patients are more prone to infection due to loss ofimmunoglobulins and complements in the urine.
/square6Patients also have hypercoagulable state due tourinary losses of antithrombin III, protein C, and

/square6Diseases of Kidney and Urinary Tract487
8protein S and increased platelet activation. Patients
are prone to renal vein thrombosis and other venousthromboemboli.
/square6Microcytic hypochromic anemia may result from
loss of transferrin in the urine.
/square6Vit D deficiency may result from loss of cholecalci-
ferol binding protein.
Investigations
/square6Urine analysis shows heavy proteinuria. 24-hoururine protein excretion should be measured and it
shows nephrotic range proteinuria (>3 gm/day).
Normal protein excretion is <150 mg/day. Minimalhematuria may also be present.
/square6Serum albumin is low (<3 g/dL).
/square6Urea and creatinine may be elevated if there is renalfailure.
/square6Total cholesterol and LDL-cholesterol is elevatedin most patients. HDL-cholesterol is normal ordecreased.
/square6Blood sugar and glycosylated hemoglobin tests for
diabetes.
/square6Antinuclear antibody (ANA) and ANCA test for
collagen vascular disease and vasculitis.
/square6Serum anticoagulants and complement levels aredecreased.
/square6Hepatitis B and C serology and HIV serology.
/square6Renal biopsy if the cause is not clear especially inan adult patient.
Management
Protein loss
/square6The daily total dietary protein intake should replacethe daily urinary protein losses so as to avoidnegative nitrogen balance. Angiotensin converting
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor
blockers reduce the amount of proteinuria.
Edema
/square6This can be managed by dietary salt restriction anddiuretics. Commonly used diuretics includethiazide and loop diuretics.
Hyperlipidemia
/square6Dietary modification and exercise should be adviced.HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins) can be usedin patients not responding to dietary measures.
Hypercoagulable State
/square6Anticoagulation therapy is given for at least 3–6
months in patients with evidence of thrombosis.
Patients with renal vein thrombosis and recurrentthromboemboli require indefinite anticoagulation.
Treatment of the Underlying Cause
/square6Minimal change disease responds to steroids ./square6Steroids are beneficial in only 20–30% cases of focal
segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS). Cyclo-phosphamide and cyclosporine are alternatives.
/square6Membranous nephropathy responds to alternating
monthly corticosteroids and monthly oral chloram-
bucil over 6 months. Recent controlled studies usingonly corticosteroids for 6 months have shownsimilar beneficial results. Membranous nephro-pathy with progressive renal failure may benefitfrom cyclophosphamide plus corticosteroids.
Q.Minimal change disease (nil disease or lipoid
nephrosis).
/square6Minimal change disease accounts for most cases of
nephrotic syndrome in children and 10 to 15% ofidiopathic nephrotic syndrome in adults.
Etiology
/square6Most of the cases are idiopathic (primary).
/square6Some cases may be secondary to following causes.
– Infections: Tuberculosis, syphilis, mycoplasma,
ehrlichiosis, hepatitis C virus, HIV.
– Malignancies: Leukemia, Hodgkin and non-
Hodgkin lymphoma.
– Allergy: Bee sting, cat fur, fungi, poison ivy,
ragweed pollen, house dust.
– Drugs: NSAIDs, lithium, antibiotics (ampicillin,
cephalosporins), immunizations.
Clinical Features
/square6Patients typically present with periorbital and
peripheral edema. Periorbital edema is noted first.
/square6Malaise, easy fatiguability and weight gain.
/square6Hypertension is rare.
Investigations
/square6Urea and creatinine are normal.
/square6Urine analysis shows nephrotic range proteinuria
and occasionally hematuria. RBC casts are absent.
/square6Serum albumin is low.
/square6Serologic workup (including antinuclear antibodiesand complements) is normal.
/square6Kidney biopsy is usually not required in childrenexcept in atypical cases. However, kidney biopsyis required in adults. Biopsy shows no glomerularabnormalities on light microscopy. The tubules may
show lipid droplet accumulation from absorbed
lipoproteins (hence also called lipoid nephrosis).Complement and Ig deposits are absent onimmunofluorescence. Electron microscopy showseffacement or “fusion” of the foot processes ofepithelial podocytes.
Treatment
/square6Initial therapy is with steroids, prednisolone
60 mg/m2 per day (maximum of 60 mg/day). When

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
8488 proteinuria disappears, prednisolone is continued
at the same dose for 1 month and then on alternate
day (at the same daily dose) for 2 months. There-
after, the alternate day dose is gradually decreased.
/square6Complete remission occurs in >80% of patientstreated with corticosteroids, and treatment is
usually continued for 1 to 2 years.
/square6Response may be slower in adults, and they should
not be considered steroid-resistant until they havefailed to respond to 4 months of treatment.
/square6Relapses can occur in children and adults. First
relapse is treated similarly as the initial episode.
Patients who relapse third time or who becomesteroid dependent may be treated with a 2-month
course of an alkylating agent (cyclophosphamide
2 mg/kg/day or chlorambucil). Another alternativeis low dose cyclosporine (4 to 6 mg/kg/day for
4 months), but this carries the risk of nephrotoxicity.
/square6Mycophenolate mofetil or rituximab may be
considered if the above drugs are not effective.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of glomerulonephritis (nephritic
syndrome).
/square6Glomerulonephritis literally means ‘inflammation
of glomeruli’. Here the glomeruli are damaged dueto inflammation. Glomerulonephritis classically
presents with hematuria, RBC casts, pyuria (WBCs),
mild to moderate proteinuria and hypertension.
Etiology
Primary glomerular diseases: Diffuse proliferative glomerulo-
nephritis, focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS), membranousglomerulonephritis, membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis,
cresentic glomerulonephritis, IgA nephropathy.
Systemic diseases: SLE, Wegener’s granulomatosis, poly-
arteritis, Henoch-Schönlein purpura, Goodpasture’s syndrome,sickle cell nephropathy.
Infections: Post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis, syphilis,
subacute bacterial endocarditis, hepatitis B and C, HIV
infection, infectious mononucleosis, cytomegalovirus, malaria,schistosomiasis.
Miscellaneous: Malignancy, eclampsia, serum sickness, drugs
(penicillamine), malignant hypertension.Pathogenesis
/square6Most types of glomerulonephritis are immunologi-
cally mediated. Glomerular injury occurs by twomain mechanisms, either by deposition of antibody
in the glomerular basement membrane or by
deposition of immune complexes.
/square6Immune complexes are formed ‘in situ’ by anti-bodies which complex with glomerular antigens, or
with other antigens (‘planted’ antigens, e.g. viral
or bacterial ones) that have localized in glomeruli.
/square6The antibodies and immune complexes triggerinjury by complement activation, fibrin deposition,
release of cytokines and recruitment of inflamma-
tory cells.
Clinical Features
/square6Patients present with hematuria, hypertension,oliguria and edema. Edema is found first in bodyparts with low tissue tension, such as the periorbitaland scrotal regions.
Investigations
/square6Urine analysis shows hematuria, moderate protei-nuria (usually <2 g/d), RBC casts, and WBCs. Red
cell casts are specific for glomerulonephritis.
/square6Complement levels (C3, C4) are usually decreased.
/square6ASO titer may be increased in post-streptococcal
glomerulonephritis.
/square6Anti-GBM antibody levels are elevated.
/square6ANCA, ANA if connective tissue disease issuspected.
/square6Hepatitis serologies.
/square6Renal ultrasound.
/square6Renal biopsy if the cause is not clear.
Treatment
/square6Depending on the nature and severity of disease,treatment may involve high-dose steroids, cyclo-phosphamide, and rituximab.
/square6Plasmapheresis can be used in Goodpasture’sdisease as a temporary measure until chemotherapytakes effect.
/square6Underlying disease requires specific treatment.
Q.What are the differences between nephrotic and nephritic syndromes?
TABLE 8.2: Differences between nephrotic and nephritic syndromes
Nephrotic syndrome Nephritic syndrome
Proteinuria Massive (>3 gm/day) Moderate (<2 gm/day)
Hematuria Minimal Significant
RBC casts in urine Absent Present
Hypoalbuminemia Present Rarely
Generalized edema Present Rarely present in cases of renal failure
Hyperlipidemia/hyperlipiduria Yes No
Hypertension Absent Present
Urea and creatinine Usually normal Often elevated

/square6Diseases of Kidney and Urinary Tract489
8Q.Discuss the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features,
investigations, complications and management of
poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis.
/square6Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis is acuteglomerulonephritis occurring after infection withstreptococci.
Etiology
/square6Group A beta hemolytic streptococci are respon-sible for poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis. Skinand throat infections with this organism are follo-wed by glomerulonephritis.
Pathogenesis
/square6Post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis is an immune-mediated disease involving streptococcal antigens,circulating immune complexes, and activation ofcomplement in association with cell-mediated injury.
/square6Many streptococcal antigens have biochemicalaffinity for glomerular basement membrane and inthis location act as target for antibodies.
/square6The immune response to these antigens leads toacute glomerulonephritis.
Clinical Features
/square6It occurs in children between the ages of 5 and15 years, but can occur in adults also.
/square6It is more common in males.
/square6Patients present with hematuria, proteinuria, pyuria,RBC casts, edema, hypertension, and oliguric renalfailure.
/square6Systemic symptoms of headache, malaise, anorexia,and flank pain (due to swelling of the renal capsule)may be present.
/square6Subclinical disease is common and is characterized
by asymptomatic microscopic hematuria.
Investigations
/square6Urine analysis shows hematuria, proteinuria,
pyuria, and RBC casts. Proteinuria can sometimesbe in the nephrotic range.
/square6Urea and creatinine may be elevated.
/square6Serum complement levels are low.
/square6Streptococcal culture may be positive from the
infected site (throat or skin).
/square6ASO titre, anti-DNAase or antihyaluronidase anti-
bodies are increased.
/square6Renal biopsy is rarely required. It shows mesangialand endothelial cell proliferation, glomerularinfiltration with polymorphonuclear leukocytes,granular subendothelial immune deposits andsubepithelial deposits.
Complications
/square6Pulmonary edema, hypertensive encepahalopathy,
and permanent renal failure.Management
/square6Treatment is mainly supportive.
/square6The measures are salt restriction, diuretics, anti-
hypertensives and dialysis if required.
/square6Antibiotic treatment for streptococcal infectionshould be given to all patients and their cohabitants.Antibiotic choices are penicillins (ampicillin,amoxicillin) or cephalosporins or macrolides orclindamycin. Oral penicillin V or amoxicillin are the1st drugs of choice and are given for 10 days.
/square6Steroids and cytotoxic drugs are of no value.
/square6Prognosis is good and permanent renal failure isuncommon.
Q.IgA nephropathy.
/square6IgA nephropathy is the most common type of
primary glomerulonephritis. It is a common causeof renal failure.
/square6It is characterized by deposition of IgA immunecomplexes in glomeruli manifesting as slowly pro-gressive hematuria, proteinuria, and, often, renal
insufficiency. Sometimes, it can progress rapidly
causing rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis(RPGN).
Etiology
/square6IgA nephropathy is an autoimmune disease, causingantibody-mediated destruction of the glomerularbasement membrane. Usually, there is an infectiousdisease preceding IgA nephropathy which triggersabnormal immune response.
Pathogenesis
/square6Exact pathogenesis is unknown, but evidence
suggests that there may be several mechanisms,
including increased IgA production, defectiveIgA glycosylation causing increased binding tomesangial cells, decreased IgA clearance, a defec-tive mucosal immune system, and overproductionof cytokines stimulating mesangial cell prolifera-
tion.
/square6Damage to basement membranes results in the
ultrafiltration of larger molecules and produces
hematuria.
Clinical Features
/square6It occurs in all age groups but more common
in young adults. Males are more commonlyaffected.
/square6Patients present with gross painless hematuria,proteinuria and hypertension within 1–2 daysfollowing a mucosal infection (respiratory tract, GItract). Hematuria is usually recurrent or persistent.There may be acute exacerbations of hematuria in
association with respiratory tract infections.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
8490 Diagnosis
/square6IgA nephropathy should be suspected in patients
who present with gross hematuria, particularlywithin 2 days of a febrile mucosal illness or with
flank pain.
/square6Urinalysis.
/square6Renal biopsy shows mesangial deposition of IgA
and complement (C3) on immunofluorescentstaining. IgA deposits are not specific for IgAnephropathy because similar IgA deposits are alsoseen in other diseases such as Henoch-Schönleinpurpura.
Treatment
/square6Patients with mild disease should be monitored at
6 to 12 months in tervals to assess for disease pro-
gression. Patients with persistent proteinuria should
be treated with an ACE inhibitor. Omega-3 fattyacids found in fish oil have been shown to bebeneficial. Patients with progressive disease shouldbe treated by intravenous methylprednisolone 1 gm
daily for three consecutive days.
Q.Rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis (crescentic
glomerulonephritis).
/square6Rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis  (RPGN)
refers to  glomerulonephritis progressing to renal
failure within a short period of time (over days toweeks).
Etiology
Anti-GBM antibody mediated
• Anti-GBM glomerulonephritis (without lung hemorrhage)• Goodpasture syndrome (with lung hemorrhage)
Immune complex mediated
• IgA nephropathy• Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis• Lupus nephritis• Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis• Mixed cryoglobulinemiaPauci-immune RPGN• Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (previously called Wegener
granulomatosis)
• Microscopic polyangiitis• Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Churg-Strauss
syndrome)
Pathology
/square6RPGN is characterized by presence of crescents in
renal biopsy, hence also called crescentic glomerulo-nephritis. Crescents are formed by the accumulation
of cells and extracellular material in the urinary
space of glomerulus. These cells are parietal andvisceral epithelia as well as inflammatory cells.
/square6RPGN can be classified into 3 types based on patho-
logic features.–Anti-glomerular basement membrane (GBM)
antibody disease:  Linear deposits of antibodies on
immunofluorescence.
–Immune complex RPGN:  Granular deposits of
immune complexes on immunofluorescence.
–Pauci-immune RPGN:  Few or no immune deposits
on immunofluorescence.
Clinical Features
/square6Manifestations are usually insidious, with weak-ness, fatigue, fever, nausea, vomiting, anorexia,arthralgia, and abdominal pain.
/square6Patients with anti-GBM antibody disease (Good-pasture syndrome) may have pulmonary hemorr-hage, which can present with hemoptysis.
/square6Patients also complain of hematuria, oliguria, andgeneralized edema.
Investigations
/square6Urea and creatinine are elevated because of renal
failure.
/square6Urine analysis shows nephritic pattern with
hematuria, RBC casts, WBCs and proteinuria.
/square6Serologic testing: It includes anti-GBM antibodies(present in anti-GBM antibody disease); antistrepto-lysin O antibodies (post-streptococcal GN), anti-DNA antibodies, or cryoglobulins (immune complexRPGN); and ANCA titers (pauci-immune RPGN).
/square6Complement level is low in immune complex RPGN.
/square6Renal ultrasound shows normal sized kidneys.
/square6Chest X-ray may show infiltrates in Goodpasturesyndrome and other vasculitides.
/square6Kidney biopsy shows presence of crescents.
Treatment
/square6Supportive therapy involves diuretics, antihyper-tensives and dialysis if required.
/square6For immune complex and pauci-immune RPGN,corticosteroids (methylprednisolone 1 g IV daily for3 to 5 days followed by prednisone 1 mg/kg orallydaily). Cyclophosphamide orally daily is added to
prednisolone.
Figure 8.3 Crescentic glomerulonephritis


/square6Diseases of Kidney and Urinary Tract491
8/square6Plasma exchange (daily 3 to 4 L exchanges for
14 days) is recommended for anti-GBM antibodydisease.
/square6Kidney transplantation in end stage renal disease.
Prognosis
/square680 to 90% of untreated patients progress to end-
stage renal disease within 6 months.
Q.Tubulointerstitial nephritis (interstitial nephritis).
/square6Tubulointerstitial nephritis refers to inflammatory
disease of renal tubules and the surrounding inter-stitium.
Etiology
Drugs (allergic): Penicillins, NSAIDs, allopurinol, lithium,
ciclosporin.
Autoimmune: Sarcoidosis, Sjögren syndrome, SLE.
Infections: Pyelonephritis, leptospirosis, tuberculosis,
hantavirus.
Toxic: Myeloma light chains, mushrooms, Chinese herbs, lead.
Metabolic and systemic diseases: Hypokalaemia, hyper-
calciuria, hyperoxaluria, amyloidosis.
Congenital/developmental: Vesico-ureteric reflux, Wilson
disease, medullary sponge kidney, sickle-cell nephropathy.
Clinical Features
/square6Tubulointerstitial nephritis can be acute or chronic.
More than 95% of cases of acute tubulointerstitial
nephritis result from infection or an allergic drugreaction. Chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis ariseswhen chronic tubular insults cause gradualinterstitial infiltration and fibrosis, tubular atrophyand dysfunction, and a gradual deterioration of
renal function, usually over years.
/square6Acute tubulointerstitial nephritis may be asympto-
matic. Fever, rash, arthralgias may be present in
allergic (drug-induced) interstitial nephritis. Some
patients develop polyuria and nocturia due to adefect in urinary concentration and Na reabsorp-tion.
/square6Chronic tubulointerstitial nephritis is usuallyasymptomatic unless renal failure develops.
Investigations
/square6Urea and creatinine are elevated.
/square6Hyperkalemia and acidosis may be present.
/square6Urine analysis shows proteinuria, hematuria,pyuria and eosinophils.
/square6Renal biopsy shows intense inflammation, withpolymorphonuclear leukocytes and lymphocytessurrounding tubules and blood vessels and invad-ing tubules (tubulitis), and occasional eosinophils
(especially in drug-induced disease).Management
/square6Underlying cause should be treated such as
withdrawal of offending drug.
/square6Steroids (e.g. prednisolone 1 mg/kg/day) accele-rate recovery and may prevent long-term scarringin allergic and autoimmune interstitial nephritis.Steroids should be given for 2 to 3 months.
/square6Supportive measures such as dialysis if required.
Q.Polycystic kidney disease (PKD).
/square6Polycystic kidney disease is a common disorder,
occurring in approximately 1 in every 1000 livebirths. It is characterized by presence of extensivecysts scattered throughout both kidneys.
/square6There are 2 types of PKD. Infantile polycystickidney disease and adult polycystic kidney disease.Infantile PKD is rare, autosomal recessive andusually fatal. Adult PKD is common and is inherited
as autosomal dominant trait.
Pathogenesis
/square6Mutations in PKD1 and PKD2 genes are responsible
for this disease.
/square6Small cysts lined by tubular epithelium developfrom infancy or childhood and enlarge slowly
compressing the normal kidney tissue leading to
renal failure.
Clinical Features (Adult PKD)
/square6Patients are usually asymptomatic until later life.
/square6After the age of 20 there is often insidious onset ofhypertension.
/square6One or both kidneys may be palpable and thesurface may be nodular.
/square6Family history is usually positive.
/square6Gradual reduction in renal function.
/square6Some patients may have hepatic cysts, and berry
aneurysms in the brain.
/square6Mitral and aortic regurgitation are also frequent in
these patients.
Investigations
/square6Ultrasound abdomen shows multiple cysts in bothkidneys.
/square6Urea and creatinine are elevated.
Figure 8.4 Polycystic kidney disease


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
8492 Management
/square6There is no treatment to alter the rate of progression
of renal failure.
/square6Control of hypertension.
/square6Dialysis if required.
/square6Kidney transplantation in end stage renal disease.
Q.Discuss the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features,
investigations and management of urinary tract
infection.
/square6Urinary tract infection (UTI), defined as thebacterial invasion of the urinary tract. It can occur
anywhere between the urethra and the kidney. UTI
is the commonest of all bacterial infections.
/square6It is more common in women because of shorturethra (4 cm) and up to 50% of women have a UTI
at some time. UTI is uncommon in males except in
the first year of life and in men over 60 because ofprostate hypertrophy causing urinary obstruction.
/square6UTI causes morbidity and in some cases renal
damage and chronic renal failure.
/square6UTI can present in following ways.
– Asymptomatic bacteriuria: This is presence of
bacteria in the urine without symptoms. It iscommon during pregnancy.
– Symptomatic acute urethritis and cystitis
– Acute pyelonephritis
– Acute prostatitis
– Septicemia
/square6Some patients, usually females, have symptoms of
UTI without any bacteria in the urine. This is called
urethral syndrome. This can occur due to infection
with difficult to culture organisms (e.g. Chlamydia,certain anaerobes), intermittent or very low-countbacteriuria, reaction to toilet preparations or dis-infectants, symptoms related to sexual intercourse,or postmenopausal atrophic vaginitis. Antibiotics
are not indicated for urethral syndrome.
/square6Uncomplicated UTI is cystitis or pyelonephritis
that occurs in healthy, nonpregnant womenwithout any structural abnormality of the urinary
tract or comorbid illness that can increase the risk
of complications.
/square6Complicated UTI can involve either sex at any age.
It is pyelonephritis or cystitis which occurs in
patients with structural or functional urinary tract
abnormality and obstruction of urine flow; patientswith comorbid illness (e.g. diabetes); pregnantladies and children; or after instrumentation of theurinary tract.
Etiology of UTI
Community-acquired UTI
•Escherichia coli  derived from GIT (75% of infections)
• Proteus•Pseudomonas  species
• Streptococci•Staphylococcus epidermidis
Hospital-acquired UTI
•E. coli
• Klebsiella• Streptococci
Pathogenesis
/square6Most of the UTI (95%) are due to ascending infection
from the urethra to bladder. Remaining are due to
hematogenous spread of infection. The first step iscolonization of the periurethral area with bacteria.
/square6Attachment of bacteria to the uroepithelial cells is
an active process mediated by bacterial adhesins
and receptors on the epithelial cells. Urothelium ofsusceptible persons may have more receptors towhich virulent strains of E. coli  become adherent.
In women, the ascent of organisms into the bladderis easier than in men because of the relatively short
urethra and absence of bactericidal prostatic
secretions.
/square6Sexual intercourse and instrumentation of thebladder may also introduce organisms into the
urethra and bladder.
/square6Multiplication of organism then depends on the size
of the inoculum, virulence of the bacteria and hostdefenses.
Risk Factors for UTI
Incomplete bladder emptying
• Bladder outflow obstruction (BPH, urethral stricture)• Neurological problems (e.g. multiple sclerosis, diabetic
neuropathy, myelopathy)
• Gynecological abnormalities (e.g. uterine prolapse)• Vesicoureteric reflux
Foreign bodies
• Urethral catheter or ureteric stent
Loss of host defenses
• Atrophic urethritis and vaginitis in postmenopausal women• Diabetes mellitus
Clinical Features
/square6Increased frequency of micturition.
/square6Pain in the urethra during micturition (dysuria).
/square6Suprapubic pain during and after voiding (in
cystitis).
/square6Urgency.
/square6Intense desire to pass more urine after micturi-tion due to spasm of the inflamed bladder wall(strangury).
/square6Passing cloudy urine with unpleasant odor andoccasionally hematuria.
/square6Systemic symptoms such as fever and chills mayoccur. Prominent systemic symptoms with feverand loin pain suggest acute pyelonephritis.

/square6Diseases of Kidney and Urinary Tract493
8Investigations
/square6Urine microscopy:  It shows presence of WBCs (>5
per high power field is significant) and RBCs.Bacteria also may be visible.
/square6Mid-stream urine culture and sensitivity. Growthof >10
5/ml organisms is regarded as significant.
/square6Complete blood count:  May show increased leukocyte
count.
/square6Serum creatinine, blood urea and electrolytes mayshow evidence of renal failure.
/square6Renal ultrasound or CT to identify obstruction,cysts, or calculi.
/square6Intravenous urogram (IVU):  Alternative to ultra-
sound, particularly to image the collecting systemafter voiding.
/square6Pelvic examination in women with recurrent UTI
to exclude cystocele, rectocele and uterovaginal
prolapse.
/square6Rectal examination in elderly men to assessprostate.
/square6Intravenous urography for any anatomical/physio-logical anomalies.
/square6Micturating cystourethrography for vesicouretericreflux.
/square6Cystoscopy in patients with hematuria or asuspected bladder lesion
/square6Blood culture in septicemic cases.
Management
/square6Adequate fluid intake to maintain good urineoutput.
/square6Antibiotic therapy. The choice of antibiotic dependson the organism. Since the most common organismis E. coli,  initial antibiotic therapy should be directed
against this organism. Antibiotic choices are cotri-moxazole, amoxicillin, ampicillin, cephalosporins,quinolones and nitrofurantoin. Antibiotic should
be modified once urine culture sensitivity reports
are available. Duration of therapy is usually3–5 days
/square6Complicated UTI usually requires parenteral anti-
biotics for 7–14 days.
/square6Asymptomatic bacteriuria should be treated if the
patient is pregnant or immunocompromised.
/square6Any underlying risk factor predisposing to UTIshould be corrected such as BPH, cystocele, stones,etc.
/square6Alkalization of urine with potassium citrate mayhelp if there is severe dysuria.
Preventive Measures for Women with Recurrent UTI
/square6Fluid intake of at least 2 liters/day
/square6Regular complete emptying of bladder
/square6If vesicoureteric reflux is present, practice doublemicturition (empty the bladder then attempt micturi-tion 10–15 minutes later)/square6Good perineal hygiene
/square6Emptying of the bladder before and after sexualintercourse
Q.Sterile pyuria.
/square6Sterile pyuria means presence of pus cells (WBCs)
in the urine without apparent bacterial infection.
Causes
• Partially treated UTI
• Contamination of the urine sample by sterilizing solution• Contamination of the urine sample with vaginal leukocytes• Interstitial nephritis• Calculi in the urinary tract• Tuberculosis of the urinary tract• Infection with difficult to culture organisms (Chlamydia)• Bladder tumors• Chemical cystitis• Prostatitis• Appendicitis
Q.Vesicoureteral reflux.
/square6Vesicoureteral reflux (VUR) is the retrograde
passage of urine from the bladder into the upper
urinary tract.
/square6It is the most common urologic anomaly in children,occurring in approximately 1 percent of newborns.
/square6VUR may transport bacteria from the bladder tothe kidney leading to pyelonephritis. Recurrentpyelonephritis may lead to renal scarring, renalfailure and hypertension.
/square6Diagnosis of VUR is made by demonstration ofreflux of urine from the bladder to the upperurinary tract by either contrast micturiting cysto-urethogram or radionuclide cystogram.
/square6Treatment includes medical or surgical therapy.Medical treatment consists of prophylactic anti-
Figure 8.5 Vesicoureteral reflux


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
8494 biotic therapy with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole,
trimethoprim alone, or nitrofurantoin. Surgicalcorrection includes open surgical repair or endo-scopic correction.
Q.Discuss the etiopathogenesis, clinical features,
investigations and management of acute pyelo-
nephritis.
/square6Pyelonephritis refers to infection of the renal paren-chyma.
/square6Pyelonephritis is a serious infection and is lesscommon than lower urinary tract infection
(urethritis, cystitis).
Etiopathogenesis
/square6Pyelonephritis is usually due to ascending infection
from the bladder. Rarely, it is due to hematogenous
spread due to bacteremia. Common organisms are
E. coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae  and Staphylococcus.
/square6Pre-existing renal damage, such as cyst or scarring
facilitates infection.
/square6The renal pelvis is inflamed and small abscessesmay be present in the renal parenchyma. Histologicalexamination shows focal infiltration by neutrophils,which can often be seen within the tubules.
Clinical Features
/square6Acute pyelonephritis presents as a classic triad ofcostovertebral angle (renal angle) pain, fever andtenderness over the kidneys.
/square6Costovertebral angle pain is usually acute onset,unilateral or bilateral and may radiate to the iliacfossa and suprapubic area. There may be associatedtenderness and guarding in the lumbar region.Vomiting may be present.
/square6Fever is high grade with chills and rigors.
/square6Rarely, patients may present with sepsis, multi-organ
dysfunction, hypotension, and acute renal failure.
Investigations
/square6Peripheral blood leukocytosis.
/square6Urine examination shows presence of pus cells
(neutrophils), organisms, RBCs and tubular epi-thelial cells.
/square6Urine culture and sensitivity.
/square6Blood culture may sometimes grow the causative
organism.
/square6Renal ultrasound.
/square6CT scan may be required in doubtful cases.
Complications
/square6Emphysematous pyelonephritis  commonly occurs in
patients with diabetes. It is a severe, necrotizingform of pyelonephritis with gas formation andextension of the infection through the renal capsule.
/square6Renal and perinephric abscess formation./square6AKI.
/square6CKD.
/square6Sepsis with multi-organ dysfunction.
Management
/square6Adequate fluid intake, if necessary by intravenousroute.
/square6Antibiotic therapy:  For uncomplicated pyelonephritis,
initial antibiotic choice can be oral trimethoprim-
sulphamethoxazole or a fluoroquinolone. Intra-
venous ceftriaxone is another option if the patientis not able to take orally. For complicated pyelo-nephritis, broad-spectrum antibiotics such aspiperacillin-tazobactam, cefepime, meropenem orimipenem should be given parenterally. Antibiotics
should be modified based on culture sensitivity
reports. Antibiotics should be given for 7–14 days.
/square6Surgery may be necessary if there is abscess formation.
Q.Renal replacement therapy.
Q.Hemodialysis.
/square6Renal replacement therapy (RRT) replaces non-
endocrine kidney function in patients with renalfailure. RRT is also occasionally used for some forms
of poisoning. Techniques of RRT include hemo-
dialysis, peritoneal dialysis, and hemofiltration.
/square6Dialysis is based on the principle that solutes shiftfrom high concentration compartment to lowconcentration compartment if separated by a
semipermeable membrane. During dialysis, serum
solutes (e.g. urea, creatinine) diffuse passivelybetween fluid compartments down a concentrationgradient. In the context of dialysis, patient bloodforms one compartment (contains high concentra-tion of urea, creatinine) and dialysis fluid forms
another compartment separated by a semi-
permeable membrane. In hemofiltration, serumwater passes between compartments down ahydrostatic pressure gradient, dragging solute withit. Both dialysis and hemofiltration can be doneintermittently or continuously.
/square6Dialysis is divided broadly into three types: Hemo-
dialysis (HD), peritoneal dialysis (PD), andcontinuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT).
/square6Hemodialysis employs an artificial membraneacross which the exchange of solutes takes place.Peritoneal dialysis is done by using the peritonealmembrane as the semipermeable membrane.Continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) is a
slower type of dialysis which is over a period of
24 hours continuously to remove waste productsand fluid from the patient. CRRT provides moregentle solute (waste) and fluid removal thanstandard dialysis techniques; hence it is helpful inhemodynamically unstable patients such as patients
with hypotension.

/square6Diseases of Kidney and Urinary Tract495
8Indications for Dialysis
• Hyperkalemia >6 mmol/l
• Metabolic acidosis not responding to medical management
• Fluid overload and pulmonary edema
• Uremic pericarditis• Uremic encephalopathy
Hemodialysis
/square6Hemodialysis is more efficient than peritoneal
dialysis in removing urea and creatinine. Inhemodialysis there is diffusion of solutes betweenplasma and dialysate fluid across a semi-permeable
membrane following a concentration gradient.
/square6Semipermeable membrane is made of cellulose,
cellulose acetate or synthetic material (polymethylmethacrylate, polycarbonate).
Technique
/square6Blood from the patient is made to flow through thedialysis machine which contains a semipermeablemembrane. This semipermeable membrane
separates the blood and dialysis fluid. Solutes such
as urea, creatinine and potassium shift from highconcentration compartment (blood) to low concen-tration compartment (dialysis fluid) through thesemipermeable membrane.
/square6Fluid is removed by applying negative pressure to
the dialysate side (ultrafiltration). After passing
through the dialysis machine blood goes back tothe patient.
/square6Heparin is given to prevent clotting of the blood asit passes through the dialysis machine./square6Vascular access can be obtained by placing acatheter into the femoral or internal jugular vein.AV fistula can be created in the forearm forpermanent vascular access.
/square6Initially hemodialysis is done for 1 hour to avoidsudden change in fluid and electrolyte balance inthe patient. Subsequently hemodialysis is done for3–4 hours 3–4 times a week.
Complications of Hemodialysis
/square6Nausea, vomiting, and headache.
/square6Hypotension due to fluid removal and hypo-
volemia.
/square6Cardiac arrhythmias due to sudden potassium and
acid-base shifts.
/square6Hemorrhage due to anticoagulation.
/square6Air embolism due to disconnected or faulty linesand equipment malfunction.
/square6Allergic reaction to dialysis membrane or sterilisant.
/square6Dialysis disequilibrium syndrome may follow a
session of dialysis. It is due to cerebral edema which
develops due to rapid decrease in plasma osmolality.It is characterized by nausea, vomiting, restlessness,headache, hypertension, myoclonic jerks and insevere cases seizures and coma.
/square6Cardiac disease has been found to be higher inpatients on long-term hemodialysis.
/square6Dementia is more common in patients on long-term
dialysis. Reasons for this may be other comorbid
illness and age rather than dialysis itself. Dementiaassociated with aluminum intoxication in dialysispatients is now uncommon due to adoption ofalternatives to aluminum-containing compounds asphosphate binders.
Figure 8.6 Hemodialysis


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
8496 Q.Peritoneal dialysis (PD).
/square6In peritoneal dialysis (PD), peritoneum acts as a
semipermeable membrane across which diffusion
of solutes and water takes place.
/square6It is less efficient than hemodialysis, and is rarely
used in AKI. It requires an intact peritoneal cavityand is not feasible after recent abdominal surgery.
/square6Access to the peritoneal cavity is obtained througha peritoneal catheter made of silicon rubber withnumerous side holes at the distal end.
/square61.5–3 L of a dextrose-containing solution is infusedinto the peritoneal cavity and allowed to dwell for2 to 4 hours. Uremic toxins diffuse from theperitoneum into the dialysis fluid during this periodwhich is then removed and fresh dialysis fluid is
infused.
Forms of PD
/square6PD can be done manually or using an automated
device. In manual methods dialysis fluid is infused
into the peritoneum manually and is drained
manually. Automated PD uses an automated deviceto do multiple nighttime exchanges, sometimeswith a daytime dwell.
/square6Continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD ):
Involves multiple exchanges during the day (usuallyfour, but sometimes three or five) with an overnightdwell. The dialysate is infused into the abdomen atbedtime and is drained upon awakening.
/square6Continuous cyclic peritoneal dialysis (CCPD): This is
an automated form of therapy in which a machineperforms exchanges while the patient sleeps; theremay be a long daytime dwell, and occasionally amanual daytime exchange is performed. CCPDgenerally allows significantly more uninterrupted
time for work, family, and social activities than
CAPD.
Complications of Peritoneal Dialysis
/square6Peritonitis.
/square6Increased risk of hernias.
/square6Hyperglycemia due to use of dextrose containing
fluid as the dialysis fluid.
/square6Weight gain due to glucose absorption from the
dialysis fluid.
/square6Protein malnutrition.
Q.Dialysis disequilibrium syndrome.
/square6Dialysis disequilibrium syndrome refers to an array
of neurological manifestations that are seen duringor shortly after hemodialysis.
Pathophysiology
/square6Removal of urea from the blood by hemodialysisreduces osmolality of blood producing an osmoticdisequilibrium between blood and brain. Since it
takes some time for the urea concentration in thebrain to reduce, water moves into brain cellscausing brain edema.
/square6Another mechanism postulated is during hemo-dialysis, existing systemic metabolic acidosis ispromptly corrected, but the corresponding CSFpH level remains low. This causes sodium andpotassium that are bound to proteins to disassociate,making them osmotically active leading to brain
edema.
/square6Disequilibrium syndrome most commonly occurs
in first few dialysis sessions and in patients withhigh pre-dialysis urea.
Clinical Features
/square6Signs and symptoms of cerebral edema, such as
headache, blurred vision due to papilledema,
decreased level of consciousness, convulsions,delirium occurring immediately after dialysisshould raise the suspicion of DDS.
Investigations
/square6CT or MRI brain is required to rule out otherneurological problems such as stroke, intracranialbleed, etc.
/square6Serum electrolytes.
Treatment
/square6Usually self-limited. However, for severe symp-toms hemodialysis should be stopped.
/square6If seizures occur, antiepileptics should be givensuch as diazepam, and phenytoin.
/square6Brain edema can be reduced by IV mannitol andglycerol
Prevention
/square6Initial sessions of dialysis should be short so as to
gradually bring down the blood urea.
/square6Prophylactic administration of osmotically active
agents (mannitol, glucose) and using high sodiumdialysate in high risk patients.
Q.Renal transplantation.
/square6Kidney transplantation is the commonest organ
transplantation done.
/square6It offers the best chance of long-term survival inpatients with end-stage renal disease. It can restore
normal kidney function and correct all the
metabolic abnormalities of CKD.
Procedure
/square6Kidney grafts are taken from a cadaver or a livingdonor.
/square6ABO (blood group) and HLA antigens should be
matched between the donor and recipient,

/square6Diseases of Kidney and Urinary Tract497
8otherwise failure of the transplant can occur due to
graft rejection. Transplantation usually succeeds if
all known class I (HLA-A, B, and C) and class IIantigens (HLA-DR) between donor and recipientare matched.
/square6Patient should be dialyzed before transplantationto achieve a near normal metabolic state.
/square6Surgical technique:  The new kidney is placed in one
or the other iliac fossa, in an extraperitoneal position
that allows ease of repeated biopsy to detect the cause
of graft dysfunction. The renal artery is anastomosedto common iliac artery. Renal vein is anastomosedto common iliac vein. Ureter is implanted into thebladder. Patients own kidneys are left in situ .
Management after Transplantation
/square6Immunosuppressive therapy is given to prevent
graft rejection usually life long. A commonly usedregimen is a combination of prednisolone,ciclosporin and azathioprine. Use of newer
immunosuppressive drugs such as mycophenolate
mofetil and rapamycin is increasing.
/square6Rejection is treated by short courses of high-dosesteroids in the first instance. Anti-lymphocyte anti-
bodies or plasma exchanges are used in resistant cases.
/square6All transplant patients require regular life-long
follow-up to monitor renal function and immuno-suppression.
Complications
Perioperative Problems
/square6Fluid imbalance. Careful matching of input tooutput is required.
/square6Primary graft non-function. Causes include hyper-volemia, acute tubular necrosis, hyperacute rejection,
vascular occlusion and urinary tract obstruction.
Complications due to Immunosuppression
/square6Increased risk of infections, especially opportunistic
infections such as cytomegalovirus and Pneumo-
cystis carinii ./square6Increased risk of malignancy (skin cancer,
lymphomas, etc).
/square6Sepsis.
Contraindications to Renal Transplantation
Absolute
/square6Active malignancy.
/square6Active vasculitis or anti-GBM disease.
/square6Severe ischemic heart disease
/square6Severe occlusive aorto-iliac disease.
/square6Persistent substance abuse.
/square6Severe mental retardation.
/square6Severe psychiatric disease.
Relative
/square6Very young children (<1 year) or older people(>75 years).
/square6High risk of disease recurrence in the transplantkidney.
/square6Severe bladder or urethral abnormalities.
/square6Significant comorbidity.
Prognosis
/square6There is >75% patient survival and graft survival
at 5 years.
Q.Renal tubular acidosis.
/square6Renal tubular acidosis (RTA) refers to the development
of metabolic acidosis due to a defect in the kidneyto reabsorb bicarbonate or to excrete hydrogen ions.
/square6All forms of RTA are characterized by a normalanion gap (hyperchloremic) metabolic acidosis.
/square6RTA should be suspected in patients with metabolicacidosis with normal anion gap or with unexplainedhyperkalemia or hypokalemia.
/square6There are four major types of RTA;
– Type 1 RTA or distal RTA
– Type 2 RTA or proximal RTA– Type 3 RTA or mixed RTA
– Type 4 RTA or hypoaldosteronism
Type 1 RTA or Distal RTA
/square6Distal RTA is due to impaired hydrogen ion
secretion in the distal tubule.
Causes
• Idiopathic, sporadic
• Familial
• Autoimmune disease with hypergammaglobulinemia,
particularly Sjögren syndrome, RA, SLE
• Kidney transplantation• Nephrocalcinosis• Medullary sponge kidney• Chronic obstructive uropathy
• Drugs (mainly amphotericin B, ifosfamide, and lithium)
• Cirrhosis
• Sickle cell anemiaFigure 8.7 Kidney transplantation


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
8498 Features
/square6Urine pH is abnormally high (>5.5) in spite of
systemic acidosis.
/square6ABG shows normal anion gap metabolic acidosis.
/square6Chronic acidosis leads to bone demineralizationand hypercalciuria. Bone demineralization leads to
rickets in children and osteomalacia in adults.
Hypercalciuria may lead to nephrolithiasis.
/square6Hypokalemia is frequently seen in distal RTA andthe exact reason for this is unknown.
/square6Plasma bicarbonate is usually below 15 mEq/L.
Treatment
/square6Alkali therapy (usually potassium citrate) improvesboth calcium and potassium balance, and preventsstones and nephrocalcinosis.
Type 2 RTA or Proximal RTA
/square6This is due to failure of proximal tubules to reabsorbfiltered bicarbonate from the urine, leading tobicarbonate wasting and acidosis.
Causes
• Fanconi syndrome
• Light chain nephropathy due to multiple myeloma• Drugs (acetazolamide, sulfonamides, ifosfamide, outdated
tetracycline, or streptozocin)
• Heavy metals (lead, cadmium, mercury)
Features
/square6ABG shows normal anion gap metabolic acidosis.
Since distal segments can reabsorb bicarbonate,
plasma bicarbonate concentration is usuallybetween 12 and 20 mEq/L.
/square6Urine pH is above 7.5 and there is bicarbonaturia
when the serum bicarbonate concentration is raised
to a normal level.
/square6Proximal RTA is commonly associated withgeneralized proximal tubular dysfunction called the
Fanconi syndrome. In addition to bicarbonaturia,
generalized proximal dysfunction causes glucos-uria, phosphaturia, uricosuria, aminoaciduria, andtubular proteinuria. Loss of phosphate may lead tobone demineralization.
Treatment
/square6Supplementation of bicarbonate.
Type 3 RTA or mixed RTA
/square6This is due to carbonic anhydrase II deficiency inboth proximal and distal tubules. It is extremelyrare and has features of both type 1 and type 2 RTA.Additional features are osteopetrosis, cerebralcalcification, and mental retardation.
/square6Treatment is same as that for type 1 and type 2RTA.Type 4 RTA or hypoaldosteronism
/square6This is due to either aldosterone deficiency or tubularresistance to the action of aldosterone.
/square6Aldosterone stimulates the secretion of bothhydrogen and potassium in the distal tubules.Hence, hypoaldosteronism causes retention ofhydrogen ions leading to acidosis and retention ofpotassium leading to hyperkalemia.
Causes
Primary aldosterone deficiency
• Primary adrenal insufficiency• Congenital adrenal hyperplasia, particularly 21-hydroxylase
deficiency
• Isolated aldosterone synthase deficiency
Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism
• Diabetic nephropathy• Volume overload• Drugs (ACE inhibitors, NSAIDs, cyclosporine)• HIV infection• Obstructive uropathy
Aldosterone resistance
• Drugs which close the collecting tubule sodium channel
(amiloride, spironolactone, triamterene, trimethoprim)
• Tubulointerstitial disease• Pseudohypoaldosteronism• Distal chloride shunt
Features
/square6Hyperkalemia.
/square6ABG shows normal anion gap metabolic acidosis.
/square6Urine pH is appropriate, i.e. below 5.5 in the pre-
sence of acidosis.
/square6Bicarbonate concentration is usually >17 mEq/L.
Treatment
/square6Aldosterone deficiency is treated with fludro-cortisone.
/square6Hyperkalemia is controlled by restricting dietarypotassium and diuretics.
Q.Renal tuberculosis.
Q.Tuberculosis of urinary tract.
/square6Tuberculosis of the kidney is secondary to tuber-
culosis elsewhere due to hematogenous spread.
/square6Initially, lesions develop in the renal cortex; thesemay ulcerate into the renal pelvis and involve theureters, bladder, epididymis, seminal vesicles andprostate.
/square6Kidney calcification and ureteric stricture arecommon.
Clinical Features
/square6Fever, malaise, night sweats, weight loss.
/square6Hematuria (sometimes macroscopic).

/square6Diseases of Kidney and Urinary Tract499
8/square6Loin pain.
/square6Symptoms of bladder involvement (frequency,
dysuria).
/square6Chronic renal failure due to urinary tract obstruc-tion or destruction of kidney tissue.
Investigations
/square6WBCs (pyuria) are present in the urine but routineurine cultures are negative (‘sterile pyuria’). Earlymorning urine specimens should be examined byspecial techniques of microscopy and culture to
detect tuberculous bacilli.
/square6Cystoscopy to assess bladder involvement.
/square6Chest X-ray to look for pulmonary tuberculosis.
/square6Mantoux test may be positive.
/square6Ultrasound and CT abdomen to assess kidneys and
bladder.
/square6IVP to assess distortion of kidneys and uretericstrictures.
Treatment
/square6Anti-tuberculous therapy as for pulmonary tuber-
culosis.
/square6Surgery may be required to relieve urinary tract
obstruction or to remove a severely infected kidney.
Q.Renal artery stenosis (RAS).
/square6Renal artery stenosis refers to narrowing of one or
both renal arteries. >70% narrowing is associated
with reduction of blood flow to kidneys.
Etiology
/square6Atherosclerosis (most common cause).
/square6Fibromuscular dysplasia.
/square6Vasculitis (Takayasu’s, PAN).
Clinical Features
/square6Hypertension is present if RAS is unilateral. Hyper-
tension is due to activation of the renin-angiotensinsystem in response to renal ischemia. Hypertensionis severe, and may be difficult to control.
/square6Renal failure if RAS is bilateral./square6Evidence of vascular disease elsewhere especiallyin the legs.
/square6Deterioration of renal function with ACE inhibitors.This happens because ACE inhibitors or angio-tensin II receptor antagonists block efferent arteriolar
vasoconstriction which maintains glomerularfiltration pressure in ischemic kidney.
/square6Repeated flash pulmonary edema.
Investigations
/square6Ultrasound abdomen:  It shows asymmetry in kidney
size in unilateral RAS and bilaterally shrunken
kidneys in bilateral RAS.
/square6Renal artery Doppler can identify significant renalartery stenosis.
/square6Renal isotope scanning may show delayed uptakeof isotope and reduced excretion by the affectedkidney, but this is unreliable in the presence of renalimpairment.
/square6Renal arteriography is the definitive test, but isinvasive and carries the risk of contrast nephro-pathy.
/square6MR angiography and spiral CT angiography arenoninvasive are being increasingly used.
Management
/square6Medical management with antihypertensives, low-dose aspirin and lipid-lowering drugs.
/square6Angioplasty, with placement of stents.
/square6Surgical resection of the stenosed segment and re-
anastomosis.
Q.Renal cell carcinoma (RCC); Renal adenocarcinoma.
/square6Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most common
malignant tumor of the kidney in adults. It is anadenocarcinoma and arises from renal tubules.
/square6It can spread into the renal pelvis, causinghematuria, along the renal vein into the inferiorvena cava and to perinephric tissues. Lymphatic
spread occurs to para-aortic nodes, and blood-
borne metastases can occur to anywhere in thebody.
Risk Factors
/square6Smoking doubles the risk.
/square6Obesity.
/square6Excess use of phenacetin.
/square6Acquired cystic kidney disease in dialysis patients.
/square6Some familial syndromes, particularly von Hippel-Lindau disease.
/square6Exposure to certain radiopaque dyes, asbestos,cadmium, and leather tanning and petroleum
products.
Figure 8.8


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
8500 Clinical Features
/square6It is twice as common in males as in females. The
peak incidence is between 50 and 70 years of ageand it is uncommon before 40.
/square6Symptoms usually do not appear until late, whenthe tumor may already be large and metastatic.
/square6Most common manifestation is gross or microscopichematuria.
/square6Loin pain, abdominal mass may be present.
/square6RCC may secrete many substances leading tovarious paraneoplastic syndromes. These includefever, hypercalcemia, anemia, thrombocytosis,neuropathy, etc.
Investigations
/square6Ultrasound abdomen:  Distinguishes between solid
tumor and simple renal cysts./square6CT abdomen and chest:  Helps in knowing the extent
and staging of tumor.
/square6Biopsy of the lesion.
Management
/square6Radical nephrectomy is performed whereverpossible. This includes the removal of kidney,perirenal fascial envelope and ipsilateral para-aortic
lymph nodes. Radical nephrectomy should be
considered even when metastases are present,because this leads to reduction of systemic effects
and regression of metastases.
/square6Some benefit has been seen with immunotherapy
using interferon and interleukin-2.
/square6RCC is resistant to radiotherapy and chemo-therapy.

9
501Q.Enumerate the common presenting complaints of
endocrine dysfunction.
Easy fatigability: Hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, hyperpara-
thyroidism, hypogonadism, adrenal insufficiency, Cushing’s
syndrome.
Weight gain: Hypothyroidism, Cushing’s syndrome.
Weight loss: Thyrotoxicosis, adrenal insufficiency, diabetes mellitus.
Amenorrhea/oligomenorrhea: Menopause, polycystic ovarian
syndrome, hyperprolactinemia, thyrotoxicosis, premature
ovarian failure, Cushing’s syndrome.
Precocious puberty: Gonadotrophin excess.
Delayed puberty: Hypopituitarism, hypogonadism.
Polyuria and polydipsia: Diabetes mellitus, diabetes insipidus,
hyperparathyroidism (due to hypercalcemia), Conn’s syndrome
(due to hypokalemia).
Hypertension: Pheochromocytoma, Cushing’s syndrome,
hypothyroidism.
Hypotension, hypoglycemia: Adrenal insufficiency.
Heat intolerance: Thyrotoxicosis, menopause.
Palpitations: Thyrotoxicosis, pheochromocytoma.
Thyroid enlargement: Goiter, Graves’ disease, Hashimoto’s
thyroiditis.
Prominence of eyes: Graves’ disease.
Hirsutism: polycystic ovarian syndrome, congenital adrenal
hyperplasia, Cushing’s syndrome.
Alopecia: Cushing’s syndrome, hypothyroidism.
Galactorrhea: Hyperprolactinemia.
Loss of libido: Hypogonadism.
Visual dysfunction: Pituitary tumor.
Headache: Acromegaly, pituitary tumor, pheochromocytoma.
Muscle weakness (usually proximal): Thyrotoxicosis, Cushing’s
syndrome, hypokalemia (e.g. Conn’s syndrome), hyperpara-
thyroidism, hypogonadism.
Paraesthesiae and tetany: Hypoparathyroidism.
Recurrent ureteric colic: Hyperparathyroidism (due to hyper-
calcemia leading to stones).
Coarsening of features: Acromegaly, hypothyroidism.Endocrinology and
Diabetes Mellitus
Q.Discuss briefly the anatomy of pituitary gland,
hormones secreted and their functions.
Anatomy
/square6Pituitary gland lies within the sella turcica of the
sphenoid bone and is bridged over by a fold of dura
mater.
/square6Pituitary gland has dual embryologic origin. Theanterior lobe is formed from Rathke’s pouch, andposterior lobe from the floor of the third ventricle.
/square6It is composed of two predominant lobes, anterior(adenohypophysis) and posterior (neurohypo-physis) lobes. The intermediate lobe is rudimentaryin humans.
/square6Important relations of the gland are sphenoid sinusanteroinferiorly, cavernous sinus (with internalcarotid arteries and cranial nerves III, IV, V, andVI) laterally, and optic chiasma anterior to the
pituitary stalk.
/square6The gland is connected to the hypothalamus by the
infundibular stalk, which has portal vesselscarrying blood from the median eminence of the
hypothalamus to the anterior lobe and nerve fibres
to the posterior lobe.
Figure 9.1 Pituitary gland


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
9502 Hormones Secreted by Pituitary Gland
and their Functions
Anterior pituitary hormones
•Growth hormone:  Promotes growth; lipid and carbohydrate
metabolism.
•Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH):  Stimulates adrenal
glands to produce hormones such as cortisol and aldosterone
important for stress response and fluid electrolyte balance.
•Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH):  Stimulates the thyroid
gland to release thyroid hormones. Thyroid hormones controlbasal metabolic rate and play an important role in growth
and maturation.
•Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone
(LH):  Growth of reproductive system and sex hormone
production.
•Prolactin:  Stimulates secretion of breast milk.
Posterior pituitary hormones
•Antidiuretic hormone (ADH):  Conservation of body water.
•Oxytocin:  Stimulates milk ejection and uterine contractions.
Q.Hypopituitarism; panhypopituitarism.
/square6Hypopituitarism refers to decreased secretion of
pituitary hormones.
/square6It can result either from diseases of the pituitarygland, or diseases of the hypothalamus leading to
deficiency of hypothalamic releasing hormones.
Causes of Hypopituitarism
Pituitary diseases
• Mass lesions—pituitary adenomas, cysts, metastatic cancer• Postpartum necrosis (Sheehan syndrome)• Pituitary surgery• Pituitary radiation• Hemorrhage• Infiltrative lesions—hemochromatosis, lymphocytic
hypophysitis
• Empty sella syndrome
Hypothalamic diseases
• Mass lesions, sarcoidosis, surgery, radiotherapy, tuberculosis,
hemorrhage.
Clinical Features
/square6The clinical manifestations of hypopituitarism
depend upon the cause as well as the deficiency ofeach anterior pituitary hormone.
/square6Growth hormone deficiency —it leads to short stature
in children. In adults, it may result in diminishedmuscle mass, increased fat mass and diminished
sense of well being.
/square6TSH deficiency —clinical features are due to
accompanying thyroxine deficiency. Features arefatigue, lethargy, cold intolerance, decreasedappetite, constipation, facial puffiness, dry skin,bradycardia, delayed relaxation of deep tendon
reflexes, and anemia.
/square6ACTH deficiency —presentation is due to cortisol
deficiency. This can be in the form of acute adrenalinsufficiency characterized by hypotension. Mild,
chronic deficiency causes fatigue, anorexia, weightloss, decreased libido, hypoglycemia, and eosino-philia.
/square6Gonadotropin deficiency  (FSH and LH) —causes
hypogonadism in both men and women. Womenhave ovarian hypofunction resulting in inability toovulate, infertility, oligomenorrhea or amenorrhea,vaginal dryness and atrophy, and fatigue. Estradioldeficiency causes hot flushes. Men have testicular
hypofunction, which results in infertility and
decreased testosterone secretion. The latter causesdecreased energy and libido and decreased bonemineral density.
/square6Prolactin deficiency —leads to inability to lactate after
delivery.
/square6Patients with a pituitary or sellar mass may havesymptoms related to the mass, such as headache,
visual loss, or diplopia.
Investigations
/square6Serum levels of all the hormones secreted by
pituitary gland are low. These are low ACTH, lowTSH, low FSH and LH, and low growth hormone.In addition to low levels of these hormones, the
corresponding hormones stimulated by these are
also low. These include low cortisol, low T3 andT4, low testosterone and low estradiol.
/square6CT or MRI of the head to identify pituitary pathology.
Treatment
/square6Treatment of hypopituitarism involves the treat-ment of each individual target gland hormonedeficiencies.
/square6ACTH deficiency is treated by giving hydrocorti-sone or other glucocorticoid.
/square6TSH deficiency, which results in thyroxine defi-ciency, is treated with L-thyroxine.
/square6In men with gonadotropin deficiency, testosteronereplacement is indicated when fertility is notdesired. If fertility is desired, they are treated withgonadotropins. In women with gonadotropin
deficiency, estrogen and progesterone replacement
is enough if fertility is not desired. If fertility isdesired, they should be treated with gonadotropinor pulsatile GnRH therapy to induce ovulation.
/square6Growth hormone is replaced with recombinanthuman growth hormone.
Q.Pituitary infarction (Sheehan syndrome).
/square6Hypopituitarism due to infarction of the pituitary
gland after postpartum hemorrhage is calledSheehan syndrome. The pituitary gland is physio-logically enlarged in pregnancy and is thereforevery sensitive to the decreased blood flow caused
by massive hemorrhage and hypovolemic shock.

/square6Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus503
9/square6In developed countries, Sheehan syndrome is less
common due to improved obstetrical care. However,in underdeveloped and developing countries, itremains a common cause of hypopituitarism.
Clinical Features
/square6Patients often have a history of severe postpartumhemorrhage causing hypotension and requiringblood transfusion.
/square6Severe hypopituitarism manifests during the firstdays or weeks after delivery. Less severe hypopitui-tarism manifests weeks or months after delivery.
/square6Failure to lactate or difficulties with lactation arecommon initial symptoms of Sheehan syndrome(due to prolactin deficiency). Many women alsoreport amenorrhea or oligomenorrhea after delivery(due to FSH and LH deficiency). Other features
include fatigue, anorexia, weight loss (due to
decreased ACTH), and features of hypothyroidism(due to decreased THS).
Investigations
/square6There is deficiency of all the hormones, i.e. growthhormone, prolactin, gonadotropins, TSH and ACTH.
/square6CT scan or MRI shows a small pituitary within a sellaof normal size, sometimes read as an “empty sella”.
Treatment
/square6Treatment is same as that for hypopituitarism.
Q.Enumerate the causes of short stature.
Normal variation of growth
• Familial short stature.
• Constitutional delay of growth and puberty.
• Idiopathic short stature.
• Small for gestational age infants with catch-up growth.
Systemic disorders with secondary effects on growth
• Malnutrition.
• Glucocorticoid therapy.
• Gastrointestinal disease (Crohn disease, celiac disease).
• Rheumatologic disease (juvenile rheumatoid arthritis, etc.).
• Renal disease (CKD).
• Cancer.
• Pulmonary disease (cystic fibrosis, bronchiectasis).
• Cardiac disease (congenital heart disease).
• Metabolic diseases.
Endocrine causes of growth failure
• Cushing’s syndrome.
• Hypothyroidism.
• Growth hormone deficiency.
• Vitamin D deficiency.
• Precocious puberty.
Genetic diseases with primary effects on growth
• Turner syndrome.
• Prader-Willi syndrome.
• Noonan syndrome.
• Russell-Silver syndrome.
• Skeletal dysplasias.Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investiga-
tions, and management of acromegaly/gigantism.
/square6Acromegaly is the clinical syndrome that results
from excessive secretion of growth hormone (GH).
/square6If GH hyper-secretion occurs before epiphyses have
fused, then gigantism will result. If GH excessoccurs in adult life, after epiphyseal closure, then
acromegaly occurs. If hyper-secretion starts in
adolescence and persists into adult life, then the twoconditions may be combined.
/square6The mean age at diagnosis of acromegaly is 40 to
45 years.
Etiology
/square6The most common cause of acromegaly is a somato-
troph (growth hormone-secreting) adenoma of the
anterior pituitary. Most of these are macroadenomas.
/square6Other causes of acromegaly are excess secretion of
growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH) byhypothalamic tumors, ectopic GHRH secretion by
nonendocrine tumors such as carcinoid tumors or
small-cell lung cancers, and ectopic secretion of GHby nonendocrine tumors.
Clinical Features
/square6There is stimulation of growth of many tissues, such
as skin, connective tissue, cartilage, bone, viscera,
and many epithelial tissues.
/square6Findings include an enlarged jaw (macrognathia)and enlarged swollen hands and feet. Facial featuresbecome coarse, with enlargement of the nose, frontal
bones and jaw, and the teeth become spread apart.
Macroglossia and enlargement of the soft tissuesof the pharynx and larynx lead to obstructive sleepapnea.
/square6Skin thickness is increased and hyperhidrosis iscommon. Hair growth increases, and some womenhave hirsutism.
/square6Enlargement of synovial tissue and cartilage causes
hypertrophic arthropathy of the joints.
/square6Fatigue and weakness can be prominent symptoms.
They may result from sleep apnea, cardiovasculardysfunction, neuropathy, hypogonadism, and
hyperglycemia.
/square6Cardiovascular abnormalities include hypertension,
left ventricular hypertrophy, and cardiomyopathy.
/square6Pituitary adenoma may cause local symptoms suchas headache, visual field defects (classicallybitemporal hemianopsia) and cranial nerve palsies.It may also cause decreased secretion of otherpituitary hormones due to its mass effect, most
commonly gonadotropins. Many women with
acromegaly have menstrual dysfunction, hot flashesand vaginal atrophy.
/square6There is increased risk of colon cancer and uterine
fibroids.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
9504
/square6Mortality is increased in acromegaly due to cardio-
vascular diseases and cancer.
Investigations
/square6Insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) is the mediator
of growth hormone actions. Since growth hormone
secretion is pulsatile, its measurement is not very
reliable and instead IGF-1 measurement can be
done as a marker of growth hormone secretion.
IGF-1 levels are relatively stable and correlate with
clinical acromegaly and elevated growth hormone
levels. Biochemical diagnosis is made by determin-
ing growth hormone and IGF-1 level after OGTT
(oral glucose tolerance test) with 75 gm glucose. In
normal subjects, growth hormone suppresses to
below 0.4 μg/L after OGTT. A value greater than
0.4 μg/L after OGTT and high IGF-I levels indicate
acromegaly.
/square6Blood glucose levels may be high due to excess
growth hormone causing insulin resistance.
/square6Prolactin concentrations are elevated in about 30%
of patients due to co-secretion of prolactin from the
pituitary adenoma.
/square6CT or MRI of brain demonstrates pituitary adenoma./square6Skull X-ray may show cortical thickening,
enlargement of the frontal sinuses, and enlargement
and erosion of the sella turcica. X-rays of the hands
show tufting of the terminal phalanges and soft-
tissue thickening.
Management
Surgical
/square6Trans-sphenoidal surgery to remove the adenoma
is usually the first line of treatment and may result
in cure of GH excess. Surgery is also useful to
debulk the tumor followed by second-line therapy.
Radiotherapy
/square6External radiotherapy is usually employed as second-
line treatment if acromegaly persists after surgery.
Medical
/square6This may be employed in patients with persisting
acromegaly after surgery. Agents which can
suppress GH secretion are somatostatin analogues
(e.g. octreotide or lanreotide), dopamine agonists
(bromocriptine, cabergoline) and GH receptor
antagonist (pegvisomant).Figure 9.2 Clinical features of acromegaly


/square6Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus505
9Q.Growth hormone deficiency.
Causes of Growth Hormone Deficiency
/square6These are same as the causes listed under hypo-
pituitarism.
Clinical Features
/square6Growth hormone (GH) deficiency in childrenpresents as short stature.
/square6Growth hormone deficiency in adults is associatedwith a decrease in lean body mass and an increase
in fat mass.
/square6Other features are higher serum LDL cholesterol,
impairment of cardiovascular function, decreasedbone mineral density, feeling less healthy and less
energetic than normal subjects, and reduced life
expectancy.
Diagnosis
/square6Reduced serum IGF-1 or growth hormone levels.
/square6Provocative tests—a subnormal rise in the serumgrowth hormone concentration after insulin-inducedhypoglycemia or after injection of combination ofarginine and growth hormone-releasing hormone
confirms the diagnosis of growth hormone defi-
ciency.
Treatment
/square6Recombinant human GH preparations are available.GH is given as subcutaneous injection once a day,
usually in the evening.
/square6All children with GH deficiency should receive
recombinant growth hormone to normalize growthand development.
/square6Growth hormone should also be given to adultpatients with severe clinical manifestations andunequivocal biochemical evidence of growthhormone deficiency.
/square6Dose of GH should be adjusted to maintain serumIGF-1 levels within the normal range.
Q.Hyperprolactinemia; prolactinoma.
Q.Galactorrhea.
/square6Hyperprolactinemia is a common biochemical
abnormality.
/square6The cardinal features are galactorrhea and hypo-
gonadism. Galactorrhea refers to lactation without
breastfeeding. Prolactin stimulates milk secretionbut not breast development, hence galactorrhea is notseen in men, but can occur if there is gynecomastia.
/square6Prolactinoma is an important cause of hyperpro-lactinemia. Most prolactinomas in pre-menopausalwomen are microadenomas, because they aredetected early due to symptoms. In men and post-menopausal women, tumors are usually macro-adenomas due to late presentation.Causes of Hyperprolactinemia
Physiological
• Stress (e.g. post-seizure)• Pregnancy• Lactation• Nipple stimulation• Coitus• Baby crying
Drugs
• Dopamine antagonists (phenothiazines and butyrophenones,
antidepressants, metoclopramide, domperidone)
• Dopamine-depleting drugs (reserpine, methyldopa)• Oral contraceptive pill
Pathological
• Prolactinoma (usually microadenoma)• Disconnection hyperprolactinemia (e.g. non-functioning
pituitary macroadenoma)
• Polycystic ovarian disease (PCOD)• Hypothalamic disease• Hypothyroidism• Pituitary tumor secreting prolactin and growth hormone• Macroprolactinemia• Renal failure• Ectopic source
Clinical Features
/square6In women, there is galactorrhea and hypogonadism
leading to secondary amenorrhea, anovulation and
infertility.
/square6In men there is decreased libido, reduced shaving
frequency and lethargy.
/square6There may be headache and visual field defects dueto mass effect of prolactinoma.
Investigations
/square6Pregnancy should be excluded by urine pregnancytest and ultrasound in all women of child-bearing
age.
/square6Serum prolactin levels are raised.
/square6Thyroid function tests to exclude primary hypo-
thyroidism causing TRH-induced prolactin excess.
/square6MRI or CT scan of head to exclude hypothalamicor pituitary tumor.
/square6Assessment of other pituitary hormones in patientswith a macroadenoma.
Management
/square6Underlying cause of hyperprolactinemia should becorrected. Examples are stopping offending drugs,correcting primary hypothyroidism, etc. If this is notpossible, dopamine agonist therapy (bromocriptine,cabergoline, quinagolide, pergolide) will normalizeprolactin levels.
/square6Prolactinomas can be treated by the following ways.
/square6Medical —dopamine agonist drugs (bromocriptine,
cabergoline) are first-line therapy. Dopamine
agonists not only lower prolactin levels, but also

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
9506 shrink the majority of prolactin-secreting macro-
adenomas. Cabergoline is the first choice due tomore efficacy and lesser side effects.
/square6Surgical —surgical removal may be required if the
tumor is large and invasive or the patient is unable
to tolerate dopamine agonists. Tumor can beremoved by trans-sphenoidal surgery.
/square6Radiotherapy —external irradiation may be required
for some macroadenomas to prevent regrowth, if
dopamine agonists are stopped.
Q.Diabetes insipidus (DI).
/square6Diabetes insipidus (DI) results from a deficiency of
vasopressin (ADH) due to a hypothalamic-pituitarydisorder (central DI) or from resistance of thekidneys to vasopressin (nephrogenic DI).
/square6The posterior lobe of the pituitary is the primarysite of vasopressin storage and release, but vaso-pressin is synthesized within the hypothalamus.
/square6Diabetes insipidus (DI) is characterized by excretionof large quantity of dilute urine and increased thirst.
Etiology
Central
• Idiopathic• Structural hypothalamic or high stalk lesion• Familial disease (DIDMOAD syndrome-association of diabetes
insipidus with diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, deafness)
• Neurosurgery or trauma• Cancer (primary brain tumors, metastases)• Hypoxic encephalopathy• Infiltrative disorders (histiocytosis, sarcoidosis)
Nephrogenic
• Genetic defects (vasopressin-2 receptor mutation, aquaporin-
2 mutation, cystinosis)
• Metabolic abnormality (hypokalemia, hypercalcemia)• Drugs (lithium, demeclocycline)• Poisoning (heavy metals)• Polycystic kidney disease
Clinical Features
/square6Polyuria and polydipsia—patient may pass 5–20
liters or more of dilute urine in 24 hours. Polyurialeads to excess thirst and polydipsia.
/square6Diabetes insipidus may lead to dangerous hypo-volemia if the patient does not have access to wateror there is impaired thirst mechanism.
Investigations
/square6Measurement of 24-hour urine volume and creati-nine excretion. Urine is clear and of low specificgravity. Urine osmolality is usually less than plasma.
/square6Serum glucose, urea, calcium, potassium, and sodium.
/square6Vasopressin challenge test —desmopressin (an
analogue of vasopressin) is given in an initial dose
of 5–10 μg intranasally (or 1 μg subcutaneouslyor intravenously). Urine volume is measured for
12 hours before and 12 hours after administration.Serum sodium should be measured if the patientdevelops symptoms of hyponatremia. Patients withcentral diabetes insipidus notice a distinct reductionin thirst and polyuria; serum sodium stays normal
except in some salt-losing conditions.
/square6Water deprivation test: This is done to confirm the
diagnosis of diabetes insipidus, and differentiatecentral from nephrogenic causes. Patient is advised
not to take any fluids for many hours and his body
weight, urine volume, plasma and urine osmolalityare monitored hourly. Patients with diabetesinsipidus continue to pass large quantity of diluteurine in spite of water deprivation, whereas normalpatients would pass less amount of concentrated
urine. In addition, there is rise in serum osmolality
and sodium concentration in diabetes insipidus asthere is depletion of plasma volume. When plasma
osmolality rises above 300 mOsm/kg,  exogenous
desmopressin (DDAVP) is given, 2 μg IM. Central
diabetes insipidus is confirmed if urine osmolality
rises by at least 50% after DDAVP. Nephrogenic
diabetes insipidus is confirmed if desmo pressin
(DDAVP) does not concentrate the urine.
/square6MRI of the pituitary and hypothalamus to look for
mass lesions.
Management
/square6Treatment of central diabetes insipidus is with
desmopressin (DDAVP) which is an ADH ana-logue. Desmopressin is usually administered as ametered dose spray into the nose. In emergencies,desmopressin is given by intramuscular injection.The dose of desmopressin is adjusted to keep the
plasma sodium concentrations and/or osmolality
in the normal range. The main side effect of desmo-pressin is excess water retention and hyponatremia.
/square6Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is treated by
thiazide diuretics (has paradoxical effect of reduc-
ing urine volume in diabetes insipidus), amiloride,and NSAIDs (e.g. indomethacin).
Q.Thyroid function tests.
/square6Thyroid secretes T4 (thyroxine) and T3 (triiodothyro-
nine) which is regulated by pituitary TSH. TSHsecretion, in turn, is controlled through negativefeedback by thyroid hormones. TSH secretion is
regulated by thyroid releasing hormone (TRH) from
hypothalamus.
/square6Thyroid function is assessed by one or more of thefollowing tests.
– Serum TSH concentration.
– Serum total T3 and T4 concentration.– Serum free T3 and T4
– Uptake of radioactive iodine or technetium.

/square6Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus507
9Serum TSH Serum T3, T4 Interpretation
Normal Normal Euthyroid
Low High Primary hyperthyroidism (problem
in thyroid gland)
High Low Primary hypothyroidism (problem
in thyroid gland)
High High TSH-mediated hyperthyroidism
(problem in pituitary)
Low Low Central hypothyroidism (problem
in pituitary)
Q.Radionuclide thyroid scanning
/square6Radionuclide scanning of thyroid using techne-
tium-99 is useful in demonstrating the distribution
and functioning of thyroid gland. Earlier, 131I was
being used which has largely been replaced by
technetium-99 which closely mimics radioactive
iodine. Technetium-99 is injected intravenously intothe arm and images of the thyroid are obtained with
gamma camera approximately 20 minutes later.
/square6Increased uniform radionuclide uptake is seen in
Graves’ disease. Toxic adenomas appear as focal
areas of increased uptake, with suppressed uptake
in the remainder of the gland. In toxic multinodulargoiter, there are multiple areas of relatively
increased or decreased uptake. Subacute thyroiditis
is associated with very low uptake.
/square6Thyroid scanning is also used in the follow-up ofthyroid cancer. After thyroidectomy and radioabla-tion using radioactive iodine, there is diminished
radionuclide uptake in the thyroid gland. Areas of
uptake indicate residual or metastatic thyroidcancer tissue.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of hyperthyroidism (thyrotoxicosis).
/square6Hyperthyroidism is characterized by increased
synthesis and secretion of thyroid hormones which
leads to the hyper-metabolic state.
Causes of Hyperthyroidism
• Autoimmune thyroid disease
• Graves’ disease
• Hashitoxicosis
• Toxic adenoma• Toxic multinodular goiter
• TSH-producing adenoma or pituitary adenoma
• Human chorionic gonadotropin-mediated hyperthyroidism• Exogenous thyroid hormone intake
• Struma ovarii
• Metastatic follicular thyroid cancer
• Drugs (excess of iodine, amiodarone)Clinical Features
General
• Weight loss despite normal or increased appetite• Heat intolerance• Fatigue• Goiter with bruit• Single or multiple nodules may be present in the thyroid
GIT
• Diarrhea, hyperdefecation• Anorexia• Vomiting
CVS
• Systolic hypertension/increased pulse pressure• Palpitations• Sinus tachycardia• Atrial fibrillation• High output cardiac failure• Angina
RS
• Exacerbation of asthma• Dyspnea on exertion
Hematological
• Lymphadenopathy
• Normochromic normocytic anemia (due to increased plasma
volume)
Nervous system
• Tremor• Muscle weakness
• Periodic paralysis
• Hyper-reflexia• Ill-sustained  clonus
• Proximal myopathy• Bulbar myopathy
Skin
• Increased sweating• Pruritus• Hair thinning, alopecia• Palmar erythema• Pretibial myxedema
• Onycholysis
• Hyperpigmentation• Vitiligo can occur in association with autoimmune thyroid
disorders
Genitourinary system
• Amenorrhea/oligomenorrhea
• Infertility, spontaneous abortion• Loss of libido, impotence• Gynaecomastia• Urinary frequency and nocturia
Eyes
• Stare and lid lag• Gritty feeling or pain in the eyes• Excessive lacrimation• Diplopia• Loss of acuity• Exophthalmos
• Periorbital and conjuctival edema
• Corneal ulceration• Ophthalmoplegia• Papilledema
Bone
• Osteoporosis (fracture, loss of height)
Psychiatric
• Anxiety, irritability, emotional lability, psychosis

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
9508 /square6About one-third of elderly patients with hyper-
thyroidism may be apathetic, rather than havinghyperactivity, tremor, and other symptoms ofsympathetic over-activity (apathetic or maskedhyperthyroidism). Tachycardia may be absentbecause of coexisting conduction abnormality.
Investigations
/square6Serum T3 and T4 are elevated.
/square6Serum TSH is low in primary thyrotoxicosis(problem in thyroid gland) and high in TSHinduced thyrotoxicosis (e.g. pituitary adenomasecreting TSH).
/square6TSH receptor antibodies (TRAb) are elevated inGraves’ disease.
/square6Anti-thyroid peroxidase (anti-TPO) antibody titersare significantly elevated in Graves’ disease, andusually are low or absent in toxic multinodulargoiter and toxic adenoma.
/square6Isotope scanning may show increased or decreaseduptake depending on the cause. Increased uptakeis seen in Graves’ disease. Decreased uptake is seenin thyroiditis. Radio-iodine uptake tests have beenlargely superseded by 99m technetium scintigraphyscans which are quicker to perform with a lower
dose of radioactivity, and provide a higher resolu-
tion image.
/square6Thyroid ultrasound. Can identify nodules anddistinguish solid from cystic lesions. Ultrasound-
guided FNAC helps in obtaining cytologic material
from nodules that are difficult to identify by palpa-tion.
Management
/square6Definitive treatment of thyrotoxicosis depends onthe underlying cause and may include antithyroiddrugs, radioactive iodine or surgery.
Antithyroid Drugs
/square6These drugs decrease the thyroid hormone synthesisand release from thyroid gland. The thionamide
derivatives, propylthiouracil (PTU), methimazole
and carbimazole are the drugs of first choice inGraves’ disease. These drugs interfere withorganification and iodotyrosine coupling byinhibiting the peroxidase enzyme.
/square6These drugs are rapidly absorbed from GIT andconcentrated in the thyroid. PTU inhibits peripheralconversion of T4 to T3, contributing 10 to 20% tothe decrease in T3 levels. This effect is not seen withmethimazole and carbimazole. Both PTU and
methimazole cross the placenta and can interfere
with fetal thyroid function. PTU can cause hepaticfailure and hence, used only in first trimester ofpregnancy.
/square6Methimazole is started at a dose of 5 to 10 mg OD.Improvement of thyrotoxic symptoms usually takes2 to 3 weeks. Thyroid hormone values are checked
4 weeks after the start of therapy and if there is noimprovement in thyroid function tests, the dosemay be increased to 30 to 40 mg a day. Once thyroidhormone levels normalize, the dose is decreased.Most patients can be maintained on low doses of
2.5 to 5 mg of methimazole.
/square6PTU is given at a dose of 100 to 150 mg every
8 hours.
/square6The most important side effect of antithyroid drugsis agranulocytosis. Patients should be told todiscontinue their medication and contact theirphysician when fever occurs or infection develops,especially in the oropharynx. If agranulocytosis
develops, antithyroid drugs should be discontinued
and broad-spectrum antibiotics should be given.Other treatment modalities such as radioactiveiodine should be chosen for further treatment.
Radioactive Iodine
/square6Radioactive iodine (131I) is used to treat hyper-
thyroidism in older patients with moderate hyper-thyroidism and thyroid enlargement, for patients
with a prior allergic or toxic reaction to the antithy-
roid medication, poor compliance with antithyroiddrugs and after antithyroid drugs have failed toinduce a long-term euthyroid state.
/square6Radioiodine treatment is contraindicated duringpregnancy and pregnancy should be avoided for6 to 12 months after radioiodine treatment.
/square6Antithyroid drugs should be stopped for 3 or 4 days
before radioiodine administration. A dose of 5 to
10 mCi is usually required. Improvement in thyro-toxicosis occurs after 4 to 5 weeks, and almost 80%of patients are cured with one dose. The remainingneed a second dose, which should be given 6 monthsafter the first dose. After giving radioactive iodine,
antithyroid drugs can be added at day 5 to reach a
euthyroid state more quickly. Beta-blockers are alsoused for symptomatic control.
/square6Rarely radioiodine can induce painful thyroiditisand lead to thyroid storm. Hypothyroidism is a riskand more than 50% of patients become hypothyroidafter radioiodine treatment.
Surgical Therapy
/square6Subtotal thyroidectomy can be used to treat hyper-
thyroidism in the following situations.
– Patients with large goiter causing obstructive
symptoms.
– Malignant thyroid nodule.– Pregnant women with severe hyperthyroidism,
which is difficult to control with antithyroiddrugs.
– Young patients who are difficult to control on
antithyroid drugs.

/square6Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus509
9– Patients with toxic reactions to antithyroid drugs.
– Patients who are not candidates for antithyroid
drugs and refuse radioactive iodine.
/square6However, hyperthyroidism should be controlledbefore surgery using PTU or methimazole. Thyroidsurgery is contraindicated in severely hyperthyroidpatients.
Symptomatic Treatment
/square6In all patients with thyrotoxicosis a non-selectiveβ-blocker such as propranolol or nadolol should be
used to control symptoms such as tachycardia,
palpitations and tremors.
Q.Discuss the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features,
investigations and management of Graves’ disease.
/square6Graves’ disease, first described by Robert Graves
is a syndrome that consists of hyperthyroidism,goiter, ophthalmopathy and occasionally infiltrative
dermopathy (pretibial myxedema).
/square6The terms Graves’ disease and hyperthyroidism
are not synonymous, because some patients withGraves’ disease have ophthalmopathy but no hyper-
thyroidism.
Etiology and Pathogenesis
/square6Graves’ disease is most likely an autoimmune
disorder and is caused by autoantibodies to the TSHreceptors (TSHR-Ab) that activate the receptor,thereby stimulating thyroid hormone synthesis andsecretion as well as thyroid growth (causing goiter).These antibodies are produced by B lymphocytes.
/square6Infiltrative opthalmopathy and dermopathy arespecific to Graves’ disease and are due to immuno-logically mediated activation of fibroblasts inextraocular muscles and skin, with accumulationof glycosaminoglycans leading to water trapping
and edema initially, followed by fibrosis later.
/square6There is a genetic predisposition for Graves’ disease
as evidenced by strong association of Graves’disease with HLA-B8, DR3 and DR2, and high
concordance rate in monozygotic twins. Viral and
bacterial infections have been suspected to triggerthe development of thyrotoxicosis in geneticallysusceptible individuals. Escherichia coli  and Yersinia
enterocolitica  possess cell membrane TSH receptors;
antibodies to these microbial antigens may cross-
react with the TSH receptors on the host thyroid
follicular cell.
/square6Iodine supplementation in iodine deficient areascan trigger the development of thyrotoxicosis
in those with pre-existing subclinical Graves’
disease.
/square6Histologic examination of the thyroid gland showsfollicular hyperplasia, and patchy lymphocytic
infiltration.Clinical Features
/square6Are same as that discussed under hyperthyroidism.
/square6Features specific to Graves’ disease are ophthalmo-
pathy and infiltrative dermopathy (pretibialmyxedema).
/square6Ophthalmopathy leads to proptosis and lid retrac-
tion preventing complete eye closure of the eyes,
resulting in exposure keratitis and corneal ulceration.Compression of the optic nerve at the posterior apexby enlarged muscles may lead to blurring andimpaired visual acuity, visual field defects, impair-ment of color vision, and papilledema.
/square6Treatment of ophthalmopathy involves preventionof drying and infection of the cornea by applyingartificial tears and antibiotic drops. Surgicaldecompression may be required in severe proptosis
with optic nerve compression.
Investigations and Treatment
/square6This is same as that discussed under hyperthyroidism.
Q.Thyroid dermopathy (pretibial myxedema or
infiltrative dermopathy).
/square6Thyroid dermopathy also known as pretibial
myxedema refers to localized skin lesions due todeposition of hyaluronic acid seen in thyroiddiseases. It is rare and is seen in Graves’ disease. Itcan also occur in patients with chronic autoimmune
thyroiditis.
/square6The incidence of thyroid dermopathy has declined
due to earlier diagnosis and treatment of Graves’disease.
Pathology and Pathogenesis
/square6Thyroid dermopathy occurs due to the accumula-
tion of glycosaminoglycans, especially hyaluronic
acid in the dermis. Characteristic pathologic changesare mucinous edema and the fragmentation ofcollagen fibers.
/square6The exact cause of thyroid dermopathy is not proven.These patients have higher serum concentrationsof TSH receptor antibodies than patients withoutdermopathy. TSH receptors have been found in skinfibroblasts. TSH-receptor antibodies probably acton these receptors and stimulate the production of
glycosaminoglycans.
Clinical Features
/square6Non-pitting scaly thickening and induration of the
skin in the form of papules or nodules. They maybe violaceous or slightly pigmented, and often havean orange-peel appearance.
/square6Pretibial areas of lower leg is most commonlyaffected. Rarely the fingers and hands, elbows, armsor face are affected.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
9510 Treatment
/square6Most patients are asymptomatic and do not require
treatment. Indications for treatment are pruritus,local discomfort, or the unsightly appearance.
/square6The only effective treatment is topical applicationof a glucocorticoid ointment covered by anocclusive dressing (e.g. 0.02 percent fluocinoloneunder plastic wrap) at night. Resistant lesions may
require systemic glucocorticoid therapy.
Q.Thyrotoxic crisis (‘thyroid storm’).
/square6This is a life-threatening increase in the severity of
the clinical features of thyrotoxicosis. It is the mostextreme state of thyrotoxicosis and is a medicalemergency.
/square6It is rare and occurs in patients with Graves’ diseaseor toxic multinodular goiter.
Precipitating Factors
/square6Infection.
/square6Trauma to the thyroid gland.
/square6After thyroid or non-thyroid surgery in a patientwith poorly controlled hyperthyroidism.
/square6After radioiodine therapy.
Clinical Features
/square6Patients usually present with exaggerated featuresof hyperthyroidism along with multisysteminvolvement. Involvement of CNS, CVS, and GI
tract is common.
/square6Hyperpyrexia.
/square6CNS symptoms:  Agitation, confusion, psychosis,
stupor, or coma.
/square6CVS symptoms:  Tachycardia, atrial fibrillation and
cardiac failure.
/square6GI symptoms: Severe nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea,
and hepatic failure with jaundice.
Investigations
/square6Elevated T3, T4 and suppressed TSH levels. RarelyTSH may be elevated in instances of excess TSH
secretion.
/square6CBC shows mild leukocytosis, with a shift to the
left.
/square6LFTs show elevated levels of alanine amino-transferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase(AST).
/square6ECG may show arrhythmias such as atrial fibrilla-tion.
Treatment
/square6Rehydration and antibiotics.
/square6Beta-blockers to control symptoms of sympatheticover-activity. Propranolol can be given orally (80 mg
6-hourly) or intravenously (1 to 5 mg 6-hourly)./square6Iodine compounds (Lugol iodine or potassium
iodide) orally inhibit the peripheral conversion ofT4 to T3 and also the release of thyroid hormones.Iodinated radiocontrast such as sodium ipodate canbe given intravenously if available and is moreeffective than potassium iodide or Lugol’s solution.
/square6Carbimazole 40–60 mg daily or propylthiouracil200 mg every four hours inhibits the synthesis ofnew thyroid hormone. Propylthiouracil is preferredover methimazole for treatment of severe thyroid
storm because of its early onset of action and
capacity to inhibit peripheral conversion of T4 toT3. If the patient is unconscious these drugs can begiven through Ryle’s tube. Both drugs can also besuspended in liquid for rectal administration.Parenteral preparations of these drugs are not
available.
/square6Glucocorticoids reduce conversion of T4 to T3.
Dexamethasone (2 mg 6-hourly) is given.
Q.Enumerate the causes of hypothyroidism.
Q.Discuss the clinical features, diagnosis, and
management of primary hypothyroidism.
Etiology of Hypothyroidism
Primary hypothyroidism
• Chronic autoimmune (Hashimoto’s) thyroiditis• Iatrogenic (thyroidectomy, radioiodine therapy or external
irradiation)
• Iodine deficiency or excess• Drugs (thionamides, lithium, amiodarone)• Infiltrative diseases (fibrous thyroiditis, hemochromatosis,
sarcoidosis)
• Congenital causes (thyroid agenesis, dysgenesis, or defects
in hormone synthesis)
Secondary (central) hypothyroidism
• TSH deficiency• TRH deficiency
Thyroid hormone resistance
/square6Primary hypothyroidism refers to hypothyroidism
caused by disease of the thyroid gland itself.Decreased secretion of T3 and T4 leads to compen-
satory increase in TSH secretion. Thus, the combina-
tion of a low serum T3, T4 and a high serum TSHconcentration indicates primary hypothyroidism.
/square6Two forms of primary hypothyroidism can be
recognized:
–Subclinical hypothyroidism —it is defined as a high
serum TSH concentration in the presence ofnormal serum free T4 and T3 concentrations.
These patients are usually asymptomatic.
–Overt hypothyroidism —it is defined as a high
serum TSH concentration in the presence of a lowserum free T4 concentration. These patients are
usually symptomatic.

/square6Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus511
9/square6Secondary hypothyroidism refers to diseases of
pituitary or hypothalamus leading to TSH or TRHdeficiency causing hypothyroidism.
Clinical features
Chronic autoimmune (Hashimoto’s) thyroiditis
• General: Weight gain, fatigue, somnolence, cold intolerance,
hoarseness of voice, slurred speech, puffy face and loss of
eyebrows.
• Skin: Dry, cold and pale skin, decreased sweating, non-
pitting edema (myxedema), carotenemia, coarse hair and
hair loss, xanthelasma.
• Hematologic: Anemia, macrocytosis.
• CVS:  Diastolic hypertension, bradycardia, reduced cardiac
output, angina, pericardial effusion.
• RS:  Hypoventilation, sleep apnea, exertional dyspnea,
pleural effusion.
• GIT: Enlargement of the tongue, constipation (due to decreased
gut motility), ileus, decreased taste sensation, ascites.
• Reproductive system: Oligomenorrhea, amenorrhea or
menorrhagia, decreased fertility, increased risk of abortion,
decreased libido, erectile dysfunction, delayed ejaculation.
• Neuropsychiatric: Encephalopathy, myxedema coma,
mental retardation in children, carpal tunnel syndrome,
cerebellar ataxia, depression, psychosis, myotonia, delayedrelaxation of tendon reflexes.
• Musculoskeletal:  Slow movement, myalgia, arthralgia, aches
and stiffness.
• Metabolic:  Hyperuricemia, hyponatremia hyperlipidemia.
Investigations
/square6Serum T3, T4 are low and TSH is elevated (>5).
/square6Serum cholesterol, triglycerides, lactate dehydro-
genase (LDH), creatinine kinase (CK) and AST maybe raised.
/square6Serum sodium levels may be low.
/square6Chest X-ray may show cardiomegaly.
/square6ECG may show sinus bradycardia with low voltage
complexes and ST segment and T wave abnormalities.
Treatment
/square6Hypothyroidism is treated with levothyroxine (T4),
with doses ranging from 50 to 200 μg/day. It is
given once a day. Most patients require lifelongtreatment and periodic evaluations should be done.
/square6In young healthy adults without coronary arterydisease, a starting dose of 75 to 100 μg/day can be
used and then adjusted every 4 weeks to reach thefinal replacement level. In elderly patients and thosewith coronary artery disease, the initial dose shouldbe 12.5 to 25 μg/day and increased by 25 to 50 μg
every 4 weeks to avoid precipitating angina and
heart failure.
/square6The aim is to achieve a euthyroid status with TSH,T4, and T3 levels in the normal range. TSH is the
most sensitive indicator and treatment should be
aimed at normalizing TSH level.Q.Subclinical hypothyroidism.
/square6Subclinical hypothyroidism refers to mildly elevated
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) but normal
thyroxine (T4) levels. Patients usually do not have
any clinical symptoms (hence called subclinical)and are picked up by routine testing.
/square6Some evidence suggests that subclinical hypo-
thyroidism is associated with an increased risk of
coronary artery disease (CAD) events, congestiveheart failure and fatal stroke.
Etiology
/square6Causes of subclinical hypothyroidism are same asthat of hypothyroidism.
Evaluation
/square6The hallmark of subclinical hypothyroidism is anelevated TSH with a normal T4. Since many non-thyroidal illnesses can cause elevated TSH, it is
better to repeat TSH and T4 measurement after
2–3 months.
/square6Presence of anti-TPO antibodies should be testedsince such patients are more likely to progress to
overt hypothyroidism and may require treatment.
/square6Presence of coronary heart disease should be looked
for as it influences the treatment decision in sub-clinical hypothyroidism.
Treatment
/square6Treatment with levothyroxine is indicated infollowing situations:
– Level of TSH is >10 mIU/L.
– Positive thyroid peroxidase antibody.
– Presence of hypothyroid symptoms.
– Presence of cardiovascular risk factors.
Q.Myxedema coma; Myxedema madness.
/square6Myxedema coma is defined as severe hypothyroidism
leading to decreased mental status, hypothermia,and other symptoms. Myxedema also refers to adermatologic condition (pretibial myxedema),which occurs in hyperthyroidism and should notbe mistaken for myxedema coma.
/square6Myxedema coma is a medical emergency with ahigh mortality rate.
/square6Older women are most often affected.
/square6Usual precipitating factors are infection, myocardialinfarction, cold exposure, or sedative drugs, espe-cially opiates.
Clinical Presentation
/square6The hallmarks of myxedema coma are decreasedmental status and hypothermia.
/square6Most patients present with confusion and obtunda-tion. Some may present with prominent psychotic

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
9512 features (myxedema madness). Untreated patients
will progress to coma.
/square6Other features are hypotension, bradycardia,hyponatremia, hypoglycemia, and hypoventilation.
/square6There may be evidence of a precipitating event suchas infection, but fever may be absent in thesepatients.
Management
/square6Patient should be admitted to ICU.
/square6Treatment should be started without waiting forlab reports. Before thyroid hormone is given,however, blood should be drawn for measurementsof T3, T4, TSH and cortisol to exclude associatedadrenal insufficiency or hypopituitarism.
Thyroid Hormone Administration
/square6300 μg thyroxine is given intravenously over 5–10
minutes initially, followed by 100 μg per day until
patient becomes alert and able to take thyroxine
orally. If no IV preparation is available same dose
may be given through Ryle’s tube.
Supportive Measures
/square6Hydrocortisone, 100 mg IV bolus followed by
100 mg every eight hours till associated adrenal
insufficiency is excluded.
/square6Cover with blankets to correct hypothermia.
/square6Intravenous fluids, electrolytes, and glucose tocorrect electrolyte abnormalities and hypoglycemia.
/square6Mechanical ventilation if required.
/square6Treat precipitating factors (infection).
/square6Avoid sedatives and narcotics.
Q.Simple goiter.
/square6Simple goiter refers to diffuse enlargement of the
thyroid with the patient in euthyroid state. It occurssporadically and the etiology is unknown.
Clinical Features
/square6Usually presents between the ages of 15 and
25 years, often during pregnancy.
/square6There may be a tight sensation in the neck, particu-
larly while swallowing.
/square6The goiter is soft, diffuse and the thyroid is enlargedto two or three times its normal size. There is notenderness, lymphadenopathy or overlying bruit.
Investigations
/square6Thyroid function tests are normal. Thyroid auto-antibodies are absent.
Treatment
/square6No treatment is necessary and in most cases the goiterregresses. In some cases, it may progress to become
multinodular with areas of autonomous function.Q.Endemic goiter.
/square6This is seen in areas of iodine deficiency. It presents
as diffuse thyroid enlargement with the patient in
euthyroid state.
/square6Thyroid function tests are normal. Serum inorganic
iodide levels and urinary iodide excretion are low.
/square6Prevention involves fortification of common saltwith iodine and intramuscular injection of 3 to4 ml of iodized oil once in 2 years.
Q.Multinodular goiter.
/square6This refers to multinodular enlargement of the
thyroid. Etiology is unknown.
Clinical Features
/square6Patients usually present with thyrotoxicosis.
/square6The goiter is large, nodular and may extend retro-
sternally.
/square6It may cause stridor due to tracheal compression,
dysphagia due to esophageal compression, andhoarseness due to recurrent laryngeal nerve
compression. It may also cause obstruction of the
superior vena cava.
Investigations
/square6Ultrasound of the thyroid.
/square6Radioisotope thyroid scan.
/square6Chest X-ray and CT or MRI of the thoracic inlet to
quantify the degree of tracheal compression and
the extent of retrosternal extension.
/square6FNAC is indicated in those with a ‘dominant’, ‘cold’nodule, to exclude thyroid cancer.
Management
/square6No treatment is required if the goiter is small andpatient is euthyroid. However, patients should befollowed up yearly as it may progress to toxic
multinodular goiter.
/square6Partial thyroidectomy is indicated for large goiter
causing mediastinal compression or for cosmeticreasons. Iodine-131 (also known as radioiodine) can
result in a significant reduction in thyroid size and
may be of value in elderly patients.
/square6Iodine-131 is used for toxic multinodular goiter.
Q.Thyroiditis.
/square6The term thyroiditis refers to inflammation of
thyroid gland.
/square6Thyroiditis can be divided into three types—acute,subacute, and chronic.
/square6Acute thyroiditis is caused by bacterial infection ofthe gland.
/square6Subacute thyroiditis, also known as granulomatousthyroiditis, is caused by viruses (coxsackie virus,mumps, measles, adenovirus).

/square6Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus513
9/square6Chronic thyroiditis includes autoimmune thyroiditis,
Hashimoto thyroiditis, postpartum thyroiditis, anddrug-induced thyroiditis.
Pathophysiology
/square6Thyroid inflammation releases thyroid hormonesleading to thyrotoxicosis. Initial hyperthyroidismis sometimes followed by a transient period of hypo-
thyroidism. The disease usually resolves sponta-
neously.
Clinical Features
/square6Pain in the thyroid, which may radiate to the neckor ears. Thyroid gland is enlarged and tender. Fever,fatigue, malaise, anorexia, and myalgia are common.
Investigations
/square6ESR is high.
/square6Technicium-99 uptake is low.
/square6Serum thyroglobulin is raised.
/square6Initially hyperthyroidism is seen, followed byeuthyroidism, hypothyroidism and ultimatelyrestoration of normal thyroid function.
Treatment
/square6Anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDs or steroids) areused to control inflammation.
/square6Beta-blockers (propranolol) are used to controlthyrotoxic symptoms.
Q.Hashimoto thyroiditis (autoimmune thyroiditis;
chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis).
/square6Hashimoto thyroiditis is chronic autoimmune
inflammation of the thyroid with lymphocyticinfiltration. It is the most common cause of hypo-
thyroidism in developed countries.
/square6Hashimoto thyroiditis, like Graves’ disease, is
sometimes associated with other autoimmunedisorders, including Addison disease (adrenal
insufficiency), type 1 diabetes mellitus, vitiligo, and
pernicious anemia.
Clinical Features
/square6More common in women.
/square6Diffuse goiter with characteristic firm or rubberyconsistency.
/square6Features of hypothyroidism are present.
Investigations
/square6Thyroid function tests suggest hypothyroidism.
/square6Anti-TPO (thyroid peroxidase) and anti-Tg (anti-
thyroglobulin) antibodies are present in the serum
in >90% of patients with Hashimoto thyroiditis.
/square6Biopsy shows profuse lymphocytic infiltration,lymphoid germinal centers, destruction of thyroid
follicles and fibrosis.Treatment
/square6Thyroxine corrects hypothyroidism as well as helps
in goiter shrinkage.
Q.Enumerate the causes of hyperparathyroidism.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of primary hyperparathyroidism.
Causes of Hyperparathyroidism
Primary:  Adenoma, glandular hyperplasia, familial hyperpara-
thyroidism (as part of multiple endocrine neoplasia), carcinoma.
Secondary:  Hypocalcemia due to any reason may stimulate
parathyroid glands leading to secondary hyperparathyroidism,
e.g. CKD, malabsorption, osteomalacia.
Tertiary:  The secondarily stimulated parathyroid glands as in
CKD may enlarge, becoming autonomous leading to tertiaryhyperparathyroidism.
Primary Hyperparathyroidism
/square6Primary hyperparathyroidism is due to a problem
in the parathyroid glands themselves. It is charac-
terized by excessive secretion of PTH by one ormore parathyroid glands.
/square6It can be seen at any age but is more frequent in
persons over the age of 50 years and is three times
more common in women than men.
Etiology
/square6See above.
Clinical Features
Manifestations of Hypercalcemia
/square6See under hypercalcemia.
Skeletal Manifestations
/square6Bone demineralization and loss of cortical bone.
/square6Severe cases progress to osteitis fibrosa cystica.
/square6Pathologic fractures.
/square6Bone pain and arthralgias.
Urinary Tract Manifestations
/square6Polyuria and polydipsia due to hypercalcemia-
induced nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.
/square6Kidney stones due to hypercalciuria.
/square6Urinary tract infection due to stone and obstruction
may lead to renal failure and uremia.
Hyperparathyroidism during Pregnancy
/square6Fetal demise, preterm delivery, low birth weight,
neonatal tetany.
Investigations
/square6Hypercalcemia is the most important finding.
Serum calcium is >10.5 mg/dL. Serum phosphate
is often low (<2.5 mg/dL).

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
9514 /square6Hypercalciuria and hyperphosphaturia are often
present.
/square6Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) is elevated due to highbone turnover.
/square6Elevated serum levels of PTH confirm the diagnosisof hyperparathyroidism.
/square6Preoperative sestamibi-iodine subtraction scanningand neck ultrasound are used to locate parathyroidadenomas. CT and MRI are usually not required un-less carcinoma or ectopic parathyroids are suspected.
/square6Bone radiographs: May show demineralization,subperiosteal resorption of bone (especially in theradial aspects of the fingers), mottling of the skull(“salt-and-pepper appearance”), or pathologicfractures. Articular cartilage calcification (chondro-calcinosis) is sometimes found.
/square6Dual energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) mayshow reduced bone density.
Treatment
Parathyroidectomy
/square6Parathyroidectomy is recommended for patientswith symptomatic hyperparathyroidism, kidneystones, bone disease, pregnancy and very highserum calcium. During pregnancy, parathyroidec-tomy is performed in the second trimester.
/square6Subtotal parathyroidectomy is indicated for para-thyroid hyperplasia. Three and one-half glands areusually removed, and a metal clip is left to markthe location of residual parathyroid tissue.
/square6Parathyroid carcinoma is treated by en bloc resec-tion of the tumor and the ipsilateral thyroid lobe.Adjuvant treatment includes radiation therapy.
Treatment of Hypercalcemia
/square6Hydration with oral or IV fluids.
/square6Bisphosphonates inhibit bone resorption anddecrease serum calcium. Pamidronate 30 mg (innormal saline) or zoledronic acid 4 mg can be givenas intravenous infusion. Calcium decreases overseveral days and the effect may last for weeks tomonths.
/square6Calcimimetics:  Calcimimetic agents activate the
calcium-sensing receptor in the parathyroid gland,thereby inhibiting PTH secretion. Cinacalcet is acalcimimetic agent. Cinacalcet may be administered
orally in doses of 30–250 mg daily. It reduces serum
calcium levels.
Q.Enumerate the causes of hypercalcemia. Discuss
the management of hypercalcemia.
Q.Hypercalcemic crisis.
/square6Normal calcium level in the body is 8–10 mg/dl.
Out of this 4–5.6 mg/dl is ionized calcium and the
remaining is bound to albumin. Hence, total calciumconcentration may be high with high serum albumin
and low with low albumin concentration. This canbe corrected by using the formula, Ca = Serum Ca+ 0.8 × (Normal albumin – Patient albumin).
/square6Hypercalcemia can be classified as mild hyper-calcemia (serum level of 10.5–11.9 mg/dl), mode-rate hypercalcemia (12.0 to 13.9 mg/dl), and severehypercalcemia (level above 14 mg/dl).
Etiology of Hypercalcemia
Increased bone resorption
• Primary hyperparathyroidism• Secondary and tertiary hyperparathyroidism• Malignancy• Thyrotoxicosis
Increased calcium absorption
• Increased calcium intake• Chronic kidney disease• Milk alkali syndrome• Hypervitaminosis D
Miscellaneous causes
• Lithium• Pheochromocytoma• Adrenal insufficiency• Rhabdomyolysis and acute renal failure• Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia• Immobilization
Clinical Features
Renal
• Polyuria• Polydipsia• Nephrolithiasis• Nephrocalcinosis• Distal renal tubular acidosis• Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus• Acute and chronic renal insufficiency
Gastrointestinal
• Nausea, vomiting• Bowel hypomotility and constipation• Pancreatitis• Peptic ulcer disease
Musculoskeletal
• Muscle weakness• Bone pain• Osteopenia/osteoporosis
Neuropsychiatric
• Anxiety, depression• Decreased concentration• Confusion, stupor, coma
Cardiovascular
• Shortening of the QT interval• Bradycardia• Hypertension
Eye
• Calcium may precipitate in the corneas (“band keratopathy”)

/square6Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus515
9Hypercalcemic Crisis
/square6Often seen in elderly patients with primary hyper-
parathyroidism.
/square6Clinical features are dehydration, hypotension,
abdominal pain, vomiting, and altered sensorium.
Investigations
/square6Serum calcium should be corrected for albumin,
and an elevated concentration should be confirmedby repeat testing.
/square6ECG may show shortened QT interval, AV block,
bundle branch block, and prolonged PR and QRS.
/square6Serum PTH level helps to distinguish PTH-mediated
from non-PTH-mediated causes of hypercalcemia.In hyperparathyroidism PTH level is elevated.
/square6Serum concentration of PTH-related protein (PTHrp)
is elevated in malignancy related hypercalcemia.
/square6Serum concentration of the vitamin D metabolites,
25-hydroxyvitamin D (calcidiol) and 1,25-dihydroxy-vitamin D (calcitriol), should be measured if there
is no obvious malignancy and neither PTH nor
PTHrp levels are elevated.
/square6Serum uric acid and LDH are elevated in malig-nancy.
/square6Plasma protein electrophoresis, urine for Bence-
Jones protein and bone marrow examination are
useful to rule out multiple myeloma.
/square6Chest X-ray, ultrasound abdomen and CT scan torule out malignancy.
/square6Bone scan to rule out bone metastases.
Management
Mild to Moderate Hypercalcemia
/square6Patients with mild hypercalcemia do not requireimme diate treatment. Factors which aggravate
hypercalcemia should be avoided. These are drugs
such as thiazide diuretics and lithium, volume
depletion, prolonged bedrest, and high calcium diet(>1000 mg/day). Adequate hydration is recommen-
ded. Symptomatic patients are treated with
bisphosphonates.
Severe Hypercalcemia (Calcium >14 mg/dL; Hypercalcemic
Crisis)
/square6Rehydration with isotonic saline at an initial rate
of 200 to 300 mL/h that is then adjusted to maintainthe urine output at 100 to 150 mL/h.
/square6Administration of salmon calcitonin 4 IU/kginitially and then every 6 to 12 hours.
/square6Bisphosphonates: Zoledronic acid (4 mg IV over
15 minutes) or pamidronate (60 to 90 mg over
2 hours).
/square6Steroids:  Prednisolone 5–15 mg 6 hourly or hydro-
cortisone 100 mg 6 hourly IV. Steroids inhibit Vit Dconversion to calcitriol. They are helpful in Vit D
intoxication, malignancies and granulomatous
diseases./square6Calcitonin plus saline reduces calcium concentra-
tion within 12 to 48 hours whereas bisphosphonateswill be effective by the second to fourth day.
/square6Hemodialysis should be considered if serumcalcium is above 18 mg/dL.
Treatment of the Underlying Cause
/square6Such as malignancy, hyperparathyroidism, etc.
Q.Hypoparathyroidism.
/square6Hypoparathyroidism is characterized by deficiency
of PTH and hypocalcemia.
Causes
/square6Postsurgical (after thyroidectomy or head and neck
surgeries).
/square6Autoimmune.
/square6Autosomal dominant hypoparathyroidism.
/square6Radiotherapy to head and neck area.
/square6Pseudohypoparathyroidism (resistance to PTH).
Clinical Features
/square6Features of hypocalcemia are seen ( see under hypo-
calcemia).
Treatment
/square6In acute manifestations of hypocalcemia (such as
tetany), intravenous calcium gluconate is given.
/square6Vitamin D supplementation:  Vitamin D (in the form
of vitamin D2, or ergocalciferol), or calcitriol (1,
25-dihydroxyvitamin D) are give orally daily tomaintain normal calcium levels.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of hypocalcemia.
Q.Enumerate the causes of tetany. Discuss the clinical
features and management of tetany.
Q.Trousseau’s sign; Chvostek sign.
/square6Hypocalcemia is an abnormal reduction in serum
ionized calcium concentration (<8.8 mg/dL). Only
ionized, free serum calcium affects neuromuscularfunction and is clinically important.
Etiology of Hypocalcemia (Tetany)
Hypoparathyroidism
• After parathyroid, thyroid, or radical neck surgery• Idiopathic• Infiltration of the parathyroid gland• Pseudohypoparathyroidism
Vit D deficiency
• Nutritional deficiency• Intestinal malabsorption• CKD• Acute pancreatitis• Vitamin D resistance

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
9516Miscellaneous
• Hypophosphatemia
• Hypomagnesemia (can cause relative PTH deficiency and
end-organ resistance to PTH action
• Massive blood transfusion (citrate-anticoagulated blood can
decrease the concentration of ionized Ca)
• Alkalosis (hyperventilation, excessive vomiting)
• Fluoride intoxication
• Septic shock (due to suppression of PTH release and
decreased conversion of 25(OH)D to 1,25(OH)2 D)
Clinical Features
/square6Neuromuscular manifestations (tetany):  Hypocalcemia
leads to neuromuscular irritability leading to tetany.
Tetany is uncommon unless the serum ionized
calcium concentration falls below 4.3 mg/dL. Other
factors that worsen tetany are alkalosis, hypo-
magnesemia, hypokalemia and serum epinephrine
concentrations. Tetany is characterized by both
sensory and motor features. Initially sensory symp-
toms such as circum-oral numbness, paresthesias
of the hands and feet are seen. Motor symptoms
are stiffness and clumsiness, myalgia, and muscle
spasms and cramps. Hand muscle spasm leads to
adduction of the thumb, flexion of the metacarpo-
phalangeal joints and wrists, and extension of the
fingers. Spasm of the respiratory muscles and of
the glottis can cause cyanosis. Autonomic manifes-
tations include diaphoresis, bronchospasm, and
biliary colic. Latent tetany may be present when
signs of overt tetany are lacking. It can be demons-
trated by Trousseau’s and Chvostek’s signs.
Trousseau sign  is the induction of carpal spasm by
inflation of a sphygmomanometer above systolic
blood pressure for three minutes. It can also be
induced by hyperventilation for one to two minutes
after release of the cuff. Trousseau’s sign is due to
the ischemia of the nerve trunk under the cuff
which increases excitability. Chvostek’s sign  is
contraction of the ipsilateral facial muscles when
facial nerve is tapped anterior to the ear. This leads
to contraction of corner of the mouth, the nose and
the eye.
/square6Other neurological features are seizures (both focal
and generalized), intellectual impairment, extra-
pyramidal disorders such as parkinsonism, dystonia,
hemiballismus, and choreoathetosis.
/square6Psychiatric manifestations:  Emotional instability,
anxiety, depression, confusion, hallucinations,
and frank psychosis. All are reversible with treat-
ment.
/square6Skin manifestations: Dry skin, hyperpigmentation,
dermatitis and eczema, and psoriasis. Hair is brittle
and sparse with patchy alopecia.
/square6Eye: Cataracts.
/square6Dental:  Dental abnormalities occur when hypo-
calcemia is present during early development. Theyinclude dental hypoplasia, failure of tooth eruption,
defective enamel and root formation, and abraded
carious teeth.
/square6Cardiovascular:  Hypotension (in acute hypocalcemia),
decreased myocardial contractility, and congestive
heart failure.
/square6Gastrointestinal:  Steatorrhea due to impaired
pancreatic secretion, gastric achlorhydria.
/square6Skeletal:  Hypocalcaemia associated with hypo-
phosphatemia, as in vitamin D deficiency, causes
rickets in children and osteomalacia in adults.
/square6Endocrine manifestations:  Impaired insulin release.
Investigations
/square6Serum calcium level is low.
/square6Serum PTH level is low in hypoparathyroidism and
elevated in secondary hyperparathyroidism.
/square6Serum Vit D levels are low in Vit D deficiency.
/square6Serum magnesium level—hypomagnesemia causes
hypocalcemia by inducing PTH resistance or
deficiency. Serum magnesium should be measured
in any patient with hypocalcemia in whom the
cause is not clear.
/square6ECG shows prolonged QT interval.
Management
/square6Tetany can be treated by rebreathing expired air in
a paper bag or administering 5% CO2 in oxygen.
This increases arterial carbon dioxide which
increases ionized calcium.
/square6Injection of 20 mL of a 10% calcium gluconate slow
IV raises the serum calcium concentration imme-
diately. An intramuscular injection of 10 mL may
be given to obtain a more prolonged effect.
/square6Intravenous magnesium is given to correct the
hypocalcemia associated with hypomagnesemia.
/square6Persistent hypoparathyroidism and pseudohypo-
parathyroidism are treated with oral calcium salts
and vitamin D.Figure 9.3 Trousseau’s sign


/square6Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus517
9Q.Give a brief account of hormones secreted by the
adrenal gland and their functions. Enumerate the
diseases caused by adrenal gland dysfunction.
/square6Adrenal gland consists of adrenal cortex andmedulla. Adrenal cortex is further divided into zonaglomerulosa, zona fasciculata, and zona reticularis(remember GFR for glomerulosa, fasciculata andreticularis)
/square6Zona glomerulosa consists of small epithelioid cellswhich secrete aldosterone (mineralocorticoid).
/square6Zona fasciculata consists of polygonal columnar
cells, which secrete cortisol (glucocorticoid).
/square6Zona reticularis consists of a network of inter-
connecting cells which secrete adrenal androgens(dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA)).
/square6Adrenal medulla consists of chromaffin cells  which
secrete adrenergic hormones such as epinephrine,norepinephrine and dopamine.
Actions of Adrenal Gland Hormones
•Mineralocorticoids (aldosterone): These help maintain blood
volume and blood pressure by retaining sodium and water.
• Glucocorticoids (cortisol): Regulation of intermediary meta-
bolism. They counter hypoglycemia, induce protein
catabolism and enhance lipolysis. Glucocorticoids also affect
the adaptive response to stress and inflammation, immunity,wound healing and muscle and myocardial integrity.
• Adrenal androgens: Required for the growth of axillary and
pubic hair in both males and females.
• Epinephrine (also known as adrenaline) and norepinephrine :
These 2 hormones prepare the body for the fight-or-flight
response by increasing the heart rate, constricting blood
vessels, increasing the metabolic rate, and increasing therespiratory rate.
Diseases Caused by Adrenal Dysfunction
Hyperfunctioning of adrenal gland
• Glucocorticoid excess—Cushing’s syndrome• Aldosterone excess—hyperaldosteronism  (primary
aldosteronism-Conn’s syndrome, secondary aldosteronism)
• Androgen excess—virilisation• Adrenal medulla—pheochromocytoma
Hypofunctioning of adrenal gland
• Primary—due to inability of the adrenals to produce
hormones (Addison’s disease)
• Secondary—due to deficient ACTH secretion by pituitary• Tertiary—due to deficient CRH production by hypothalamus
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of Cushing syndrome (gluco-
corticoid excess).
/square6Cushing syndrome is due to chronic glucocorticoidexcess. The most common cause is iatrogenic dueto prolonged administration of glucocorticoids suchas prednisolone. ACTH-dependent cortisol excessdue to a pituitary adenoma is called Cushing disease.Etiology
ACTH-dependent Cushing syndrome
• Pituitary adenoma secreting ACTH (i.e. Cushing disease)• Ectopic ACTH syndrome• Ectopic CRH syndrome• ACTH therapy
ACTH-independent Cushing syndrome
• Adrenal adenoma• Adrenal carcinoma• Micronodular hyperplasia• Macronodular hyperplasia• Steroid therapy
Pseudo-Cushing syndrome (cortisol excess as part of another
illness)
• Major depressive disorder• Alcoholism• Primary obesity
Clinical Features
/square6The typical patient with Cushing syndrome is a
middle-aged plethoric woman with truncal obesityand hypertension.
/square6Obesity—the obesity is central (centripetal obesity)
with sparing of limbs which gives “lemon on stick
appearance”. There is accentuation of normal fatover the upper part of the back, giving a “buffalohump” appearance. The neck is thick and short. Thesupraclavicular fat pads are enlarged.
/square6Skin manifestations—include skin atrophy, easybruisability, and purple striae in the trunk, breasts,and abdomen. Fungal infections are common. Inpituitary tumors secreting ACTH, and in ectopicACTH syndrome, hyperpigmentation can occur.
/square6Menstrual irregularities—oligomenorrhea, amen-orrhea, etc.
/square6Signs of adrenal androgen excess—women withCushing syndrome often have signs of androgenexcess. These include hirsutism, thinning of scalphair, deepening of voice, and clitoral enlargement.
/square6Proximal muscle wasting and weakness.
/square6Osteoporosis is common and may lead to patho-logic fractures and vertebral collapse. Low backpain is a common presenting feature. Occasionally,
patients can present with avascular necrosis of the
femoral head. Increased resorption of bones canlead to hypercalciuria and renal calculi.
/square6Neuropsychiatric symptoms—emotional lability,
depression, irritability, anxiety and panic attacks.
/square6Diabetes mellitus may develop due to increased
hepatic gluconeogenesis and insulin resistance.
/square6Hypertension and cardiovascular risk is a majorcause of morbidity and mortality.
Investigations
/square6Investigations are useful to confirm the diagnosisof Cushing syndrome and to find out the etiology.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
9518
To Confirm the Presence of Cushing’s Syndrome
/square6Serum cortisol level—it is normally lowest at 12
midnight. There is loss of diurnal variation inCushing syndrome, and midnight level is high.Recently, it has been shown that salivary cortisolconcentration correlates well with blood level and
can be used instead of blood level. In iatrogenic
Cushing syndrome, cortisol level is low unless thepatient is taking a corticosteroid (such as predniso-lone) which cross-reacts in immunoassays withcortisol.
/square624-hour urinary cortisol excretion—it is high inpatients with Cushing syndrome (normal <90 μg/
24 hours). The patient can be assumed to have Cushing
syndrome, if basal urinary cortisol excretion is more
than three times the upper limit of normal.
/square6Overnight dexamethasone suppression test—1 mgof dexamethasone is given orally at 11 pm to12 am and serum cortisol is measured at 8 am thenext morning. In most normal patients, this drugsuppresses morning serum cortisol to ≤1.8 μg/mL,
whereas patients with Cushing syndrome virtually
always have a higher level.
/square648-hour low dose dexamethasone suppressiontest—this is a confirmatory test. 0.5 mg dexametha-
sone is given orally 6th hourly for 2 days startingat 9 am. Serum cortisol is measured 6 hours afterthe last dose of dexamethasone. Serum cortisol<1.8 μg/dl excludes Cushing’s.To Establish the Cause of Cushing Syndrome
/square6Once the presence of Cushing syndrome is con-
firmed, measurement of plasma ACTH is the keyto establishing the cause of Cushing syndrome.
/square6Increased cortisol level and an undetectable ACTHindicate an adrenal pathology. Increased cortisollevel with increased ACTH level indicates either
pituitary source or an ectopic source of ACTH.
/square6Pituitary and ectopic source of ACTH can be
differentiated by the fact that pituitary tumors, butnot ectopic tumors, retain some features of normal
regulation of ACTH secretion. Thus, pituitary
ACTH secretion is suppressed by dexamethasone(although at a higher dose than normal). Hence highdose dexamethasone suppression test can be usedto differentiate whether high ACTH is coming frompituitary or from ectopic source.
/square6MRI with gadolinium contrast enhancement canlocalize the tumors secreting ACTH or cortisol.
/square6Venous catheterization with measurement ofinferior petrosal sinus ACTH (i.e. draining directlyfrom the pituitary) may be helpful in confirmingCushing’s disease if the MRI does not show amicroadenoma of pituitary.
/square6CT or MRI detects most adrenal adenomas.
Additional Tests
/square6Serum electrolytes (usually high sodium and lowpotassium), glucose (elevated), glycosylated hemo-globin and bone mineral density measurement.
Management
/square6Most patients are treated surgically with medicaltherapy given for a few weeks prior to operation.
Medical Therapy
/square6Includes the following drugs:
/square6Somatostatin analogs: Pasireotide is a somatostatin
analog that binds and activates human somatostatinreceptors resulting in inhibition of ACTH secretion,which leads to decreased cortisol secretion. It is
indicated for treatment of Cushing disease in which
pituitary surgery is not an option or has not beencurative.
/square6Adrenal steroid inhibitors: Metyrapone, ketoconazole,
etomidate.
/square6Glucocorticoid receptor antagonist:  Mifepristone.
/square6Adrenolytic agents:  Mitotane. This drug causes
adrenal cortical necrosis.
Surgery
/square6In Cushing’s disease, trans-sphenoidal surgery withselective removal of the adenoma is the treatmentof choice.
/square6Adrenal adenomas are removed via laparoscopyor a loin incision.Figure 9.4 Clinical features of Cushing syndrome


/square6Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus519
9/square6Ectopic ACTH syndrome—localized tumors (e.g.
bronchial carcinoid) should be removed. Unresect-able malignancies may be treated by radiotherapyand chemotherapy. Medical therapy can be usedfor recurrences.
Q.Nelson’s syndrome.
/square6This syndrome occurs in patients who have under-
gone bilateral adrenalectomy for Cushing’s disease.
/square6Complete loss of negative feedback from adrenal
glands leads to development of pituitary macro-adenoma secreting ACTH.
/square6Clinical features include development of hyper-pigmentation (due to high ACTH) within one ortwo years following adrenalectomy, headache andvisual disturbances (due to pressure effect of macro-
adenoma). There may be signs of hypopituitarism
due to compression of normal pituitary by themacroadenoma.
/square6Treatment involves resection of pituitary adenoma
and irradiation.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, diagnosis,
and management of mineralocorticoid excess(aldosteronism).
Or
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, diagnosis,
and management of primary hyperaldosteronism(Conn’s syndrome).
Q.Secondary hyperaldosteronism.
/square6Hyperaldosteronism is the condition of excessive
secretion of aldosterone from the adrenals. Primaryhyperaldosteronism occurs due to excessiveproduction of aldosterone within the adrenals. Insecondary hyperaldosteronism the stimulus is
extra-adrenal.
/square6Excessive production of aldosterone leads to
hypertension, sodium retention, suppression ofplasma renin and hypokalemia.
Etiology
Primary hyperaldosteronism
• Adrenal adenoma secreting aldosterone (Conn’s syndrome)• Idiopathic bilateral adrenal hyperplasia• Glucocorticoid-suppressible hyperaldosteronism (rare)
Secondary hyperaldosteronism
• Pregnancy• Inadequate renal perfusion, e.g. hypovolemia, cardiac
failure, nephrotic syndrome, renal artery stenosis
• Renin-secreting renal tumor (very rare)
Clinical Features
/square6Sodium retention may cause edema and hyper-
tension./square6Hypokalemia causes muscle weakness or evenparalysis.
/square6Hypertension is common in primary aldosteronismand is due to sodium and fluid retention.
/square6Metabolic alkalosis— this is due to increased urinary
hydrogen excretion mediated both by hypokalemiaand by the direct stimulatory effect of aldosteroneon distal acidification.
Investigations
/square6Serum electrolytes may show hypernatremia, hypo-
kalemia and increased bicarbonate.
/square6Plasma renin activity and aldosterone levels—renin
is low and aldosterone level is high in Conn’ssyndrome and bilateral adrenal hyperplasia.
/square6Abdominal CT is useful to detect any adrenaltumors.
/square6If CT is inconclusive, adrenal vein catheterizationwith measurement of aldosterone or 
131iodo-
norcholesterol scanning may be helpful.
Management
Primary Hyperaldosteronism
/square6Treatment for primary hyperaldosteronism includes
laparoscopic resection for adenomas.
/square6For patients who are unable to undergo surgery
aldosterone antagonists (spironolactone or eplere-none) can be used to treat both hypokalemia and
hypertension. High doses of spironolactone (up to
400 mg/day) may be required but cause gyneco-mastia.
/square6Amiloride (10–40 mg/day), which blocks the
epithelial sodium channel regulated by aldosterone,
or eplerenone can be used if spironolactone is nottolerated due to gynecomastia.
/square6Glucocorticoid—suppressible hyperaldosteronism
is treated by suppression of ACTH, e.g. with
dexamethasone.
Secondary Hyperaldosteronism
/square6Underlying cause should be treated.
Q.Pheochromocytoma.
/square6Pheochromocytoma is catecholamine-secreting
tumor that arises from chromaffin cells of theadrenal medulla and the sympathetic ganglia. Thecatecholamines secreted include norepinephrine,epinephrine, and dopamine.
/square690% of tumors arise in adrenal medulla. There is auseful ‘rule of tens’ in this condition: 10% are malig-nant, 10% are extra-adrenal (i.e. in sympatheticganglia), 10% are bilateral, and 10% are familial.
/square6Pheochromocytoma may be part of the syndromeof familial multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN)
types 2A and 2B, in which other endocrine tumors

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
9520 (parathyroid or medullary carcinoma of the
thyroid) coexist or develop subsequently.
Clinical Features
/square6Paroxysmal hypertension associated with pallor
(occasionally flushing), palpitations, sweating,
headache and anxiety (fear of death). Classic triadis considered to be episodic headache, sweating,and tachycardia in association with hypertension.
/square6Abdominal pain, vomiting.
/square6Constipation.
/square6Weight loss.
/square6Glucose intolerance.
Investigations
/square6Plasma catecholamines (epinephrine, norepine-
phrine and dopamine) are increased.
/square6Plasma free metanephrine is elevated and is 99%
sensitive. Since plasma metanephrine is continuouslyelevated, it is more sensitive than measurement of
plasma catecholamines which are intermittently
elevated during a paroxysm.
/square6Measurement of catecholamine metabolites (e.g.vanillyl-mandelic acid, VMA; conjugated metane-
phrine and normetanephrine) in 24 hours urine
collection shows increase in excretion.
/square6CT or MRI of the abdomen can localize the tumor.
/square6MIBG scan—metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG)resembles norepinephrine and is taken up byadrenergic tissue. MIBG scan can detect tumors notdetected by CT or MRI.
/square6Positron emission tomography (PET) scan is superiorto MIBG in the evaluation of metastatic disease.
/square6Selective venous sampling with measurement of
plasma norepinephrine can localize the tumor in
difficult cases.
Management
/square6The gold standard treatment of pheochromocytomais surgical resection. Preoperative preparation isdone with α-blocker phenoxybenzamine or
labetalol.
/square6If excision is not possible, medical therapy with
alpha and beta blocking drugs (phenoxybenzamineand propranolol, or labetalol) is necessary. Beta
blockers should not be given alone, as unopposed
alpha action will lead to hypertensive crisis.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of adrenal insufficiency.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of Addison disease.
/square6Adrenal insufficiency results from destruction or
dysfunction of the entire adrenal cortex. It affects
glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid function./square6It is of two types: Primary (inability of the adrenals
to produce hormones), secondary (due to pituitaryor hypothalamic disease leading to ACTH and CRHdeficiency). Primary adrenal insufficiency is alsoknown as Addison disease.
/square6Adrenal insufficiency can be acute or chronic. Acuteadrenal insufficiency (acute adrenal crisis) is amedical emergency.
Etiology
Idiopathic
• Sporadic
Infections
• Tuberculosis• HIV/AIDS• Histoplasmosis
Carcinoma
• Metastatic carcinoma• Lymphoma
Infiltrative diseases
• Hemochromatosis• Sarcoidosis• Amyloidosis
Iatrogenic
• Bilateral adrenalectomy• Post-radiotherapy
Adrenal hemorrhage
• Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome following meningo-
coccal septicemia
• Anticoagulation• Trauma
Drugs
• Aminoglutethimide, metyrapone, ketoconazole
Genetic
• Congenital adrenal hyperplasia• Polyglandular syndromesSecondary ( ↓↓↓↓↓ACTH)
• Hypothalamic or pituitary disease• Withdrawal of glucocorticoid therapy
Clinical Features
/square6Symptoms and signs are due to low glucocorticoid,
low mineralocorticoid, low adrenal androgen levels
and secondary increase in ACTH and renin.
/square6Glucocorticoid deficiency causes malaise, fatigue,generalized weakness, nausea, vomiting, anorexia,
weight loss, postural hypotension with postural
drop and hypoglycemia.
/square6Mineralocorticoid deficiency causes hyponatremiaand hyperkalemia. Salt craving, may be present in
some patients.
/square6ACTH excess in primary adrenal deficiency
(Addison disease) causes hyperpigmentation.Hyperpigmentation is seen in exposed areas or
pressure sites such as knuckles, elbows, knees,
palmar creases, nail beds, nipples, tongue, buccal

/square6Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus521
9mucosa, gums and conjunctivae. Hyperpigmenta-
tion is not seen in secondary adrenal insufficiency
as ACTH is low. Vitiligo may be seen especially
with autoimmune etiology.
Investigations
/square6Serum cortisol level—an early morning (between8 and 9 am) serum cortisol concentration less than
3 μg/dL suggests adrenal insufficiency and a value
above 19 μg/dL excludes it.
/square6ACTH stimulation test (synacthen test)—250 μg of
ACTH (synacthen) is given by IM injection at anytime of day. Blood samples are drawn at  0 and
30 minutes for plasma cortisol. In normal subjectsplasma cortisol is >17 μg/dl either at baseline or at
30 minutes. Cortisol levels fail to increase in primary
adrenal insufficiency.
/square6Serum ACTH level—primary and secondary
adrenal insufficiency can be distinguished bymeasurement of ACTH which is low in ACTHdeficiency and high in Addison’s disease.
/square6Serum electrolytes—hyponatremia and hyper-kalemia are seen.
/square6HIV test if risk factors for infection are present.
/square6Plain X-ray abdomen may show adrenal calcifica-tion in tuberculosis.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen is useful to assess the size ofadrenals and also to detect any tumors.
/square6CT or MRI of adrenals to look for size of adrenalsand metastatic malignancy.
/square6Adrenal and other organ specific antibodies maybe present in autoimmune adrenalitis.Management
/square6Patients should receive lifelong steroid replacementtherapy.
/square6Cortisol 15 mg in the morning and 5 mg at 6 pm orprednisolone 5 mg in the morning and 2.5 mg inthe evening.
/square6During intercurrent illness the dose of steroidshould be doubled. During surgery, oral steroidshould be changed to parenteral dose, i.e. hydro-cortisone 100 mg 6-hourly for 24 hours, then 50 mg
IM 6-hourly until ready to take tablets.
/square6Patient should carry a steroid card all the time
which should give information regarding diag-
nosis, steroid, dose and doctor. Patients should be
encouraged to wear a bracelet engraved with thediagnosis all the time. All these can help in emer-gencies.
/square6Underlying cause should be treated.
Q.Acute adrenal crisis (acute adrenal insufficiency;
Addisonian crisis).
/square6Acute adrenal crisis can occur in the following situa-
tions.
/square6Serious infection or other major stress in a previouslyundiagnosed patient with adrenal insufficiency.
/square6Skipping of steroid or failure to increase the dosein a patient with known adrenal insufficiencyduring major illness or stress.
/square6Bilateral adrenal hemorrhage (Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome, anticoagulant therapy).
/square6Pituitary apoplexy.
/square6Rapid withdrawal of steroids in a patient who istaking them for a long time.
Clinical Features
/square6Hypotension or shock.
/square6Dehydration.
/square6Nausea, vomiting and abdominal pain. Abdominalrigidity or rebound tenderness may be presentmimicking acute abdomen.
/square6Confusion or disorientation.
/square6Fever may be present due to underlying infection.
/square6There may be hyperkalemia, hypernatremia, hypo-glycemia, lymphocytosis and eosinophilia.
Management
/square6It is a medical emergency.
/square6Rapid replacement of steroid, sodium and waterdeficits are the primary goals of therapy.
/square6IV fluid (DNS) is started immediately.
/square6Inj hydrocortisone 100–200 mg is given intra-venously and repeated every 4–6 hours thereafter.50 mg hydrocortisone can be given IM if there is
problem with IV access.Figure 9.5 Clinical features of adrenal insufficiency


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
9522 /square6Once the patient’s condition improves, he is put
on oral steroids and oral fluids and the dose ofsteroids is slowly tapered to the maintenancedose.
/square6The precipitating cause should be identified andtreated.
Q.Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome.
/square6This refers to acute adrenal insufficiency due to
bilateral adrenal hemorrhage.
/square6It is caused by severe infection with meningococcusor other bacteria. Rarely, it can be caused by adrenalvein thrombosis leading to venous stasis andhemorrhage.
/square6Clinical features are same as that of acute adrenalinsufficiency. There is development of hypotensionwith shock. Patient may complain of abdominalpain especially in the flanks. There may be signsof meningococcal infection such as meningitis,cutaneous hemorrhages, etc. In the advanced
stages, patient has respiratory failure and slips into
coma.
/square6Treatment is same as that of acute adrenal insuffi-ciency. In addition, appropriate antibiotics should
be used to treat meningococcal septicemia
(penicillin-G) or other bacterial sepsis.
Q.Steroid therapy.
/square6Corticosteroids are synthetic analogs of the natural
steroid hormones produced by the adrenal cortex.Steroids are among the most widely used class ofdrugs.
/square6Steroids include glucocorticoids and mineralocorti-coids. Glucocorticoids are predominantly involvedin metabolism and have immunosuppressive,anti-inflammatory, and vasoconstrictive effects.Mineralocorticoids regulate electrolytes and water
balance.
Indications for Steroids
• Adrenal insufficiency
• Anaphylaxis• Bronchial asthma• Cerebral edema• Connective tissue diseases• Autoimmune diseases
• Nephrotic and nephritic syndrome
• Septic shock• ARDS• Leukemia, lymphoma• In malignancies along with chemotherapy• TB pericarditis
• Demyelinating diseases
• TB meningitisContraindications for Steroids
• Active tuberculosis
• Peptic ulcer
• Uncontrolled diabetes
• Uncontrolled hypertension
• Active infection
Side Effects of Steroid Therapy
/square6Suppression of pituitary hypothalamic axis.
/square6Cushingoid features.
/square6Glucose intolerance or diabetes mellitus.
/square6Hypertension.
/square6Mood disturbance, either depression or mania and
insomnia.
/square6Gastric erosions due to impaired prostaglandinsynthesis.
/square6Latent tuberculosis may be reactivated.
/square6Osteoporosis.
/square6Proximal myopathy.
Measures to Minimize Side Effects
/square6Give the minimum effective dose.
/square6Give on alternate day rather than daily.
/square6Give in the morning.
/square6Give for the minimum possible duration.
/square6Monitor blood sugar during therapy.
/square6H2 blockers or proton pump inhibitors to reduce
gastric side effects.
/square6Calcium and Vit D to prevent osteoporosis.
Withdrawal of Steroid Therapy
/square6Steroid therapy for more than 3 weeks can cause
pituitary adrenal suppression, and if stopped
suddenly may cause acute adrenal insufficiency(crisis). Hence, steroid withdrawal must be gradual.All patients must be advised to avoid sudden drugwithdrawal.
Q.Congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
Etiology
/square6Congenital adrenal hyperplasia is due to defects
in various enzymes in the cortisol biosyntheticpathway. 21-hydroxylase deficiency causes 90% ofall cases of congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
/square621-hydroxylase deficiency causes defective conversionof adrenal precursors to cortisol and, in some cases,to aldosterone. Accumulated hormone precursors(such as 17-OH-progesterone) are shunted intoandrogen production, causing virilization.
/square6Cortisol deficiency results in impaired negativefeedback and increased ACTH secretion. IncreasedACTH causes adrenal hyperplasia and excessproduction of steroids ‘proximal’ to the enzyme
block.

/square6Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus523
9/square6All these enzyme defects are inherited as autosomal
recessive traits.
Clinical Features
/square6Cortisol (glucocorticoid) deficiency causes weightloss, hypotension, fatigability, etc. Aldosteronedeficiency leads to hyponatremia, hypovolemia andhyperkalemia. Androgen excess causes ambiguousgenitalia in girls, precocious pseudopuberty,
amenorrhea and/or hirsutism.
/square617-hydroxylase and 11 β-hydroxylase deficiency
may produce hypertension due to excess produc-tion of 11-deoxycorticosterone, a mineralocorticoid.
Investigations
/square6High level of plasma 17-OH-progesterone is found
in 21-hydroxylase deficiency.
/square6ACTH level is elevated.
/square6Ultrasound or CT abdomen shows adrenal hyper-
plasia.
/square6In siblings of affected children, antenatal diagnosiscan be made by amniocentesis or chorionic villus
sampling.
Management
/square6The aim is to replace deficient corticosteroids, and
also suppress ACTH and hence adrenal androgenproduction.
/square6This can be achieved by giving a large dose of a
long-acting synthetic glucocorticoid such as
prednisolone before going to bed to suppress theearly morning ACTH peak, and a smaller dose isgiven in the morning.
/square6If hirsutism is the main problem, anti-androgentherapy is given.
Q.Gynecomastia.
/square6Gynecomastia is defined as a benign proliferation
of the glandular tissue of the male breast.
/square6It presents clinically as the presence of a rubbery or
firm mass extending concentrically from the nipple.
/square6Fat deposition without glandular proliferation is
termed pseudogynecomastia. Pseudogynecomastiais seen in obese men.
Causes of Gynecomastia
• Puberty (physiologic gynecomastia)
• Testicular neoplasms (due to production of hCG)
• Feminizing adrenocortical tumors• Ectopic production of hCG
• Male hypogonadism
• Enzymatic defects of testosterone production• Androgen-insensitivity syndromes
• True hermaphroditism
• Cirrhosis of liver• Starvation, during the recovery phase
• Chronic renal failure on hemodialysis• Hyperthyroidism• Excessive extraglandular aromatase activity• Drugs (spironolactone, ketoconazole)• Idiopathic
History
/square6Ask about  the duration of breast enlargement, pain,
nipple discharge, whether secondary sexual charac-
teristics are fully developed, and the relationshipbetween onset of gynecomastia and puberty.
/square6History of delayed puberty, decreased libido, and
erectile dysfunction suggests hypogonadism.
/square6History of chronic alcohol intake, jaundice and
ascites suggests cirrhosis of liver. History of tremor,heat intolerance, and diarrhea suggests hyper-
thyroidism.
/square6Enquire about the drug intake which can cause
gynecomastia.
Physical Examination
/square6Look for development of secondary sexual charac-teristics (e.g. the penis, pubic hair, and axillary hair).Also look for development of mustache and beard.Non-development of these features suggests hypo-
gonadism. Examine the testes for masses or atrophy.
/square6Examine the breasts for any nipple discharge,
consistency, fixation to underlying tissues, and skinchanges. Findings which suggest malignancy are
eccentric breast swelling, nipple discharge, fixation
to the skin, nipple retraction, axillary lymphadeno-pathy, and hard consistency.
/square6Look for signs/symptoms of hypogonadism such
as absence of pubic hair, testicular atrophy, infantile
penis, etc.
/square6Look for symptoms or signs of hyperthyroidism(e.g. tremor, tachycardia, sweating, heat intolerance,
weight loss).
Investigations
/square6Mammography is done if breast cancer is suspected.
/square6If hypogonadism is suspected, serum LH, FSH,
testosterone, estradiol, and hCG levels should bemeasured.
/square6Further tests are based on the suspicion of under-lying disease.
Treatment
/square6No specific treatment is needed for physiologicalgynecomastia which usually remits spontaneously.
/square6Treatment of the underlying cause.
/square6Drugs causing gynecomastia should be stopped.
/square6Tamoxifen 10 mg orally bid can be tried if pain andtenderness are very troublesome.
/square6If cosmetic appearance is unacceptable, surgicalremoval of excess breast tissue can be done.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
9524 Q.Hirsutism.
/square6Hirsutism  is the excessive growth of thick or dark
hair in women in locations that are more typical of
male hair growth patterns (e.g. mustache, beard,
central chest, shoulders, lower abdomen, back,inner thigh). It is due to androgen excess due tomany causes.  Hypertrichosis is a separate
condition. It is simply an increase in the amount ofhair growth anywhere on the body.
Etiology
• Idiopathic
• Familial• Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)• Congenital adrenal hyperplasia• Ovarian and adrenal tumors• Drugs (minoxidil, anabolic steroids, diazoxide)• Acromegaly• ACTH-induced Cushing’s disease
Clinical Features
/square6Increase in hair is seen on the chin, upper lip,
abdomen, and chest.
/square6Androgen excess also increases sebaceous glandactivity, producing acne.
/square6Menstrual irregularities, anovulation, andamenorrhea are common.
/square6Defeminization (decrease in breast size, loss offeminine adipose tissue) and virilization (frontalbalding, muscularity, clitoromegaly, and deepeningof the voice) occur if androgen excess is severe.
/square6Hypertension is seen in Cushing’s syndrome,adrenal 11-hydroxylase deficiency, or cortisolresistance syndrome.
Investigations
/square6Serum testosterone level is elevated.
/square617-hydroxy progesterone level is elevated incongenital adrenal hyperplasia.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen to assess adrenals andovaries.
/square6Adrenal CT.
Management
/square6Patients with mild hirsutism can be treated with
an oral contraceptive.
/square6Postmenopausal women with severe hyperandro-
genism should undergo laparoscopic bilateraloophorectomy to remove any hilar cell tumors if
adrenals are normal.
/square6Girls with hyperandrogenism due to congenital
adrenal hyperplasia may be treated with laparo-scopic bilateral adrenalectomy.
/square6Any drugs causing hirsutism are stopped.
/square6Antiandrogen therapy—spironolactone, cypro-
terone acetate, finasteride, and flutamide have anti-androgenic activity and help to decrease hirsutism.
These drugs should be used only in nonpregnantwomen.
/square6Local treatment—shaving, depilation, waxing,
electrolysis, or bleaching are effective measures to
remove excess hair. Eflornithine topical creamretards hair growth when applied twice daily tounwanted facial hair. Laser therapy is an effectivetreatment for facial hirsutism. Alopecia may betreated with minoxidil 2% solution applied twice
daily to a dry scalp.
Q.Discuss the classification and pathogenesis of
diabetes mellitus.
/square6Diabetes mellitus is a clinical syndrome charac-
terized by impaired insulin secretion and variabledegrees of peripheral insulin resistance leading tohyperglycemia.
/square6Diabetes occurs worldwide and the incidence ofboth type 1 and type 2 diabetes is rising. Majorityof diabetics have type 2 diabetes. Many factors suchas greater longevity, obesity, unsatisfactory diet,
sedentary lifestyle and increasing urbanization
contribute to development of type 2 diabetes.
/square6The prevalence of diabetes varies considerably aroundthe world, and is related to differences in genetic and
environmental factors. Type 2 diabetes is now being
observed in children and adolescents also.
/square6Type 1 diabetes was previously termed ‘insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus’ (IDDM) since it isassociated with profound insulin deficiency
requiring insulin therapy. Type 2 diabetes was
previously termed ‘non-insulin-dependent diabetesmellitus’ (NIDDM) because patients retain the capa-city to secrete some insulin but exhibit impairedsensitivity to insulin (insulin resistance) and canusually be treated without insulin replacement.
However, in advanced type 2 diabetes there is
profound insulin deficiency and it behaves like type1 diabetes, requiring insulin.
Etiologic Classification of Diabetes Mellitus
I. Type 1 diabetes (beta-cell destruction, leading to absolute
insulin deficiency)
• Immune mediated• Idiopathic
II. Type 2 diabetes (associated with insulin resistance)
III. Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM)
IV. Other specific types of diabetes
• Monogenic diabetes syndromes (such as neonatal
diabetes and maturity-onset diabetes of the young)
• Diseases of the exocrine pancreas (such as cystic fibrosis
and pancreatitis)
• Drug or chemical-induced diabetes (such as with
glucocorticoid use, in the treatment of HIV/AIDS, or afterorgan transplantation)

/square6Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus525
9Normal Physiology
/square6In humans, blood glucose is maintained within a
narrow range by a balance between factors whichincrease blood sugar and factors which decreaseblood sugar. Factors which increase blood sugar areintestinal absorption of glucose after meals,gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis by the liver.Factors which decrease blood sugar are glucoseuptake by peripheral tissues, particularly skeletalmuscles, glycolysis and glycogenesis.
/square6When blood glucose is high, there is stimulation ofinsulin secretion from pancreas which facilitates peri-pheral glucose uptake by liver and skeletal muscles.
/square6When intestinal glucose absorption declines betweenmeals, hepatic glucose output (gluconeogenesis andglycogenolysis) is increased in response to lowinsulin levels and increased levels of the counter-regulatory hormones (glucagon and adrenaline).
Pathogenesis of Diabetes
Type 1 Diabetes
Genetic factors
/square6Genetic factors account for about one-third of thesusceptibility to type-1 diabetes. The HLA haplo-types DR3 and DR4 are associated with increasedsusceptibility to type-1 diabetes in Caucasians.
/square6HLA-DQA1 and DQB1 code for proteins on thesurface of cells which present foreign and self-antigens to T lymphocytes. Defective presentationof autoantigens from beta cells may lead to auto-immunity and destruction of beta cells.
Autoimmunity
/square6Type 1 diabetes is a slowly progressive T cell-
mediated autoimmune disease. Defective presenta-tion of autoantigens derived from pancreatic isletβ cells probably leads to the development of auto-
immunity. The pathological picture in type 1diabetes is characterized by ‘insulitis’—that is,infiltration of the islets with mononuclear cells(macrophages, T lymphocytes, natural killer cellsand B lymphocytes).
/square6Islet cell antibodies can be detected even before theclinical development of type 1 diabetes.
/square6Type 1 diabetes may be associated with other auto-immune disorders such as thyroid disease, coeliacdisease, Addison’s disease, pernicious anemia andvitiligo.
Environmental factors
/square6Along with genetic factors, environmental factors
are important for the expression of type-1 diabetes.
/square6Reduced exposure to microorganisms in early child-hood limits maturation of the immune system andmay increase susceptibility to autoimmune disease.
/square6Some viral infections (mumps, Coxsackie B4,retroviruses, rubella, CMV, EBV) may cause type 1diabetes as evidenced by isolation of virus particlesfrom the pancreas known to cause cytopathic or
autoimmune damage to β cells./square6Dietary factors such as cow’s milk, has been
implicated in triggering type 1 diabetes. Children
who are given cow’s milk early in infancy are more
likely to develop type 1 diabetes than those who
are breastfed. Nitrosamines (found in smoked and
cured meats) and coffee have also been proposed
as potentially diabetogenic toxins.
/square6Stress may precipitate type 1 diabetes by increasing
counter-regulatory hormones and immunomodula-
tion.
Type 2 Diabetes
/square6In type 2 diabetes there is a combination of resistanceto the action of insulin in liver and muscle, together
with impaired pancreatic β-cell function leading to
‘relative’ insulin deficiency. In the beginning there
is increased insulin secretion to counteract insulin
resistance. But as the disease progresses, there is
progressive beta cell failure and insulin deficiency
develops.
Insulin resistance
/square6Resistance to the action of insulin in the liver and
muscle leads to overproduction and underutiliza-
tion of glucose respectively leading to hyper-
glycemia. Type 2 diabetes is often associated
with central (visceral) obesity, hypertension and
dyslipidemia (elevated LDL cholesterol and
triglycerides, low HDL cholesterol). Coexistence
of this cluster of conditions is called ‘insulin resis-
tance syndrome’ or ‘metabolic syndrome’. Meta-
bolic syndrome predisposes to cardiovascular
diseases.
/square6The exact cause of insulin resistance remains unclear.
However, there are many factors which contribute
to insulin resistance. Central obesity (especially intra-
abdominal fat) causes insulin resistance because large
quantities of free fatty acids (FFA) released by
adipose tissue compete with glucose to be utilized
by peripheral tissues. Adipose tissue also releases
many hormones (e.g. cortisol, adipokines) which
may decrease the sensitivity of insulin receptors.
/square6Lack of exercise increases insulin resistance bydownregulation of insulin-sensitive kinases and by
the accumulation of FFAs within skeletal muscle.
Exercise allows non-insulin-dependent glucose
uptake by muscles.
Pancreatic 
βββββ cell failure
/square6There is progressive reduction in beta cell mass.
There is deposition of amylin around beta cells
which forms insoluble fibrils of amyloid leading to
destruction of beta cells.
Genetic predisposition
/square6Genetic factors are important in the etiology of type
2 diabetes. There is almost 100% concordance rate
in monozygotic twins. Many susceptibility genes
have been found which increase the risk of develop-
ing diabetes.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
9526 Obesity
/square6Overeating increases the risk of type-2 diabetes, espe-
cially when combined with obesity and underactivity.
The risk of developing type-2 diabetes increasestenfold in people with a body mass index of >30.
Aging
/square6Type 2 diabetes usually affects middle-aged and
elderly. Most of them are over 50 years of age.
Other Specific Types of Diabetes
/square6Most of these types of diabetes have an obvious
cause of destruction of pancreatic β cells. Endocrine
diseases such as acromegaly or Cushing’s syn-drome cause diabetes by increasing counterregulatory hormones.
Gestational Diabetes
/square6The term ‘gestational diabetes’ refers to hypergly-cemia occurring for the first time during pregnancy.Many of these women ultimately develop perma-
nent diabetes.
/square6During pregnancy, insulin sensitivity is reducedthrough the action of placental hormones and there
is increased insulin demand. Beta cells may beunable to meet this demand which leads to develop-ment of gestational diabetes mellitus.
Q.Discuss the clinical features of diabetes mellitus.
Asymptomatic
/square6Many diabetics are asymptomatic and are detected
during routine health check ups or when they areseen for some other illness. This is especially so in
case of early type-2 diabetes.
Polyuria, nocturia
/square6They occur because of glucose in the urine which
acts as an osmotic diuretic.
Polyphagia
/square6Though there is hyperglycemia, it cannot be used
by cells due to lack of insulin or insulin resistance.Hence, a diabetic feels more hungry than usual.Thirst, dry mouth
/square6This happens because high blood glucose absorbs
water from the tissues causing dehydration andthirst. Polyuria also leads to dehydration andincreased thirst.
Easy fatigability
/square6Inability to properly utilize blood glucose leads to
easy fatigability.
Recurrent infections and delayed wound healing
/square6Hyperglycemia inhibits inflammatory response,
chemotaxis, decreased neutrophil function, etc.which lead to increased incidence of infections anddelayed wound healing. Patients may present withskin sepsis (boils) and genital candidiasis, andcomplain of pruritus vulvae or balanitis.
Weight loss
/square6Since there is loss of calories in the form of glucose in
the urine, there is negative energy balance and weightloss. A person loses weight in spite of eating more.
Symptoms of peripheral neuropathy
/square6Such as burning, tingling and numbness occur due
to diabetic peripheral neuropathy. Initially thesesymptoms are felt in feet.  Later on, it may involve
the legs and hands.
Blurring of vision
/square6This is due to the change in refractory power of
lens due to hyperglycemia. Diabetic retinopathy isanother cause in advanced diabetes.
Presenting as DKA and HHS
/square6Some patients present for the first time with one of
the acute complications of diabetes such as diabeticketoacidosis (DKA) or HHS (hyperglycemic hyper-osmolar syndrome). DKA is common in type-1
diabetes and HHS in type-2 diabetes.
Other Features
/square6Nausea; headache.
/square6Mood change, irritability, difficulty in concentrating,
apathy.
TABLE 9.1: Comparative features of type 1 and type 2 diabetes
Type 1 Type 2
Prevalence Uncommon (5–10% of diabetes cases) Common (>80% of diabetes cases)
Typical age at onset <40 years >40 years
Duration of symptoms Weeks Months to years
Body weight Normal or low Obese
Ketoacidosis Yes Rarely
Rapid death without treatment with insulin Yes No
Autoantibodies Yes No
Diabetic complications at diagnosis No 25% (because of late presentation)
Family history of diabetes Uncommon Common
Other autoimmune diseases Common Uncommon
HLA-DR3/4 Association No association
Insulin secretion Absent/severely decreased Increased/decreased
Insulin resistance Absent Present
Acanthosis nigricans No Common

/square6Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus527
9/square6Specific causes of diabetes may produce their own
features.
/square6Most of the type 2 diabetics are overweight. Hyper-tension is present in at least 50% of patients with
type 2 diabetes. Signs of hyperlipidemia such as
xanthelasma and xanthomas may be present.
Q.Discuss the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus.
Q.Glucose tolerance test.
Q.Impaired glucose tolerance (IGT).
Q.Impaired fasting glucose (IFG).
/square6Testing to detect type 2 diabetes and prediabetes
in asymptomatic people should be considered in
adults of any age who are overweight or obese (BMI≥25 kg/m
2) and have one or more additional risk
factors for diabetes such as physical inactivity, first-degree relative with diabetes, high-risk race/ethnicity (e.g. African American, Latino, Native
American, Asian American, Pacific Islander),
women who delivered a baby weighing >9 lb orwere diagnosed with GDM, hypertension, HDLcholesterol level <35 mg/dL and/or a triglyceridelevel >250 mg/dL, women with polycystic ovariansyndrome, IGT or IFG on previous testing, other
clinical conditions associated with insulin resistance
(e.g. severe obesity, acanthosis nigricans), andhistory of CVD.
/square6In those without these risk factors, testing shouldbegin at age 45 years.
/square6If tests are normal, repeat testing at least at 3-yearintervals is reasonable.
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) Criteria forthe Diagnosis of Diabetes
A hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) level of 6.5% or higher.
Or
A fasting plasma glucose (FPG) level of 126 mg/dL or higher;
fasting is defined as no caloric intake for at least 8 hours.
Or
A 2-hour plasma glucose level of 200 mg/dL or higher during
a 75-g oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT).
Or
A random plasma glucose of 200 mg/dL or higher in a patient
with classic symptoms of hyperglycemia (i.e. polyuria,
polydipsia, polyphagia, weight loss) or hyperglycemic crisis.
/square6Urine glucose tests should never be used alone to
diagnose diabetes, since an altered renal threshold
for glucose can produce similar findings.
Oral Glucose Tolerance Test (OGTT)
/square6OGTT is not recommended for routine clinical use
but may be required in the evaluation of patients
with IFG (impaired fasting glucose) or whendiabetes is still suspected despite normal FBS. It iscommonly done in the diagnosis of gestational
diabetes mellitus.
/square6OGTT should be performed under controlled condi-
tions to ensure its accuracy. The following should
be ensured before doing OGTT.
– 3 days of unrestricted diet (>150 g carbohy-
drates/day) and physical activity.
– Patient should remain seated and not smoke
during the test.
– OGTT should be done after an overnight fast,
using a glucose load containing 75 gm of anhy-
drous glucose dissolved in water; 2-hour post
load glucose levels of 200 mg/dL or greater
establish the diagnosis of diabetes.
/square6Factors that decrease the value of OGTT include:
– Carbohydrate restriction (<150 gm for 3 days)– Bedrest or severe inactivity– Medical or surgical stress– Drugs (e.g. thiazides, steroids, β-blockers,
phenytoin)
– Smoking– Anxiety from repeated needle sticks.
/square6Hence, OGTT should not be performed in acutely
ill patients.
Interpretation of OGTT Results
FBS (mg/dL) Two-hour PPBS (mg/dL)
Normal <100 <140
IFG 100–125 Normal (<140)
IGT Normal (<100) 140–199
Diabetes ≥126 ≥200 mg/dL
Impaired Glucose Tolerance (IGT) and
Impaired Fasting Glucose (IFG)
/square62 hours post-load glucose 140–199 mg/dL with FBSbeing normal is called impaired glucose tolerance
(IGT).
/square6FBS between 100–125 mg/dL with PPBS beingnormal is called impaired fasting glucose (IFG).
/square6Both IGT and IFG are now called ‘pre-diabetes’states. People with these pre-diabetic states have a
relatively high risk of developing diabetes andsubsequent vascular disease. All patients with
IFG and IGT should be treated with diet and
exercise and should be followed up yearly for theprogression to diabetes.
/square6Because individuals with IFG may exhibit severepostprandial hyperglycemia, a 75 gm OGTT should
be performed in all these patients to rule out
diabetes. If 2 hr post-load glucose concentration is200 mg/dL or more, it confirms diabetes; if between
140–199 mg/dL they are defined as having IGT.
/square6Individuals with HbA1C of 5.7–6.4% are also atincreased risk of developing diabetes later and
should be counseled about weight reduction (if
overweight), diet control and exercise.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
9528 Q.Discuss the investigations done in a case of diabetes
mellitus.
Q.Glycated hemoglobin (HbA1C).
The investigations done in case of a diabetes mellitus
are as follows:
/square6Urinalysis
/square6FBS/PPBS
/square6OGTT
/square6Glycated hemoglobin
/square6Fasting lipid profile (FLP)
/square6Renal function tests (urea, creatinine)
/square6Other tests as required
Urinalysis
/square6Glucosuria occurs when blood sugar is more
than 180 mg/dl (renal threshold for glucosuria).
Glucosuria can be detected by Benedicts test orglucose strips.
/square6Proteinuria can occur due to development ofdiabetic nephropathy. Urine should be tested in alldiabetics for the presence of proteinuria which canbe treated with ACE inhibitors.
/square6Ketone bodies may be present in DKA.
OGTT
/square6See above.
Glycated Hemoglobin (HbA1C)
/square6RBCs are freely permeable to glucose. As a result,glucose becomes irreversibly attached to hemoglobin(HbA1C) at a rate dependent upon the prevailingblood glucose. Since HbA1C circulates within RBCswhose life span lasts up to 120 days, its concentra-tion reflects the average blood glucose level in the
preceding 120 days (i.e. 3 months).
/square6Its normal concentration is 4–6%. It is abnormally
elevated in diabetic persons with chronic hyper-glycemia.
/square6It should be measured every 3 to 4 month intervalsso that adjustments in therapy can be made tooptimize diabetes control.
/square6The accuracy of HbA1c values can be affected byhemoglobin variants or derivatives; the effect
depends on the specific hemoglobin variant or
derivative and the specific assay used. Anycondition that shortens RBC survival or decreasesmean RBC age (e.g. recovery from acute blood loss,hemolytic anemia) will falsely lower HbA1c.Vitamins C and E are reported to falsely lower test
results possibly by inhibiting glycation of
hemoglobin.
Lipid Profile
/square6Obese patients with diabetes may have abnormallipid profile characterized by high triglyceride, highLDL and low HDL cholesterol. High LDL is
atherogenic and may contribute to macrovascularcomplications of diabetes.
Renal Function Tests
/square6Advanced diabetes is associated with diabeticnephropathy which may progress to renal failure.If renal failure develops urea and creatinine will beelevated.
Q.Discuss the management of diabetes.
Q.Medical nutrition therapy (MNT) of diabetes.
Q.Oral hypoglycemic agents (oral antidiabetic
agents).
/square6Methods available for the treatment of diabetes are
as follows:
1. Diet
2. Exercise
3. Oral anti-diabetic drugs
4. Insulin
5. Pancreas or islet cell transplantation
/square6Early type-2 diabetes can be controlled by diet and
lifestyle modification alone. Other patients willrequire drugs or insulin or both.
Goals of Diabetes Management
/square6To allow the patient to lead a normal life.
/square6To achieve normal metabolic state.
/square6To prevent long-term complications of diabetes.
Diet (Medical Nutrition Therapy)
/square6A well-balanced, nutritious diet is important in themanagement of diabetes.
/square6The components of the diet should be as follows.
– Carbohydrates: 45–65% of total daily calories
– Protein: 10–35%
– Fat: 25–35% (of which saturated fat is less than 7%)
/square6High protein intake may cause progression of renal
disease in patients with diabetic nephropathy; forthese individuals, protein intake should berestricted to 0.8 gm/kg/day.
/square6Dietary fiber such as cellulose, gum, and pectin areindigestible by humans. Dietary fiber increasesintestinal transit and has beneficial effects oncolonic function. It slows glucose absorption rateso that hyperglycemia is slightly diminished. Fiber
has a favorable effect on blood cholesterol levels
also. Diabetics should consume fiber rich foods suchas oatmeal, cereals, and beans.
/square6Artificial and other sweeteners such as aspartame,
saccharin, and sucralose can be used instead of
sugar by diabetics. They are well tolerated and donot increase blood sugar.
/square6Patients should avoid sweets and other high calorie
foods, reduce fats and oils and increase the intake

/square6Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus529
9of green leafy vegetables. Obese patients should
consume fewer calories to reduce their weight.Vegetarian food is encouraged and non-vegetarianfood is discouraged in diabetics as non-vegetarianfood can contribute significantly in terms of calorieand fat content.
/square6Patients should reduce alcohol consumption andstop smoking.
Exercise
/square6Regular exercise improves glycemic control andreduces insulin resistance. Exercise facilitates non-insulin dependent glucose entry into the cells.
Oral Anti-diabetic Drugs
/square6Oral drugs are mainly effective in type-2 diabetes
because most of them stimulate endogenous insulin
secretion which is absent in type-1 diabetes.
/square6The following are the groups of drugs available totreat diabetes mellitus.
• Sulfonylureas
• Biguanides
• Thiazolidinediones (TZDs)• Alpha-glucosidase inhibitors• Meglitinide derivatives
• Glucagonlike peptide-1 (GLP-1) agonists
• Dipeptidyl peptidase IV (DPP-4) inhibitors• Selective sodium-glucose transporter-2 (SGLT-2) inhibitors• Amylinomimetics
• Insulins
Sulphonylureas
Examples:  Glibenclamide, gliclazide, glipizide,
glimepiride.
/square6Individual sulphonylureas differ in their potency,
duration of action and cost. Glibenclamide can
cause severe hypoglycemia and should be avoidedin the elderly. Gliclazide and glipizide cause few
side-effects but are short acting. Glimepiride is long
acting, can be given once daily and has less chancesof causing hypoglycemia.
/square6People with type 2 diabetes who fail to respond toinitial treatment with sulphonylureas are consi-
dered ‘primary treatment failures’.
/square6After many years of diabetes, beta-cell function
gradually worsens. When beta cells are completely
exhausted, insulin secretion stops and sulphonyl-
ureas will not act. This is called ‘secondary failure’(i.e. after a period of satisfactory glycemic control).
With continuing follow-up, ‘secondary failure’
affects 3–10% of patients each year.
Mechanism of action
/square6Sulphonylureas stimulate the release of insulin from
the pancreatic β cell (insulin secretagogue). They
act through a sulphonylurea receptor which islinked to a K
+ channel on the β-cell surface. K+
transport triggers insulin secretion.Indications
/square6These are used in type-2 diabetes after a trial of diet
and exercise fails to control blood sugar.Sulfonylureas are not effective in type 1 diabetes
since these drugs require functioning beta cells to
produce their effect on blood glucose.
Contraindications
/square6Severe hepatic or renal impairment.
Side effects
/square6Hypoglycemia.
/square6Idiosyncratic reactions: Skin rashes, leukopenia,
and thrombocytopenia.
Biguanides
Examples
/square6Metformin is the only biguanide available.Phenformin has been withdrawn due to highincidence of lactic acidosis.
Mechanism of action
/square6It increases insulin sensitivity and peripheral
glucose uptake.
/square6It also impairs glucose absorption by the gut and
inhibits hepatic gluconeogenesis.
/square6It does not stimulate insulin secretion and hence
does not cause hypoglycemia.
Indications
/square6It is not associated with weight gain and hence
preferred in obese type-2 diabetes patients.
/square6It can also be used in type-1 obese diabetic patientsas they also have insulin resistance.
/square6Starting dose is 500 mg BD, can be increased to amaximum of 1 g TID.
Side effects
/square6Lactic acidosis.
/square6GI intolerance.
Contraindications
/square6Impaired renal or liver function, severe shock,
cardiac failure, peripheral vascular disease. In allthese cases, there is tissue hypoxemia (hence, already
there is acidosis) which can precipitate lactic acidosis.
Thiazolidinediones (Glitazones)
Examples: Pioglitazone, rosiglitazone.
Mechanism of action
/square6They stimulate PPAR- γ receptors ( peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor- γ). These receptors
are present mainly in adipose tissue and enhance
the action of insulin. They also release adipokinessuch as adiponectin and resistin which alter insulinsensitivity in the liver. They do not stimulate insulinsecretion and hence, hypoglycemia is not a problem.
Indications
/square6Usually given along with sulphonylureas in
patients intolerant of metformin, or added with
both sulphonylurea and metformin.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
9530 Side effects
/square6Increase in body weight.
/square6Hepatotoxicity—troglitazone has been withdrawn
because of hepatotoxicity and newer thiazolidine-diones should be avoided in patients with liver
dysfunction.
/square6Sodium and fluid retention, hence, must be avoided
in cardiac failure.
/square6Increased risk of bladder cancer has been found inwith pioglitazone.
Alpha-glucosidase Inhibitors
Examples: Acarbose, voglibose, miglitol.
Mechanism of action
/square6They inhibit alpha-glucosidase enzyme in the
intestine which prevents formation of glucose and
hence, absorption of glucose. They should be takenwith each meal. They only lower post-prandial blood
glucose. They can be combined with a sulphonylurea.
Side effects
/square6Since unabsorbed glucose is fermented by intestinal
bacteria with production of gas, patients complain
of flatulence and abdominal bloating. Unabsorbed
glucose acts as an osmotic laxative and producesdiarrhea.
Meglitinides and Amino Acid Derivatives
Examples: Repaglinide, nateglinide.
Mechanism of action
/square6These drugs are called prandial glucose regulators.
These drugs directly stimulate endogenous insulin
secretion (similar to sulphonylureas) and are takenimmediately before food. Duration of action is less
than sulphonylureas and hence, hypoglycemia is
also less.
Side effects
/square6Weight gain.
Glucagon like Peptide-1 Agonists (GLP-1 Analogues)
Examples: Exenatide, liraglutide, albiglutide, dulaglu-
tide.
Mechanism of action
/square6Incretins are gut hormones which potentiate glucose-
induced insulin secretion. Glucagon-like peptide
(GLP-1) is an incretin hormone which stimulatesinsulin secretion. In addition, GLP-1 suppresses
glucagon secretion, delays gastric emptying, reduces
appetite and encourages weight loss. GLP-1 isdegraded by the enzyme, dipeptidyl peptidase IV
(DPP-4).
/square6GLP-1 analogues mimic GLP-1 action and can be
used to treat type-2 diabetes. All these drugs are
administered as subcutaneous injection like insulin.
Side effects
/square6The main side effect is nausea and vomiting. Other
side effects are diarrhea and headache.Dipeptidyl Peptidase IV (DPP-4) Inhibitors
Examples: Sitagliptin, saxagliptin, linagliptin.
Mechanism of action
/square6DPP-4 inhibitors prolong the action of incretin
hormones GLP-1 and glucose-dependent insulino-
tropic polypeptide (GIP) by degrading DPP-4. DPP-
4 inhibitors can be used as a monotherapy or in
combination with metformin or a TZD. They are
given once daily and are weight neutral.
Side effects
/square6The main side effect of DPP-4 inhibitors is naso-
pharyngitis or upper respiratory tract infection.
/square6Pancreatitis is another important side effect.
Selective Sodium-glucose Transporter-2 (SGLT-2) Inhibitors
/square6These are relatively new class of drugs approved
recently.
/square6Examples are canagliflozin, dapagliflozin and
empagliflozin.
Mechanism of action
/square6SGLT-2 inhibitors lower the renal glucose threshold.
Lowering the renal glucose threshold results in
increased urinary glucose excretion thus reducing
blood glucose values.
Side effects
/square6Constipation, diarrhea, nausea, increased urinary
frequency (osmotic diueresis due to glucosuria) and
genitourinary infections (due to glucosuria).
Amylinomimetics
/square6Pramlintide acetate is an amylin analog that mimicsthe effects of endogenous amylin, which is secreted
by pancreatic beta cells. This agent slows gastric
emptying, suppresses glucagon, and regulates
appetite.
Combination of Oral Agents
/square6Combining different oral drugs is more effective
than either drug used alone. If the blood sugar is
not under control with either metformin or
sulphonylurea, both can be combined. If blood
sugar is still not under control, a glitazone can be
added. Finally alpha-glucosidase inhibitors and
incretin mimics can be added.
/square6If blood sugar is still uncontrolled with a combina-
tion of all the drugs, then insulin can be added to
the oral drugs.
Insulin
/square6Patients, whose sugar remains uncontrolled evenafter using a combination of all the oral drugs and
newer drugs require insulin.
/square6Oral drugs can be continued and insulin is added
to oral drugs.
/square6Initially a single dose of intermediate- or long-acting insulin can be started at bedtime. Later on,

/square6Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus531
9twice daily mixed insulin (short acting plus
intermediate acting), or basal bolus type of insulintherapy (short acting insulin before every meal andlong acting insulin as basal insulin) may be used.
Pancreas or Islet Cell Transplantation
/square6Both these procedures require suitable donors andlong-term immunosuppression.
/square6Pancreas transplantation at the time of renal trans-plantation is becoming more widely accepted.Solitary pancreatic transplantation in the absenceof a need for renal transplantation should beconsidered only in those patients who fail all other
methods of treatment.
/square6Islet cell transplantation is a minimally invasive proce-
dure, and easier than pancreas transplantation.
Q.Classify insulin preparations.
Q.Write briefly about different insulin preparations.
Q.Insulin analogues.
Q.Complications of insulin therapy.
/square6Discovery of insulin was one of the greatest
milestones in medicine. It was discovered in 1921by Banting and Best and they tried this on a patientin 1922. They received Nobel Prize in medicine for
this remarkable discovery.Classification of Insulin Preparations
Short acting
• Regular or plain insulin• Insulin lispro• Insulin aspart• Insulin glulisine
Intermediate acting
• NPH insulin ( neutral protamine Hagedorn, also called
isophane insulin)
• Lente insulin (insulin zinc suspension)
Long acting
• Insulin glargine• Insulin detemir
/square6Insulin is injected subcutaneously into the anterior
abdominal wall, upper arms, outer thighs andbuttocks. Accidental intramuscular injection canoccur sometimes, but of no consequence exceptincreased risk of hypoglycemia due to rapid
absorption.
/square6Insulin is injected using a syringe with a fine needle
(which can be reused several times). Nowadays peninjectors with insulin in cartridge have become
popular because they are more convenient and
portable.
/square6Insulin can also be administered through insulinpumps which provide continuous subcutaneous or
intravenous infusion of insulin. Insulin pumps can
TABLE 9.2: Time action profiles of insulin preparations
Insulin preparation Onset of action Peak action Duration of action
Aspart/lispro/glulisine <15 min 1–3 h 3–5 h
Regular (plain) 30 min 2–4 h 5–8 h
NPH/Lente 2–4 h 4–12 h 10–18 h
Glargine 2–4 h No peak 24 h
Detemir Slow No peak at low doses. Higher Up to 24 hours
doses may cause peak at
6–8 hours
Figure 9.6 Insulin injection sites


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
9532 be worn on the body or implanted into the sub-
cutaneous tissue.
/square6Insulin is given intravenously while treating acutecomplications of diabetes such as DKA and HHS.
Indications for Insulin
/square6Type-1 diabetes.
/square6Diabetic ketaocidosis (DKA) or hyperglycemichyperosmolar syndrome (HHS).
/square6Presence of serious infection or concurrent illness(e.g. acute M1, pancreatitis or stroke).
/square6Major surgery.
/square6Pregnancy—all pregnant women with diabetesmellitus (whether gestational or previous diabetes)whose disease is not controlled with diet aloneshould be treated with insulin. All oral agents arecontraindicated during pregnancy except metformin
which is relatively safe.
/square6Symptomatic (polydipsia, polyuria, polyphagia and
weight loss) uncontrolled diabetes, with persistentelevations of the FBS levels of 300 mg/dL or higher.
Intensive insulin therapy with tight glycemic  control
helps reverse glucose toxicity. Therapy improvesboth insulin sensitivity and insulin secretion. After6–8 weeks of good glycemic control, these patientscan be switched to an oral agent or can continueinsulin therapy.
Insulin Regimens
/square6Various insulin regimens are used in the treatment
of diabetes. Most people require two or more injec-
tions of insulin daily. Twice-daily administrationof a mixture of short-acting and intermediate-actinginsulin, given before breakfast and dinner is thecommonly used regimen. Many pre-mixed insulinpreparations are available containing different
proportions of short acting and intermediate acting
insulin (30:70 and 50:50).
/square6Multiple injection regimens require short-actinginsulin before each meal, and a long-acting insulin
injected at bedtime (basal-bolus regimen).
Regular Insulin or Plain Insulin
/square6Regular insulin is the natural insulin obtained from
animal source or humans. There are only minordifferences between human, pork and beef insulins.Animal insulins are more immunogenic than human
insulin. Nowadays the use of animal insulin hasalmost stopped due to the wide availability of
recombinant human insulin.
Species              A Chain   B Chain
8th AA 10th AA 30th AA
Human Threonine Isoleucine Threonine
Pork (porcine) Threonine Isoleucine Alanine
Beef (bovine) Alanine Valine Alanine/square6Regular insulin has an onset of action in 15–60
minutes after injection, a peak effect 2–4 hrs afterinjection and duration of action of 5–8 hrs.
/square6Regular insulin has to be injected 20–30 minutes
before the meal.
NPH and Lente Insulin
/square6These two are intermediate acting insulins.
/square6NPH (neutral protamine Hagedorn) insulin is
produced by complexing regular insulin withprotamine, a protein of fish origin and adding trace
amounts of zinc. The protamine insulin complex is
poorly soluble at physiologic pH and thus slowlyabsorbed from the subcutaneous tissue. Hagedornis the name of the scientist who first formulatedthis preparation.
/square6Lente insulin is produced by adding zinc to regularinsulin which prolongs its action. It dissolves slowlyin body fluids and thus exhibits a prolongedduration of action after subcutaneous injection.
Insulin Analogues
/square6Insulin analogues are molecules that differ fromhuman insulin in amino acid sequence but bind to
same insulin receptors and function similarly as
human insulin. They overcome some of the limita-tions of conventional insulin preparations.
/square6Short-acting analogues:  Lispro, aspart, glulisine.
/square6Long-acting analogues: Glargine, detemir.
Insulin Lispro
/square6Insulin lispro was introduced in 1996. Lispro insulin
is produced by interchanging two amino acids onbeta chain, i.e. proline at B-28, and lysine at B-29.
The first three letters of lysine and proline were
combined to name it as LYSPRO. SubsequentlyLYSPRO was changed to LISPRO since it wasplanned to release this all over the world and somelanguages do not contain the letter “Y”. Lisproinsulin is at least twice as fast acting as regular
human insulin.
/square6After subcutaneous administration, lispro begins
acting within 15 mins, peaks in activity in 60to 90 minutes and has a duration of action of
4–5 hrs.
/square6Because of its fast onset of action, lispro can be given
within 15 minutes before meals. It can also be given
immediately before or after meals. After taking
injection, there is no need to wait for 30 mins totake meals (unlike regular insulin), hence lispro isalso called no wait insulin.
Advantages of insulin lispro over regular (plain)
insulin
/square6Because of its more rapid onset and peak action,
insulin lispro more effectively controls postprandial
blood sugar at 1 and 2 hrs than regular insulin.

/square6Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus533
9/square6Lispro is more effective in suppressing hepatic
glucose output than regular insulin, because ofhigher concentrations attained in liver.
/square6The onset of action of lispro does not vary much with
the site of injection as compared to regular insulin.
/square6Regular insulin has to be injected 20–30 minutes
before a meal. However, this is not so with lisproinsulin which can be injected 0–15 minutes before
a meal in all the patients. Hence, it is called “no-
wait” insulin. It can even be injected after the meal.
/square6Because of its shorter duration of action, insulinlispro results in less late postprandial hypoglycemia
than regular human insulin. Insulin lispro is superior
to regular
 insulin in the reduction of postprandial
hyperglycemia.
Insulin Aspart
/square6This is a rapidly acting analogue which was intro-duced after lispro in 2001. In insulin aspart, neutralproline in B-28 position is replaced by
 the negatively
charged aspartic acid resulting in reduced capacity
for self association and faster absorption.
/square6The time-action-profile of aspart is similar to insulin
lispro. Its advantages are similar to insulin lispro.
Insulin Glulisine
/square6Insulin glulisine is a new rapidly acting analoguewith a pharmacokinetic
 profile that is similar to
those of insulin lispro and insulin aspart. Trials are
being conducted with this molecule.
Insulin Glargine
/square6Insulin glargine is a long acting human insulin ana-
logue produced by recombinant-DNA technology.
It was introduced in 2001. This is the first true basalinsulin.
/square6It differs from human insulin in that glycine replaces
asparagine at position 21 of the A-chain, and two
arginines are added to the C-terminus of the B-chain. Because of these changes, glargine remainscompletely soluble in the acidic pH of the vial(pH 4) but precipitates in the neutral pH of sub-cutaneous tissue after injection. It is then slowly
released from these precipitates, prolonging its
duration of action without producing any peak. Itcan be given once a day which provides basal levelof insulin throughout the day.
/square6It is suitable for initial insulin therapy in both type 1and type 2 diabetes. It is safe for use in children and
adolescents. However, data are not available aboutits use in pregnant women.
/square6Glargine solution is clear and slightly acidic (pH 4)and should not be mixed with any other insulin orsolution as this could alter its time-action profile.
/square6Injection site redness, pain, itching, hives, swelling
or inflammation are the most common type of adverse
events, probably due to acidic pH of the solution.Advantages
/square6Better control of FBS and decreased incidence of
nocturnal hypoglycemia compared to NPH insulin.
/square6There is also more improvement in HbA1C level
than with NPH insulin.
/square6The site of injection does not alter the time action
profile of insulin glargine.
/square6The time of the day at which insulin glargine is
injected does not alter glycemic control.
/square6The plasma levels of insulin glargine do not fluc-
tuate significantly, thus mimicking physiologicalbasal insulin profile.
Disadvantages
/square6No other insulin can be mixed in the same syringe.
It is more acidic (pH 4.0) than other insulins (pH
7.4). If insulin glargine  is mixed with another
insulin, both lose activity.
/square6When using insulin glargine,  three or more injec-
tions per day of a short-acting insulin may beneeded before meals.
/square6Because it is clear, care must be taken not to confuseit with the short-acting insulin.
/square6It is also expensive.
Insulin Detemir
/square6Detemir is another new long-acting insulinanalogue. Here, the amino acid threonine at theB-30 position on the human insulin chain is lacking
and a 14-carbon fatty acid (tetradecanoic acid or
myristic acid) is attached to lysine at B-29.
/square6It is a clear solution with a neutral pH. It has a highaffinity for serum albumin from which it getsreleased slowly which accounts for its unique
mechanism of prolonged duration of action.
/square6Insulin detemir acts for nearly 24 hours. Detemir
also has prominent action on hepatic glucose outputwhich may be an advantage not seen with otherinsulins.
Advantages
/square6Absorption and action of insulin detemir is more
predictable, because it is a clear solution and does
not require resuspension and it does not precipi-tate after subcutaneous injection.
Complications of Insulin Therapy
Metabolic
• Hypoglycemia
• Weight gain• Insulin edema
Local
• Lipoatrophy
• Lipohypertrophy• Local allergic reactions
Systemic
• Immune insulin resistance
• Anaphylaxis

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
9534 Q.Enumerate the complications of diabetes. What are
the factors associated with increased mortality and
morbidity in people with diabetes?
Acute complications
• Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)• Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state (HHS)• Hypoglycemia• Lactic acidosis
Chronic (long term) complications
Microvascular• Diabetic retinopathy• Diabetic neuropathy• Diabetic nephropathy
Macrovascular
• Coronary artery disease• Peripheral vascular disease• Cerebrovascular disease
Others
• Gastrointestinal (gastroparesis, diarrhea)• Genitourinary (uropathy/sexual dysfunction)• Dermatological• Infections• Cataracts• Glaucoma• Periodontal disease
Factors associated with increased mortality and
morbidity in people with diabetes
/square6Long duration of diabetes.
/square6Early age at onset of disease.
/square6Uncontrolled blood sugars (as evidenced by high
HbA1c).
/square6Associated hypertension.
/square6Proteinuria; microalbuminuria
/square6Dyslipidemia (high LDL, low HDL).
/square6Obesity.
Q.Discuss the pathogenesis, clinical features, investiga-
tions, management and complications of diabetic
ketoacidosis (DKA)./square6Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) is a major medicalemergency and remains a serious cause of morbi-dity and mortality in people with diabetes. It ismore likely to occur in type 1 diabetes because ofcomplete dependence on insulin.
/square6Many undiagnosed diabetics may present for thefirst time with DKA.
Pathogenesis of DKA
/square6DKA usually evolves rapidly, over a 24-hourperiod.
/square6The cardinal biochemical features of diabetic keto-acidosis are: Hyperglycemia, hyperketonemia andmetabolic acidosis.
/square6Two hormonal abnormalities are largely respon-
sible for the development of hyperglycemia and
ketoacidosis in patients with uncontrolled diabetes;insulin deficiency and glucagon excess. However,DKA can develop even without glucagon excess.In addition to these factors, increased catechola-mines and cortisol can contribute to the increase in
glucose and ketoacid production.
/square6Hyperglycemia causes osmotic diuresis leading to
dehydration and electrolyte loss, particularly ofsodium and potassium. Average loss of fluid in
DKA is 3–6 liters. Half the deficit is from intra-
cellular compartment leading to cellular dehydra-tion. Remaining half is derived from extracellularfluid compartment which leads to hemoconcentra-tion, hypovolemia, hypotension, decreased renalperfusion and oliguria.
/square6Ketosis results from insulin deficiency, exacerbatedby elevated catecholamines and other stresshormones, resulting in unrestrained lipolysis andsupply of free fatty acids for hepatic ketogenesis.
Excess accumulation of acidic ketones ( β-hydroxy
butyric acid and acetoacetate) leads to metabolicacidosis. Metabolic acidosis forces hydrogen ionsinto the cells, displacing potassium ions, which maybe lost in urine or through vomiting leading tohypokalemia.
Figure 9.7 Pathogenesis of DKA


/square6Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus535
9/square6There are many precipitating factors which may
trigger an attack of DKA due to increased insulinrequirements.
Precipitating Factors for DKA
• Inadequate insulin treatment or noncompliance
• Infections (pneumonia, UTI, sepsis, etc.)• Cerebrovascular accidents• Myocardial infarction• Acute pancreatitis• Drugs (steroids, thiazides, clozapine or olanzapine, cocaine)
Clinical Features
Due to Hyperglycemia
/square6Polyuria, polydipsia, and weight loss are the initial
symptoms. As hyperglycemia worsens, serum
osmolality increases leading to neurological signs
and symptoms such as lethargy, focal deficits andobtundation which can progress to coma. Blurredvision may occur due to change in the refractorypower of lens due to hyperglycemia.
Due to Dehydration
/square6Loss of skin turgor, dry tongue, cracked lips, sunkeneyeballs, tachycardia, and hypotension.
/square6Cold extremities, peripheral cyanosis.
Due to Metabolic Acidosis
/square6Deep and sighing breathing (Kussmaul breathing).Breath is usually fetid, and acetone smell may bepresent.
/square6Nausea, vomiting, and abdominal pain are common
in DKA which may be related to acidosis.
Abdominal pain is probably due to delayed gastricemptying and ileus induced by metabolic acidosisand electrolyte abnormalities.
Other Features
/square6Signs of underlying precipitating illness may bepresent such as fever in infections, signs of consolida-tion in pneumonia, etc.
Investigations
/square6Urea and creatinine—may be elevated due to severedehydration.
/square6Electrolytes—sodium level is variable dependingon the hydration status. Potassium and bicarbonateare usually low.
/square6Blood glucose—it is often >250 mg/dl.
/square6Serum amylase and lipase are elevated in DKA.Sometimes acute pancreatitis can precipitate anattack of DKA in which case amylase and lipase
are elevated.
/square6Arterial blood gas (ABG) shows presence of meta-
bolic acidosis.
/square6Plasma ketone bodies are raised./square6Urinalysis—it shows presence of sugar and ketonebodies.
/square6ECG—may show changes due to electrolyteabnormalities or MI which might have precipitated
DKA.
/square6Infection screen:  Full blood count, blood and urine
culture, C-reactive protein, chest X-ray.
Diagnostic Criteria for DKA
• Blood glucose >250 mg/dl
• Arterial pH <7.3• Serum bicarbonate <15 mEq/L• Moderate degree of ketonemia and/or ketonuria
Management of DKA
Principles of Treatment
/square6Correction of dehydration, hyperglycemia and
electrolyte imbalance.
/square6Identification and treatment of precipitating events.
/square6Frequent patient monitoring.
Quick Initial Assessment
/square6Check airway and breathing first, especially inpatients with altered sensorium. Take  focused
history and do brief physical examination. Sendinvestigations. Patients with severe DKA requireadmission in the intensive care unit.
Fluid Replacement
/square6The average fluid loss is 3 to 6 liters in DKA. Initially
1 to 2 litres of isotonic saline is given rapidly
intravenously. Subsequent rate of fluid replacementdepends on the hydration status and urine output.Patients who are able to drink can take some or allof their fluid replacement orally.
/square6Fluid replacement also contributes to correction ofhyperglycemia.
Correction of Hyperglycemia
/square6Unless the episode of DKA is mild, intravenous
insulin infusion is the treatment of choice. Initially
an intravenous bolus of regular insulin at 0.15 units/kg body wt is given, followed by a continuousinfusion at a dose of 0.1 unit/kg/h (5 to 7 units/hrin adults).
/square6Blood glucose should be monitored every hour. Itshould fall by 50–75 mg/dl per hour. If plasmaglucose does not fall by 50 mg/dl from the initialvalue in the 1st hour, check hydration status; ifnecessary, the insulin infusion may be doubled
every 2-hour until a steady glucose decline between
50 and 75 mg/h is achieved.
/square6When the blood glucose reaches 250 mg/dl, it maybe possible to decrease the insulin infusion rate to
0.05–0.1 unit/kg/h (3–6 untis/h), and dextrose (5%)
may be started. Dextrose needs to be started along

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
9536 with insulin to facilitate continuation of insulin till
the ketone bodies are cleared. This is because ketonebodies take longer time to clear than hyper-glycemia.
/square6During therapy for DKA, blood should be drawnevery 2–4 h for determination of serum electrolytes,glucose and ketone bodies.
/square6Criteria for resolution of DKA includes a glucose
<200 mg/dl, serum bicarbonate ≥18 mEq/L, and a
venous pH of >7.3. Typical duration of therapy ofDKA is usually 48 hours.
Potassium Replacement
/square6If K is <3.3 mEq, give 40 mEq/hour of K (2/3 asKCL, 1/3 as KPO
4) till K rises to ≥3.3.
/square6If K is, ≥3.3 but less than 5 mEq, give 20–30 mEq of
KCL/litre in IV fluids (2/3 as KCL, 1/3 as KPO4).
Keep checking K hrly. Maintain between 4–5 mEq/L.
/square6If K is ≥5 mEq, do not give any K. Monitor hourly.
Bicarbonate Replacement
/square6If pH is <7, sodium bicarbonate 50–100 mmol can
be given as IV infusion over 1 hour.
Treatment of the Precipitating Event
/square6Such as infection should be treated with antibiotics.
Complications of DKA
/square6Hypoglycemia due to overzealous insulin therapy.
/square6Hypokalemia due to insulin and bicarbonate
therapy.
/square6Cerebral edema—rare but frequently fatal complica-tion of DKA, most common in children. Cerebraledema most likely happens because of rapid decline
in plasma osmolality with treatment. It is mini-
mized by gradual replacement of sodium and water(maximal reduction in osmolality 3 mOsm/kgH
2O/
hour).
/square6ARDS.
/square6Mucormycosis (combination of hyperglycemia and
acidic pH facilitates fungus growth).
/square6Myocardial infarction.
/square6Vascular thrombosis due to dehydration and
increased viscosity of blood.
/square6Disseminated intravascular coagulation (rare).
/square6Acute circulatory failure due to dehydration.
Q.Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state (non-ketotic
hyperosmolar syndrome).
/square6Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state (HHS)  is chara-
cterized by severe hyperglycemia, hyperosmolality
and dehydration in the absence of significantketosis.
/square6It is more common type 2 diabetes, in middle-aged
and elderly.Precipitating Factors
/square6These are same as for DKA.
Pathogenesis
/square6Pathogenesis is same as DKA. In DKA, there is
complete or severe deficiency of insulin which leadsto formation of ketone bodies and acidosis. However,
in HHS, some amount of insulin is present which
is enough to prevent fatty acid oxidation and forma-tion of ketone bodies. Hence, in HHS, significantketosis and acidosis is absent.
/square6Dehydration and hyperglycemia are more severethan DKA.
Clinical Features
/square6Onset may be insidious over a period of days orweeks, with weakness, polyuria, and polydipsia.
/square6Signs of volume depletion and dehydration arepresent.
/square6Acidotic breathing (Kussmaul respirations) isabsent.
/square6Lethargy and confusion may be present which mayprogress to convulsions and deep coma.
Investigations
/square6Severe hyperglycemia is present (usually 600 mg/dLor more).
/square6Serum osmolality is markedly raised (>320 mOsm/
kg).
/square6Ketosis and acidosis are usually absent or mild.
/square6Serum sodium may be low in mild dehydration due
to urinary sodium losses. However, as dehydrationprogresses, serum sodium can exceed 140 mEq/L,contributing to increased serum osmolality.
/square6Urea and creatinine are usually elevated due to pre-renal azotemia.
Management
/square6Management of HHS is same as that of DKA withfollowing changes.
/square6Fluid deficit is more in HHS (average of 6–10 litres)
than DKA, hence more fluid is required. IV fluids
should be changed to 5% dextrose with 0.45% salinewhen the blood glucose falls to 300 mg/dL. It isimportant to maintain serum glucose between250–300 mg/dL till plasma osmolality is ≤315
mOsm/kg and patient is mentally alert.
/square6There is no role for bicarbonate therapy as pH is
not affected in HHS.
Prognosis
/square6The overall mortality rate of HHS is more than tentimes that of DKA. Prognosis is better when it is
recognized early and prompt therapy is instituted.

/square6Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus537
9Q.Enumerate the differences between DKA and HHS.
/square6Use of sodium bicarbonate is contraindicated as it
breaks down into carbon dioxide and water in thetissues increasing tissue acidosis. Many othertherapies have been tried without much benefitsuch as sodium dichloroacetate, tromethamine,and thiamine. Hemodialysis is useful in metformin
induced lactic acidosis.
/square6Despite energetic treatment, mortality rate is >50%.
Q.Define hypoglycemia. Discuss the causes, clinical
features, diagnosis and management of hypo-
glycemia.
/square6Hypoglycemia is low plasma glucose concentration
less than <70 mg/dL.
Causes
• Missed, delayed or inadequate meal
• Intense exercise• Alcohol• Drugs: Sulphonylureas, insulin, quinine, pentamidine• Malabsorption, e.g. celiac disease• Critical illness: Liver and renal failure, malaria• Endocrine disorders; Addison’s disease, insulinoma• Malignancies: Sarcomas• Factitious (deliberately induced)• Glycogen storage disorders• Inborn errors of metabolism
Clinical Features
Autonomic symptoms (due to acute activation of the
autonomic nervous system)
• Sweating• Trembling• Pounding heart• Hunger• AnxietyTABLE 9.3: Differences between DKA and HHS
Features DKA HHS
Common in Type 1 diabetes Type 2 diabetes
Evolution Over hours Over days or weeks
Alteration in sensorium Variable Stupor/coma
Acetone smell in breath Present Absent
Acidotic breathing (Kussmaul respirations) Present Absent
Abdominal pain, vomiting May be present Usually absent
Average fluid deficit 3–6 litres 6–10 litres
Blood glucose >250 >600
Arterial pH <7.3 >7.3
Serum bicarbonate (mEq/L) <15 >15
Blood/urine ketones Positive Absent or trace
Serum osmolality (mOsm/kg) Variable >320
Mortality 5–10% 20–30%
Q.Lactic acidosis.
/square6Lactic acidosis is the most common cause of meta-
bolic acidosis in hospitalized patients. It is associated
with elevated plasma lactate concentration above
4 mEq/L.
Causes of Lactic Acidosis
Type A lactic acidosis (associated with tissue hypoxia)
• Hypovolemia
• Cardiac failure• Sepsis• Cardiopulmonary arrest
Type B lactic acidosis (no tissue hypoxia)
• Biguanide therapy in type 2 diabetes with phenformin or
metformin
• Malignancy• Alcoholism• HIV infection
Clinical Features
/square6Nausea, vomiting.
/square6Presence of acidotic breathing (Kussmaul respira-
tions).
/square6Altered sensorium ranging from stupor to coma.
Investigations
/square6Plasma bicarbonate and pH are markedly reduced
(pH <7.2).
/square6Anion gap is increased.
/square6High lactic acid level (>4 mmol/L, normal is<2 mmol/L).
Treatment
/square6The main treatment in lactic acidosis is correcting
the underlying cause such as sepsis, hypovolemia,
cardiac failure.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
9538Neuroglycopenic symptoms (due to glucose deprivation to
the brain)
• Confusion
• Drowsiness
• Speech difficulty• Inability to concentrate• Incoordination• Focal neurological deficits
Non-specific
• Nausea
• Tiredness• Headache
/square6In most instances, patient can recognize the
symptoms of hypoglycemia and take appropriateaction which includes eating a snack or sugar, etc.However, in certain circumstances (e.g. during
sleep, or when distracted by other activities)
warning symptoms may not be perceived by thepatient, so that appropriate action is not taken andneuroglycopenia with reduced consciousnessoccurs.
/square6In diabetic patients who are accustomed to highblood sugar, symptoms of hypoglycemia may occurat higher blood sugar levels. Similarly patients whohave experienced recurrent hypoglycemia attacksmay not experience any symptoms even when the
blood glucose is well below 50 mg/dl (hypo-
glycemia unawareness).
Complications of Severe Hypoglycemia
• Impaired cognitive function
• Intellectual decline• Brain damage• Coma• Convulsions• Focal neurological lesions• Cardiac arrhythmias• Myocardial ischemia• Vitreous hemorrhage• Hypothermia• Accidents (including road traffic accidents) with injury
Measures to Prevent Hypoglycemia
/square6Do not skip meals after taking sulphonylurea or
insulin.
/square6Use the correct dose of insulin and oral antidiabeticagents as prescribed.
/square6Avoid unaccustomed intense exercise especially onempty stomach.
/square6Take light snacks in between major meals and alsoat bedtime.
/square6Monitor blood sugar frequently.
/square6Carry supply of fast-acting carbohydrate (sweets,
sugar, glucose tablets), and a glucagon injection
while going for long travel.Management of Hypoglycemia
/square6If the patient is conscious and able to swallow,glucose (50 gm) or any other fast acting source ofcarbohydrate (sweets, honey, etc.) can be given
orally.
/square6If the patient is in altered sensorium and unableto swallow, intravenous glucose (50 ml of 50%
dextrose) is given. Inj glucagon (1 mg by intra-muscular injection) can also be given, if IV accessis a problem. As soon as the patient is able toswallow, glucose should be given orally.
/square6If hypoglycemia has occurred after the use of a longacting insulin or drug such as glibenclamide, abovetreatment should be followed by an infusion of 10%
dextrose for few hours, to prevent recurrence of
hypoglycemia.
/square6If the patient fails to regain consciousness afterblood glucose is restored to normal, developmentof cerebral edema should be suspected. Cerebraledema has high mortality and morbidity, andshould be treated with mannitol and high-doseoxygen.
Q.Somogyi phenomenon and dawn phenomenon.
Somogyi Phenomenon
/square6It is also known as post-hypoglycemic hypergly-
cemia. It refers to rebound hyperglycemia due torelease of counter-regulatory hormones followingan episode of hypoglycemia.
/square6It usually happens in the morning after an episodeof hypoglycemia at midnight.
/square6Causes include  excess or ill-timed insulin, missed
meals or snacks and inadvertent insulin administra-tion
/square6It is important to recognize Somogyi phenomenonbecause control of morning hyperglycemia dependson decreasing the night dose of insulin instead ofincreasing it.
Diagnosing Somogyi Phenomenon
/square6Somogyi phenomenon should be suspected whenmorning hyperglycemia worsens or resists treat-
ment with increasing insulin doses. Other clues are
normal daytime blood sugar levels, and relativelylow HbA1C. The most important thing in the diag-nosis of Somogyi phenomenon is considering it inthe causes of morning hyperglycemia.
/square6Documenting nocturnal (3–4 am) hypoglycemiaconfirms the diagnosis.
Managing Somogyi Phenomenon
/square6Reduce night or bedtime insulin.
/square6Giving night time intermediate acting insulin(NPH/LENTE) at bedtime rather than before
dinner may help. Substitution of night dose NPH/

/square6Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus539
9LENTE with longer acting preparation (glargine,
detemir) may also help. These measures will causeinsulin effect to peak in the morning rather than atmidnight.
/square6Substitution of regular insulin with a fast-actinginsulin analog, such as Lispro, may be of some help.
/square6Patient should be advised to take a bedtime snackto prevent midnight hypoglycemia.
Dawn Phenomenon
/square6It is due to early morning surge of growth hormone,
which causes insulin resistance and early morning
hyperglycemia.
/square6It can be differentiated from Somogyi phenomenonby documenting the absence of midnight hypogly-
cemia.
/square6It is managed by increasing the night dose of insulin.
Q.Discuss the risk factors, pathology, clinical features,
diagnosis and management of diabetic nephro-
pathy.
/square6Diabetic nephropathy is glomerular sclerosis andfibrosis caused by the metabolic and hemodynamic
changes of diabetes mellitus. It manifests as slowly
progressive albuminuria with worsening hyper-tension and renal insufficiency.
/square6Diabetic nephropathy is one of the most commoncauses of end-stage renal disease (ESRD). It is an
important cause of morbidity and mortality.
/square6It is more common in type-1 than in type-2 diabetes.
Risk Factors for Developing Diabetic Nephropathy
• Genetic variables (decreased number of glomeruli)
• Family history of diabetic nephropathy• Poor control of blood glucose• Long duration of diabetes• Ethnicity (e.g. Asian races, Pima Indians)• Presence of hypertension• Dyslipidemia• Obesity• Smoking
Pathology
/square6There are three major histologic changes in the
glomeruli in diabetic nephropathy: Glomerularbasement membrane thickening; mesangialproliferation; and glomerular sclerosis.
/square6The first change to be seen is glomerular basementmembrane thickening which is associated withmicroalbuminuria. Subsequently, nodular deposits(the Kimmelstiel-Wilson lesion) develop, and
glomerulosclerosis worsens (heavy proteinuria
develops) until glomeruli are progressively lost andrenal function deteriorates.
/square6Renal failure usually takes ≥10 yr after the onset of
nephropathy to develop.Clinical Features
Diabetic nephropathy can be asymptomatic or present
with one of the following:
/square6Passing of foamy urine.
/square6Fatigue and foot edema secondary to hypoalbumi-nemia (if nephrotic range protienuria is present).
/square6In later stages, patients may develop symptoms andsigns of uremia (e.g. nausea, vomiting, anorexia).
/square6Hypertension is usually present.
Diagnosis
/square6Screening for microalbuminuria : Microalbuminuria
is urinary excretion of albumin in a range of 30 to
300 mg albumin/day. Microalbuminuria can
progress to macroalbunuria (excretion of >300 mgalbumin per day) or nephrotic range proteinuria(>3 gm/day) over many years. All diabetic patientsshould be screened for albuminuria at the time ofdiagnosis and yearly thereafter.
/square6Quantification of albumin excretion can be done bythe following methods.
– Measurement of albumin-to-creatinine ratio on
a spot urine test. A ratio of more than 30 mgalbumin/g creatinine is abnormal .
– 24-hour urine albumin excretion: >30 mg/
24 hours is abnormal.
/square6Renal function tests— urea, creatinine may be elevated
in advanced diabetic nephropathy .
/square6Ultrasound of kidneys is required to know the size
of kidneys and any parenchymal changes.
/square6Kidney biopsy is not routinely necessary unless other
kidney diseases are suspected such as glomerulo-
nephritis, etc.
Management
/square6If there is evidence of nephropathy, further
progression can be delayed by strict control of blood
glucose and control of blood pressure.
/square6ACE inhibitors not only reduce blood pressure butalso reduce proteinuria and progression of diabetic
nephropathy. Angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARB)
and calcium channel blockers such as amlodipine,cilnidipine, and diltiazem also have similar benefits.
/square6Newer mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist,
finerenone, have shown albuminuria reduction in
diabetic nephropathy.
/square6Statins are used to treat dyslipidemia. They alsoreduce proteinuria.
/square6Renal replacement therapy (dialysis) is required inend stage renal disease.
Q.Diabetic retinopathy.
/square6Diabetic retinopathy is one of the most common
causes of blindness in adults.
/square6Diabetic retinopathy (DR) is divided into two major
forms: Nonproliferative and proliferative, depend-

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
9540 ing on the absence or presence of abnormal new
blood vessels in the retina.
Pathogenesis
/square6The exact mechanism by which diabetes causes
retinopathy is unknown. Many theories have been
proposed. There are many mechanisms which canproduce retinopathy such as: increased productionof sorbitol by polyol pathway, activation of proteinkinase C (PKC), increased expression of growthfactors such as vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) and insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1),
hemodynamic changes, formation of advancedglycation endproducts (AGEs), oxidative stress,activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosteronesystem (RAAS), and subclinical inflammation andcapillary occlusion. Retinal capillary occlusion
causes chronic retinal hypoxia and stimulates new
vessel formation (neovascularization) and increasesvascular permeability (causing retinal leakage andexudation).
/square6Nonproliferative retinopathy (also called back-ground retinopathy) develops first and causesincreased capillary permeability, microaneurysms,hemorrhages, exudates, macular ischemia, andmacular edema.
/square6Proliferative retinopathy develops after nonproli-ferative retinopathy and is more severe. It ischaracterized by abnormal new vessel formation(neovascularization) which may rupture and causeretinal and vitreous hemorrhage. Neovasculariza-
tion is often accompanied by pre-retinal fibrous
tissue, which, along with the vitreous, can contract,resulting in traction retinal detachment.
Clinical Features
• Microaneurysms
• Retinal hemorrhages• Exudates• Cotton wool spots• Venous changes• Neovascularisation• Vitreous hemorrhage• Fibrosis
Diagnosis
/square6Fundoscopy
/square6Color fundus photography
/square6Fluorescein angiography
/square6Optical coherence tomography.
Management
/square6Severe non-proliferative and proliferative retino-
pathy is treated with retinal laser photocoagulation.
Photocoagulation is used to destroy areas of retinal
ischemia which stimulate neovascularisation, toseal leaking microaneurysms and reduce macularedema, and to gliose new vessels directly on the
retinal surface.
/square6Clinically significant macular edema is treated withintraocular injection of anti-VEGF drugs (e.g.
ranibizumab, bevacizumab, aflibercept) and/or
with focal laser photocoagulation.
/square6Vitrectomy may be used in selected cases wherevisual loss is due to recurrent vitreous hemorrhage
which has failed to clear, or retinal detachment
resulting from retinitis proliferans.
Prevention
/square6Good control of blood sugar and blood pressure.
/square6Regular screening for retinopathy at least once ayear in all diabetic patients.
Q.Discuss the classification, pathology, clinical features,
investigations and management of diabetic neuro-pathy.
Q.Autonomic neuropathy.
/square6Diabetic neuropathy is the most common complica-
tion of diabetes mellitus (DM), affecting as manyas 50% of patients with type 1 and type 2 DM.
/square6It is asymptomatic in the majority, although it cancause disabling symptoms in a few patients. Itsprevalence is higher with long duration of diabetesand poor control of blood sugar.
Classification
Symmetric polyneuropathy
Polyradiculopathies
• Lumbar polyradiculopathy (diabetic amyotrophy)• Thoracic polyradiculopathy
Mononeuropathies
• Cranial mononeuropathy• Peripheral mononeuropathy
Mononeuropathy multiplexAutonomic neuropathy
Pathology
/square6Nerve damage is probably due to accumulation of
advanced glycosylation end products and sorbitoland increased oxidative stress. The followingchanges are seen in nerve biopsy.
/square6Axonal degeneration of both myelinated andunmyelinated fibres.
/square6Thickening of Schwann cell basal lamina.
/square6Patchy, segmental demyelination.
/square6Thickened endoneural blood vessel walls andvascular occlusions.
Clinical Features
Symmetrical Polyneuropathy
/square6Distal symmetric sensorimotor polyneuropathy is
the most common type of diabetic neuropathy. It

/square6Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus541
9is characterized by progressive loss of distal
sensation, followed, in severe cases, by motorweakness.
/square6Symptoms include paraesthesiae in the feet and,rarely, in the hands, pain in the lower limbs (dull,aching and/or lancinating, worse at night), burning
sensations in the soles of the feet, cutaneous
hyperaesthesia and numbness in the feet.
/square6Examination shows loss of vibration sensation,altered proprioception distally and loss of tendonreflexes in the lower limbs. These features are dueto large nerve fiber involvement. Impairment of
pain, light touch and temperature is secondary to
loss of small fibers.
/square6Muscle weakness and wasting develop only inadvanced cases, but subclinical motor nerve dys-function is common.
/square6All the above features start initially in the feet, but
later as the disease advances, hands also get
involved.
Polyradiculopathies
/square6Lumbar polyradiculopathy (diabetic amyotrophy):  The
most common type of diabetic polyradiculopathyis high lumbar radiculopathy involving the L2, L3,and L4 roots. Patients present with thigh pain follo-wed by painful proximal weakness and wasting in
one leg. Tendon reflexes may be absent on the
affected side(s). This condition is thought to be dueto acute infarction of the involved nerve roots.Although recovery usually occurs within 12 months,
some deficits become permanent. Management ismainly supportive.
/square6Thoracic polyradiculopathy:  This is less common than
lumbar polyradiculopathy and affects the T4through T12 roots. Patients present with abdominalpain, sometimes in a band-like pattern. Diagnosisis confirmed by EMG studies.
Mononeuropathies
/square6Mononeuropathies are usually severe and of rapidonset but eventually recover.
/square6Cranial mononeuropathy—cranial nerves 3, 4 and6 are commonly affected. Patients present withunilateral pain, ptosis, and diplopia, with sparingof pupillary function. Facial mononeuropathy(Bell’s palsy) occurs more frequently in diabeticthan in nondiabetics.
/square6Peripheral mononeuropathy—median, femoral andsciatic nerves are commonly involved. These areusually compression palsies. Median nerve getscompressed at the wrist commonly leading tocarpal tunnel syndrome. Lateral popliteal nervecompression occasionally causes footdrop. Ulnar
mononeuropathy, either at the elbow or, less
commonly, at the wrist can also occur.Mononeuropathy Multiplex
/square6Multiple mononeuropathies in the same patient areknown as mononeuropathy multiplex (orasymmetric polyneuropathy).
Autonomic Neuropathy
/square6It can affect many organ systems, including cardio-
vascular, gastrointestinal, genitourinary, pupillary,
sudomotor and neuroendocrine systems.
/square6Either parasympathetic or sympathetic nerves maybe predominantly affected in one or more visceral
system.
Manifestations of Autonomic Neuropathy
Cardiovascular
• Postural hypotension• Resting tachycardia• Fixed heart rate
Gastrointestinal
• Dysphagia, due to esophageal atony• Gastroparesis (abdominal fullness, nausea and vomiting,
delayed gastric emptying)
• Constipation, diarrhea, incontinence
Genitourinary
• Bladder dysfunction
• Erectile dysfunction and retrograde ejaculation
Sudomotor
• Gustatory sweating• Anhidrosis; fissures in the feet
Vasomotor
• Feet feel cold, due to loss of skin vasomotor responses• Dependent edema, due to loss of vasomotor tone and
increased vascular permeability
Pupillary
• Decreased pupil size
• Resistance to mydriatics
• Delayed or absent reflexes to light
Investigations
/square6Simple clinical tests such as heart rate variation
during deep breathing, heart rate response tostanding and blood pressure response to standing.
/square6Baroreflex sensitivity using power spectral analysisof heart rate
/square6Nerve conduction studies.
/square6Assess glycemic control by FBS, PPBS and HbA1c.
Management
/square6Good control of diabetes.
/square6Pain control—neuropathic pain can be controlledby tricyclic antidepressants (amitriptyline), anti-convulsants (gabapentin, carbamazepine, phenytoin,pregabalin), topical capsaicin, opiates (tramadol,
oxycodone) and duloxetine. Any one or more of
these can be used.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
9542 /square6Autonomic neuropathy—postural hypotension can
be reduced by full length elastic stockings, increas-ing salt intake, fludrocortisone and α-adrenoceptor
agonist (midodrine). Gastroparesis may respond toprokinetic agents such as metoclopramide anddomperidone. Diarrhea responds to diphenoxylate,
loperamide and broad-spectrum antibiotics. Constipa-
tion can be managed by stimulant laxatives (senna).Bladder dysfunction can be managed by inter-mittent self-catheterization. Erectile dysfunction(impotence) by phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitors(sildenafil, vardenafil, tadalafil).
Q.Diabetic foot.
/square6Foot complications are common in diabetics and if
neglected can lead to amputation. Hence, foot careis very important in diabetics.
Etiology
/square6Both neuropathy and peripheral vascular diseaseplay an important role in the causation of diabeticfoot. Neuropathy promotes ulcer formation bydecreasing pain sensation and perception ofpressure. Peripheral vascular disease also contri-butes to ulcer formation and gangrene.
/square6Infection occurs as a secondary phenomenon follow-ing disruption of the protective epidermis.
Clinical Features
/square6Due to neuropathy —pain, paraesthesiae and numb-
ness, neuropathic ulcer.
/square6Due to ischemia —rest pain, cluadication, ischemic
ulcer, gangrene.
/square6Due to infection —cellulitis, abscess, osteomyelitis
and sepsis
Management
/square6Good control of blood sugar.
/square6Removal of callus skin.
/square6Treatment of infection with appropriate antibiotics.
/square6Avoid weight-bearing on calluses and ulcers.
/square6Treatment of peripheral vascular disease.
/square6Amputation if there is extensive tissue necrosis,gangrene and/or bony destruction.
/square6Specially manufactured and fitted orthotic footwearto prevent recurrence of ulceration and protect thefeet of patients with Charcot neuroarthropathy.
/square6Use of footwear made of microcellular rubber ishelpful to prevent callus formation and ulcers.
Q.What is gestational diabetes mellitus? Discuss the
pathophysiology, risk factors, diagnostic criteria,
and management of gestational diabetes.
/square6Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is defined asdiabetes with first onset or recognition duringpregnancy./square6Most GDM cases begin during pregnancy, but someGDM cases may be previously undetected type 1or type 2 diabetes.
Pathophysiology
/square6Pregnancy is characterized by insulin resistanceparticularly during the second half of pregnancy whichmay predispose some women to develop diabetes.
/square6Insulin resistance is due to placental secretion ofdiabetogenic hormones such as growth hormone,cortisol, placental lactogen, and progesterone, aswell as increased maternal adipose deposition,decreased exercise, and increased caloric intake.
/square6GDM develops when pancreas fails to compensatefor increased insulin resistance.
Risk Factors for Gestational Diabetes
/square6Obesity
/square6Age greater than 25 years
/square6Ethnicity (South Asian, black, Hispanic, NativeAmerican)
/square6Family history of diabetes.
/square6Previous glucose abnormalities in pregnancy.
/square6Previous macrosomia.
Diagnosis of GDM
One-step Strategy
/square6Perform a 75-g OGTT, with plasma glucosemeasurement when patient is fasting and at 1 and2 h, at 24–28 weeks of gestation in women notpreviously diagnosed with diabetes.
/square6The OGTT should be performed in the morningafter an overnight fast of at least 8 h.
/square6The diagnosis of GDM is made when any of thefollowing plasma glucose values are met or exceeded:
– Fasting: 92 mg/dL (5.1 mmol/L)
– 1 h: 180 mg/dL (10.0 mmol/L)
– 2 h: 153 mg/dL (8.5 mmol/L)
Two-step Strategy
/square6Step 1:  Perform a 50-g glucose tolerance test
(nonfasting), with plasma glucose measurement at
1 h, at 24–28 weeks of gestation in women not
previously diagnosed with overt diabetes. If theplasma glucose level measured 1 h after the load is≥140 mg/dL, proceed to a 100 g OGTT.
/square6Step 2:  The 100 g OGTT should be performed when
the patient is fasting.
/square6The diagnosis of GDM is made if at least two of thefollowing four plasma glucose levels (measured
fasting and 1 h, 2 h, 3 h after the OGTT) are met or
exceeded:
– Fasting: 95 mg/dL
– 1 h: 180 mg/dL
– 2 h: 155 mg/dL
– 3 h: 140 mg/dL

/square6Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus543
9Significance of GDM (Effects on Mother and Fetus)
/square6Gestational diabetes is associated with an increased
risk of later development of type 2 diabetes.Maternal morbidity is increased and there is a high
chance of ceasarean section. Pregnancy is also
associated with an increased risk of ketoacidosis.
/square6Increased risk of perinatal mortality and morbidityfor the baby. Maternal hyperglycemia stimulates
fetal insulin production which stimulates fetal
growth leading to macrosomia. Fetal macrosomiaincreases the risk of birth injury during delivery,and of subsequent neonatal hypoglycemia. Thereis also increased risk of polycythemia, hyper-bilirubinemia and hypocalcemia in the fetus.
Management of GDM
/square6Targets recommended for blood glucose control in
gestational diabetes mellitus:
– Fasting glucose <95 mg/dL and
– One-hour postprandial glucose <140 mg/dL or– Two-hour postprandial glucose <120 mg/dL
/square6All women with GDM should receive nutritional
counseling and nutrition therapy. Total caloriesshould be distributed wisely throughout the day.Consumption of refined carbohydrates should be
reduced. When nutritional therapy fails to maintain
glucose at normal levels, insulin should be used.
/square6All the oral antidiabetic agents are contraindicatedduring pregnancy except metformin for PCOS(polycystic ovarian syndrome).
/square6Only human insulin should be used during preg-nancy. 3–4 injections of short acting insulin may berequired to achieve good glucose control.
/square6Blood glucose should be monitored daily. Do notstrive for normoglycemia at the expense of hypo-glycemia.
Q.Metabolic syndrome (insulin resistance syndrome;
Syndrome X).
/square6The co-occurrence of metabolic risk factors
(abdominal obesity, hyperglycemia, dyslipidemia,and hypertension) is termed “metabolic syndrome”.Patients with metabolic syndrome are at risk of
developing type 2 diabetes and cardiovasculardisease.
/square6Abdominal obesity increases the risk of metabolic
syndrome. Excess abdominal fat leads to excess free
fatty acids in the portal vein, increasing fat accumu-lation in the liver. Fat also accumulates in musclecells leading to insulin resistance and hyperinsuli-nemia. Glucose metabolism is impaired, and dyslipi-demia and hypertension develop. Serum uric acid
level is usually elevated (increasing the risk of gout).
/square6Metabolic syndrome is diagnosed when any three
of the following five traits are present:
• Abdominal obesity, defined as a waist circumference in men
>40 inches and in women >35 inches.
• Serum triglycerides ≥150 mg/dL or drug treatment for
elevated triglycerides.
• Serum HDL cholesterol <40 mg/dL in men and <50 mg/dL
in women or drug treatment for low HDL-C.
• Blood pressure ≥130/85 mmHg or drug treatment for elevated
blood pressure.
• Fasting blood sugar ≥100 mg/dL or drug treatment for
elevated blood glucose.
Clinical Implications
The risk of following conditions is increased in people
with metabolic syndrome:
/square6Cardiovascular diseases
/square6Fatty liver disease
/square6Polycystic ovarian disease
/square6Obstructive sleep apnea
/square6Hyperuricemia and gout
/square6Chronic kidney disease
/square6Erectile dysfunction
Treatment
/square6Reduction of obesity is the main therapeutic goal.This can be achieved by regular exercise and lowfat, high fiber diet.
/square6Control of hypertension, dyslipidemia and hyper-glycemia by appropriate drugs. Metformin is usedto treat insulin resistance.
/square6Cessation of smoking.

10
544Q.What are rheumatic diseases?
/square6Rheumatic diseases are autoimmune and inflamma-
tory diseases that affect joints, muscles, bones, andorgans. These are usually painful, chronic, and pro-gressive diseases.
/square6These diseases are different from orthopedicproblems which also affect musculoskeletal system.
Q.What are the presenting complaints of rheumatic
diseases (musculoskeletal diseases)?
• Joint pain
• Joint stiffness (subjective feeling of inability to move freely)• Swelling of joints• Fatigue• Deformity (Joint, bone)• Skin rash• Systemic complaints (weight loss, loss of appetite, easy
fatigability, etc.)
Q.What are the investigations done in rheumatic
diseases?
/square6Plain X-rays.
/square6Synovial fluid analysis (arthrocentesis).
/square6Radionuclide bone scans (useful in detecting
Paget’s disease, and primary or secondary bone
tumors).
/square6Bone mineral density (BMD) measurements:  Useful to
diagnose and quantify osteoporosis. Dual energyX-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) is the current method
of choice.
/square6CT and MRI:  Useful to assess anatomically com-
plex structures, such as the spinal canal and facetjoints.
/square6Ultrasonography:  Useful in confirming soft tissue
changes such as a hip joint effusion, popliteal cystor thickened Achilles tendon.Diseases of Immune System,
Connective Tissue and Joints
/square6C-reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation
rate (ESR):  These are acute phase reactants and
elevated in infections and inflammation.
/square6Autoantibodies:  Theumatoid factor (RF), antinuclear
antibodies (ANA), antiphospholipid antibodies andanti-CCP (cyclic citrullinated peptide) antibodies.Anti-CCP has more specificity for diagnosingrheumatoid arthritis than RF.
/square6Biochemical tests (calcium, phosphorus, uric acid,alkaline phosphatase).
/square6Bone biopsy.
Q.What is arthrocentesis? Enumerate the indications
for arthrocentesis.
/square6Arthrocentesis is a procedure performed to collect
synovial fluid from joint spaces by inserting aneedle.
Indications
/square6Diagnosis of joint infection (septic arthritis).
/square6Diagnosis of crystal induced arthropathy (e.g.pseudogout).
/square6Administration of medications for acute or chronicarthritis.
/square6Symptomatic relief in large joint effusion.
/square6Evacuation of possible hemarthrosis in a traumaticeffusion.
/square6Identifying communication between the joint spaceand a laceration.
Contraindications
/square6Periarticular infection (chances of introducing theinfection into the joints.
/square6Coagulopathy.
Q.Enumerate the causes of monoarthritis.
/square6Monoarthritis refers to inflammation of only one
joint.

/square6Diseases of Immune System, Connective Tissue and Joints545
10Causes
• Septic arthritis
• Crystal induced arthritis (gout, pseudogout)• Monoarticular presentation of oligo- or polyarthritis (reactive
arthritis, psoriatic arthritis
• Rheumatoid arthritis, etc.• Trauma• Hemarthrosis• Foreign body reaction (e.g. plant thorn)• Avascular necrosis• Subchondral collapse or fracture
Q.Enumerate the causes of oligoarthritis.
/square6Oligoarthritis refers to arthritis affecting 2 to 4 joints.
Causes
• Osteoarthritis
• Seronegative spondyloarthropathies (reactive arthritis,
psoriatic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, IBD associatedarthritis)
• Juvenile idiopathic arthritis• Oligoarticular presentation of polyarthritis• Infections (bacterial endocarditis, neisseriae, mycobacteria)
Q.Enumerate the causes of polyarthritis.
/square6Polyarthritis refers to arthritis involving 5 or more
joints.
Infections: Gonococcal arthritis, rheumatic fever tuberculous
arthritis, syphilitic arthritis, bacterial endocarditis, Lymedisease, viral arthritis.
Rheumatic diseases: Rheumatoid arthritis, ankylosing spondy-
litis, SLE, systemic vasculitis, systemic sclerosis, polymyositis/
dermatomyositis, Still’s disease, Behçet syndrome, sarcoidosis.
Mechanical: Degenerative joint disease—osteoarthritis.
Malignancy: Paraneoplastic arthropathies.
Metabolic: Hypothyroidism, hyperparathyroidism, Cushings
disease, hemochromatosis, Wilson’s disease, ochronosis,
hyperlipoproteinemias.
Drug induced: Hydralazine, procainamide (drug induced lupus).
Q.Enumerate the causes of bone pain.
• Malignancy (primary or secondary bone tumors)
• Hematological malignancies such as myeloma and leukemia• Fracture• Paget’s disease• Osteoporosis• Osteomalacia• Chronic infection (osteomyelitis)• Osteonecrosis
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of osteoarthritis.
/square6Osteoarthritis (OA, osteoarthrosis) is the most
common form of arthritis./square6It is characterized by damage to articular cartilage,new bone formation and remodeling of joint.Inflammation is not a prominent feature of OA.
Epidemiology
/square6The prevalence of osteoarthritis increases withageing. By 65 years of age, 80% of people haveradiographic evidence of OA.
/square6It mainly affects weight bearing joints thoughcertain small joints can also be involved. The kneeand hip are most often involved.
/square6Knee OA is prevalent in all racial groups but hip, handand generalized OA are only prevalent in Caucasians.
/square6OA is more common in females.
Etiology and Pathogenesis
/square6OA was previously thought to be a normal conse-quence of aging, thereby leading to the term degenera-
tive joint disease. However, it is now realized that
multiple factors play a role in the causation of OA.
/square6There are many risk factors for the development ofOA which are as follows.
• Advanced age
• Female sex• Obesity• Occupation which involves repetitive loading of particular
joints (e.g. shipyard workers)
• Sports activities• Previous injury to joint• Muscle weakness• Proprioceptive deficits• Genetic factors• Acromegaly• Calcium crystal deposition disease
/square6Many insults such as trauma, repetitive loading,
metabolic, genetic or constitutional insults maydamage a synovial joint and trigger the repairprocess.
/square6The repair process involves new bone formationand remodeling of joint shape. New bone formationoccurs at the margins of the joint called osteophytes.This may result in anatomically altered but pain-freefunctioning joint (‘compensated’ OA). However,poor repair process may result in progressive symp-
toms and joint failure.
/square6Pathologically there is fissuring of the articular
cartilage surface (‘fibrillation’), development ofdeep vertical clefts, localized chondrocyte death
and decrease in cartilage thickness. Decrease in the
thickness of articular cartilage results in decreasein joint space. The bone immediately below thedamaged articular cartilage develops cysts andthere is increase in its trabecular thickness. Thesynovium also undergoes variable degrees of
hyperplasia. These synovial changes may some-
times resemble those of rheumatoid arthritis.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
10546 Clinical Features
/square6The main symptoms of OA are pain and restriction
of joint movement. Patient is usually above 45 years(often over 60 years).
/square6Pain is of insidious onset over months or years.Usually one or few joints are affected and weightbearing joints are commonly involved (such as kneeand hip). It is variable or intermittent over time
(‘good days, bad days’). It is worse on movement
and weight-bearing, and relieved by rest. Morningstiffness is less (<15 minutes) compare to rheuma-toid arthritis (>1 hour).
/square6Examination of the involved joint shows restrictedmovement (due to capsular thickening and block-ing by osteophyte), coarse crepitus on movement(due to rough articular surfaces), bony swelling(osteophyte) around joint margins, joint deformity,and joint-line tenderness.
/square6Muscle wasting is present around the involved joint.
/square6Generalized OA involves multiple joints. It initially
starts at interphalangeal joints (IPJs) of fingers
affecting distal interphalangeal joints (DIP) morethan proximal interphalangeal joints (PIP). Affectedjoints develop posterolateral swellings on each sideof the extensor tendon which enlarge and hardento become Heberden’s (DIP) and Bouchard’s (PIP)
nodes.
Investigations
/square6Blood counts, ESR and CRP are normal.
/square6Plain X-ray:  This shows reduced joint space, marginal
osteophytes and joint deformities.
/square6Synovial fluid analysis:  Predominantly viscous with
low turbidity; calcium pyrophosphate crystals maybe seen.
Management
Non-pharmacologic Therapy
/square6Short periods of rest during acute pain.
/square6Reduction of risk factors:  Weight loss if obese, pacing
of activities, use of a walking-stick for painful kneeor hip OA, etc.
/square6Physiotherapy including muscle strengtheningexercises.
Pharmacologic Therapy
/square6Analgesics:  Paracetamol up to 4 g/day. Oral NSAIDs
such as ibuprofen, diclofenac or aceclofenac, etc.can be used. Topical NSAIDs and capsaicin are alsohelpful in relieving the pain and inflammation.
/square6Steroids:  Intra-articular injection of corticosteroid
can be tried for severe pain.
Surgical Therapy
/square6Surgery is indicated if there is severe pain, pro-gressive immobility and functional impairment inspite of conservative measures. Osteotomy (for mal-
aligned joints), arthroscopic debridement, arthro-plasty, joint replacement, etc. are options.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of rheumatoid arthritis.
/square6Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic autoimmune
disease primarily involving joints. Its main feature
is symmetric, peripheral polyarthritis.
/square6RA occurs all over the world. Highest prevalence
is in Pima Indians of Arizona and lowest in blackAfricans and Chinese. It is more common in
females.
Etiology
/square6The exact cause of RA is unknown. It is an auto-
immune disease and is thought to result from the
interaction between patients genotype and environ-
ment.
/square6RA might be a manifestation of the response to aninfectious agent in a genetically susceptible host. A
number of infectious agents has been suspected
which include mycoplasma, Epstein-Barr virus(EBV), cytomegalovirus, parvovirus, and rubellavirus.
/square6Evidence for genetic predisposition is suggested byhigher incidence of RA in monozygotic twins thanin dizygotic twins and increased frequency ofdisease in first-degree relatives of patients. The riskof developing rheumatoid arthritis has beenassociated with HLA-DRB1 alleles.
/square6Female gender and cigarette smoking are riskfactors for the development of RA.
/square6Changes in the composition of intestinal bacteria
have also been implicated in rheumatoid arthritis.
Pathology
/square6RA is characterized by chronic inflammation,
granuloma formation and joint destruction.
/square6The earliest change is swelling and congestion ofthe synovial membrane which becomes infiltratedwith lymphocytes (CD4+ T cells), plasma cells andmacrophages. These inflammatory cells releasecytokines which stimulate the activation, prolifera-tion and differentiation of B cells into antibody-
producing plasma cells. These plasma cells produce
antibodies (rheumatoid factor, anti-cyclic citrullinatedpeptide [anti-CCP]) which contribute to jointdestruction.
/square6Inflammation of synovium leads to synovial hyper-trophy and effusion of synovial fluid into the jointspace leading to joint swelling. There is formationof inflammatory granulation tissue (pannus) whichspreads over and under the articular cartilage, anddamages it. Involved joint may develop fibrous or
bony ankylosis.

/square6Diseases of Immune System, Connective Tissue and Joints547
10/square6Muscles adjacent to inflamed joints atrophy and
there may be focal infiltration with lymphocytes.
/square6Subcutaneous nodules consist of a central area offibrinoid necrosis surrounded by radially arranged
(palisade) mononuclear cells with strands of
collagen.
/square6Rheumatoid vasculitis involves medium and smallarteries and venules, with infiltration by lympho-
cytes.
Clinical Features
Articular Features
/square6RA is more common in females. The peak age of
onset is in the fourth decade in females and slightlylater in males.
/square6The onset can be monoarticular, oligoarticular orpolyarticular.
/square6The most common presentation is insidious onsetof symmetric polyarthritis. The joints involved arewrist, metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints, wrist,proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joints, elbow,shoulder, knee, ankle, and MTP joints. Wrists, andmetacarpophalangeal joints of index and middle
fingers are most commonly involved. The distal
interphalangeal (DIP) joints of the fingers areusually spared. Symmetrical joint involvement iscommon in middle-aged women.
/square6Acute onset with asymmetrical polyarthritis is moreoften seen in elderly patients.
/square6Asymmetrical presentation becomes symmetricalas the disease progresses.
/square6In the palindromic-onset type, joints are affectedand resolve completely within hours to days andrecur after a period of time. This type may finallyevolve into classical symmetrical polyarticular
pattern.
/square6Predominant symptoms are stiffness, and swelling
of involved joints.
/square6Morning stiffness is a common feature of RA and isdefined as slowness or difficulty moving the jointswhen getting out of bed or after staying in one position
too long. Stiffness usually lasts more than one hour.
/square6Joint deformities may be present and often observedin hands. Swelling of the PIP joints gives rise tospindle-shaped appearance of the fingers. The DIP
joints are usually spared (in osteoarthritis DIP joints
are involved).
/square6Swan neck deformities in the fingers is due toextension of the PIP joints and flexion of the DIP
joints. Boutonniere deformities is due to flexion of
the PIP joints and extension of the DIP joints.
Extra-articular Features
Systemic features
/square6Low grade fever, weight loss, loss of appetite, andfatigue.
Musculoskeletal
/square6Muscle wasting, bursitis, tenosynovitis and osteo-
porosis. Osteoporosis and muscle-wasting resultfrom systemic inflammation.
Skin
/square6Rheumatoid nodules—these are subcutaneous
nodules seen in 25% of patients with RA. They arefirm, round masses and vary in size. They are seenover the pressure points like the olecranon process,
scapula, sacrum, Achilles tendon and the occiput.
Visceral structures like heart, lungs and CNS mayalso be involved. Most skin nodules do not requireany treatment. For painful nodules or those thatinterfere with joint motion or impinge upon nerves,local injection with a mixture of a steroid and local
anesthetic may cause regression.
/square6Other skin manifestations are ulcers, vasculitis,
gangrene and pyoderma gangrenosum.
Eye
/square6Episcleritis, scleritis.
Respiratory
/square6Pleural effusion is usually bilateral with low pleural
fluid glucose.
/square6Fibrosing alveolitis, nodules, bronchiolitis.
/square6Caplan’s syndrome—this is a combination ofrheumatoid arthritis and pneumoconiosis whichmanifests as multiple nodules in the lungs andinterstitial lung disease. This is seen in coal miners.
Cardiac
/square6Pericarditis, myocarditis, and endocarditis.
/square6Coronary vasculitis—can lead to myocardial
infarction.Figure 10.1 Pathology of rheumatoid arthritis
Figure 10.2 Deformities in rheumatoid arthritis


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
10548 /square6Aortitis/aortic regurgitation.
/square6Conduction disturbances including complete heart
block.
Hematological/reticuloendothelial
/square6Normocytic normochromic anemia
/square6Thrombocytosis
/square6Eosinophilia
/square6Splenomegaly (Felty’s syndrome)
Neurological
/square6Compression neuropathies—these are due to
compression of peripheral nerves by hypertrophiedsynovium or joint subluxation. For example, carpal
and tarsal tunnel syndromes.
/square6Cervical cord compression—due to subluxation of
atlantoaxial joint or at a subaxial level.
/square6Peripheral neuropathy.
/square6Mononeuritis multiplex.
Others
/square6Systemic vasculitis (skin, CNS, lungs, etc.)
/square6Amyloidosis is a rare complication of chronic
active disease and usually presents with nephroticsyndrome.
Diagnosis of Rheumatoid Arthritis
/square6Diagnosis should be suspected in any patient whopresents with chronic symmetric polyarthritis.American College of Rheumatology (ACR) and theEuropean League Against Rheumatism (EULAR)criteria for the classification of rheumatoid arthritisis as follows.
/square6A score of 6 or more fulfills the requirements fordefinite rheumatoid arthritis. A score of less than 6suggests possible RA which requires follow up.Investigations
/square6Chronic normocytic, normochromic anemia.
/square6ESR and CRP are elevated.
/square6Rheumatoid factor is present in more than 80% ofcases.
/square6Anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP)antibody—this is more specific than rheumatoidfactor for the diagnosis of RA.
/square6Antinuclear antibodies (ANA) can be found in 40%of cases.
/square6Synovial fluid analysis—usually shows a white cellcount of 5000 to 20,000/cumm, with predominant
neutrophils. Synovial fluid glucose is usually
normal, but may be low.
/square6X-rays of the hands, wrists and both feet show peri-articular osteopenia and marginal non-proliferative
erosions. Bone erosions may not be seen initially
up to 6 months.
Management
/square6The goals of treatment are: (1) Relief of pain, (2)reduction of inflammation, (3) protection ofarticular structures, (4) maintenance of function,and (5) control of systemic involvement.
Pharmacologic Therapy
Analgesics
/square6Acetaminophen (paracetamol), and NSAIDs(diclofenac, ibuprofen, aceclofenac) have bothanalgesic and anti-inflammatory properties but donot alter disease outcomes. Opioid analgesics such
as propoxyphene, tramadol, oxycodone, etc. are
also useful to control pain. Topical analgesicpreparations (e.g. capsaicin or diclofenac) can becombined along with oral agents.
TABLE 10.1: Diagnostic criteria for rheumatoid arthritis
Feature Score
Joint involvement
• 1 large joint (shoulder, elbow, hip, knee, ankle) 0
• 2–10 large joints 1
• 1–3 small joints (MCP, PIP, thumb IP, MTP, wrists) 2• 4–10 small joints 3
• >10 joints (at least 1 small joint) 5
Serology
• Negative RF (rheumatoid factor) and negative anti-CCP (anti-citrullinated protein antibody) 0
• Low-positive RF or low-positive anti-CCP antibodies (3 times ULN) 2
• High-positive RF or high-positive anti-CCP antibodies (>3 times ULN) 3
Acute-phase reactants
• Normal CRP and normal ESR 0
• Abnormal CRP or abnormal ESR 1
Duration of symptoms
• <6 weeks 0
•≥6 weeks 1

/square6Diseases of Immune System, Connective Tissue and Joints549
10DMARDs (disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs)
/square6These are slow-acting anti-rheumatic drugs. They
can reduce or prevent joint damage, preserve jointintegrity and function, and maintain economic
productivity. These include hydroxychloroquine,
sulfasalazine, methotrexate, and leflunomide. Outof these, methotrexate and hydroxychloroquineare commonly used. Other less commonly usedDMARDs are gold salts, D-penicillamine, azathio-prine, and cyclosporine.
/square6Methotrexate is given once a week in a dose of7.5–25 mg per week. Folic acid should be givenalong with methotrexate to prevent hematologicalside effect. Hydroxychloroquine is given at a dose
of 200–400 mg daily. Sulfasalazine is given at a dose
of 1 gm twice daily.
Steroids
/square6Examples are prednisolone, triamcinolone, etc.
these are used to suppress inflammation, and maybe administered orally, intravenously, or by intra-
articular injection. Prednisolone 7.5 mg/day or less
is relatively safe and can be used for extendedperiods of time. Doses higher than 7.5 mg/dayshould be used for the shortest time possible.Steroids are especially useful during initial controlof the disease and during flare ups.
Biologic agents
/square6These are biologic response modifiers and have
immunosuppressive effect.
/square6These are anti-TNF (tumor necrosis factor) agents
such as adalimumab, etanercept, and infliximab.
Non-TNF inhibitors are tocilizumab (interleukin-6inhibitor), abatacept (inhibits T-cell costimulation),and rituximab (anti-B cell).
Immunosuppressive agents
/square6Examples are azathioprine  and cyclophosphamide.
These are 3rd line ag ents and are rarely used. They
have serious side effects. IV cyclophosphamide maybe life saving in acute vasculitis causing organ damage.
Non-pharmacological Measures
/square6Patient education and counseling—patient shouldbe explained about the chronic nature of diseaseand the need for long term therapy. The side effectsof drugs should be explained and the need forfollow up stressed.
/square6Rest—this helps during acute arthritis and duringflare ups.
/square6Exercise—lack of exercise can result in loss of jointmobility, contractures, and muscle atrophy. Patientsshould exercise regularly to prevent and reversethese problems.
/square6Physiotherapy—this involves application of heat orcold to relieve pain or stiffness, ultrasound to teno-synovitis, passive and active exercises to improveand maintain joint motion range.Surgery
/square6Synovectomy of the wrist or finger tendon sheathsmay be required for pain relief or to prevent tendonrupture when medical therapy fails.
/square6Osteotomy, arthrodesis or arthroplasties may berequired in advanced disease when joint destruc-tion and deformities take place.
Q.Felty syndrome.
/square6Felty syndrome refers to severe rheumatoid arthritis
(RA) complicated by neutropenia and splenomegaly.Although the pathophysiology of Felty syndromeis not fully understood, evidence points to splenicsequestration and subsequent neutrophil destruc-tion.
Clinical Features
/square6Felty syndrome is characterized by rheumatoid
arthritis, neutropenia, and splenomegaly.
/square6Both articular and extra-articular features of rheu-
matoid arthritis are more severe in  Felty syndrome.
/square6Neutropenia (neutrophil count <2000/mm3) pre-
disposes to recurrent bacterial infections. Respiratorytract and skin infections due to bacteria are mostcommon.
/square6Splenomegaly can be detected clinically in mostpatients and sometimes can be massive.
Investigations
/square6Low neutrophil count (<2000/mm3) is required for
the diagnosis of Felty syndrome.
/square6Peripheral blood smear to rule out any other
hematological abnormality.
/square6Bone marrow shows myeloid hyperplasia with a
relative excess of immature forms.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen may be required to demon-strate splenomegaly.
/square6Autoantibodies other than rheumatoid factor (e.g.
ANA, anti-histone antibodies, ANCA, anti-dsDNA
antibodies) are commonly present in Felty syndrome.
Management
/square6Treatment is generally same as for rheumatoidarthritis.
/square6G-CSF (granulocyte colony stimulating factor) may
be required to rapidly reverse neutropenia in
patients with life-threatening or refractory bacterialinfection.
/square6Splenectomy is required for severe persistent
neutropenia and severe thrombocytopenia due to
hypersplenism.
Q.Rheumatoid factor (RF).
/square6Rheumatoid factor (RF) is an antibody directed
against the Fc portion of IgG.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
10550 /square6RF is usually of IgM class, although IgG and IgA
are also seen rarely.
/square6RF was first identified in patients with rheumatoidarthritis but also occurs in other conditions and in
some normal adults.
/square6It has more sensitivity than specificity in the
diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis. Its principal useis as a prognostic marker; a high titer at presentation
associates with a poorer prognosis.
Diseases Associated with RF Positivity
Rheumatic disorders
• Rheumatoid arthritis• Sjögren’s syndrome• Mixed connective tissue disease• Mixed cryoglobulinemia• SLE• Polymyositis/dermatomyositis
Nonrheumatic disorders
• Chronic infections (subacute bacterial endocarditis, hepatitis
B or C virus infection)
• Sarcoidosis• Malignancy• Primary biliary cirrhosis
Healthy individuals:  RF can be positive in up to four percent
of healthy individuals.
Q.Anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (anti-CCP) antibody.
/square6Citrullinated peptide is found in the keratin and
synovium. Antibodies directed against thesepeptides are called anti-CCP antibodies.
/square6Anti-CCP antibodies are helpful in the diagnosisof rheumatoid arthritis. Anti-CCP antibodies aremore specific but less sensitive than rheumatoidfactor in the diagnosis of RA. It has a sensitivity of
around 60% and specificity of around 90% for RA.
Testing for both rheumatoid factor and anti-CCPis more useful in excluding the diagnosis of RA thaneither of the tests alone. Anti-CCP is especiallyuseful in early diagnosis of RA when classic featuresare not present.
/square6Anti-CCP antibody positive patients with RA are atincreased risk of more rapid radiologic progressionand progressive joint damage.
/square6Anti-CCP antibody may also be positive in otherconditions such as active tuberculosis, SLE, Sjögren’s,
polymyositis, dermatomyositis, and scleroderma.
However, titers are less in these conditions thanin RA.
Q.What are spondyloarthropathies (seronegative
spondyloarthropathies)? Discuss the pathology
and general features of spondyloarthropathies.
/square6The term, spondyloarthritis (formerly spondylo-
arthropathy), is used to refer to a group ofinflammatory joint diseases sharing similar
pathogenesis, distinct from rheumatoid arthritis.They usually involve both spine and peripheraljoints (spondylo means spine and arthro meansjoints).
/square6They have overlapping articular and extra-articularfeatures.
/square6They have strong association with HLA-B27.
/square6Rheumatoid factor (RF) is negative. Hence, they arealso known as seronegative spondyloarthropathies.
/square6They are:
– Ankylosing spondylitis (AS)
– Reactive arthritis (ReA) including Reiter’s
syndrome
– Psoriatic arthritis
– Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) associated
spondylarthropathy
– Undifferentiated spondyloarthritis
Pathology
/square6There is non-specific synovitis in the joints which
is often indistinguishable from rheumatoid
synovitis.
/square6However, a distinctive feature is extrasynovialinflammation involving tendon insertion sites
(enthesitis), joint capsule, periarticular periosteum,
cartilage and subchondral bone.
/square6The inflammation resolves leaving behind fibrosiswhich may calcify and ossify leading to joint fusion.
In the spine, periarticular osteitis and periostitis
may result in bony spurs that bridge adjacentvertebral bodies (syndesmophytes) or protrude atsites of ligament attachment (e.g. calcaneal orolecranon ‘spurs’).
/square6Large central cartilaginous joints (sacroiliac,intervertebral, symphysis pubis) are particularlyinvolved.
Clinical Features Common to Seronegative Spondylo-arthropathies
• Asymmetrical inflammatory oligoarthritis (lower limb > upper
limb)
• Involvement of spine (spondylitis) and sacroiliac joints
• Inflammation at tendon or ligament insertion sites (enthesitis)
• Strong association with HLA-B27 and tendency for familial
aggregation
• Rheumatoid factor is usually negative
• Absence of nodules and other extra-articular features of RA
Extra-articular features
• Inflammation of mucosal surface: Conjunctivitis, buccal
ulceration, urethritis, prostatitis, bowel ulceration
• Inflammation in the eyes: Uveitis
• Pustular skin lesions, nail dystrophy
• Aortic root fibrosis (aortic incompetence, conduction defects)
• Erythema nodosum

/square6Diseases of Immune System, Connective Tissue and Joints551
10Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of ankylosing spondylitis.
/square6Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) is a chronic inflamma-
tory disease of the axial skeleton characterized by
back pain, progressive stiffening and fusion of thespine. It has predilection for the sacroiliac joints andspine.
/square6Ankylosis refers to a fibrous or bony bridging ofjoints. In the spine this includes bridging of one ormore intervertebral discs.
Etiology
/square6Exact etiology is unknown.
/square6Genetic factors—most patients are HLA-B27positive. Close relatives of patients with AS haveincreased risk of developing AS.
/square6Infections—increased fecal carriage of Klebsiella
aerogenes  occurs in patients with ankylosing
spondylitis.
Clinical Features
/square6It characteristically affects young adults with a peakage of onset between 20 and 30 years.
/square6Males are more commonly affected (male: femaleratio 3:1).
Articular Features
/square6Spine and lumbosacral joints are mainly involved.
/square6Insidious onset of low back pain and stiffness. Painand stiffness are worse in the morning and after
inactivity and are relieved by movement. Lumbo-
sacral area is usually the first and worst affectedregion, but rarely thoracic or cervical spine can getaffected first.
/square6As the disease progresses, whole spine is affected.As the spine becomes progressively ankylosed,spinal rigidity and secondary osteoporosis pre-dispose to spinal fracture, presenting as acute,severe, well-localized pain. Secondary spinal cordcompression is a rare complication.
/square6Examination shows restricted spinal mobility in alldirections, pain on sacroiliac compression, anddiminished chest expansion. Increasing flexion ofthe neck, increased thoracic kyphosis and loss of
normal lumbar lordosis may lead to a stooped
posture.
/square6Peripheral arthritis is seen in 30% of patients. Hips,knees, ankles and shoulders are mainly involved.
Peripheral arthritis may precede spinal involve-
ment in 10% of cases.
Extra-articular Features
/square6Enthesitis—inflammation at tendon or ligamentinsertion sites (Achilles tendon, iliac crest andgreater trochanter).
/square6Eye—anterior uveitis, conjunctivitis (20%)./square6Prostatitis (80% men).
/square6CVS—aortic regurgitation, pericarditis, MVP.
/square6RS—atypical upper lobe pulmonary fibrosis.
/square6CNS—cervical myelopathy (secondary to atlanto-axial dislocation), cauda equina syndrome.
/square6Kidneys—IgA nephropathy, secondary amyloidosis.
/square6GIT—mucosal ulcers.
Investigations
/square6ESR and CRP are usually elevated.
/square6Rheumatoid factor is negative or present in low titer.
/square6HLA B27 is usually positive.
/square6Radiographs:  Sacroiliac joint is usually first involved.
X-ray of sacroiliac joint may show irregularity andloss of cortical margins, widening of the joint space,
sclerosis, narrowing and fusion. Lateral thoraco-
lumbar spine X-ray may show anterior ‘squaring’of vertebrae due to erosion and sclerosis of theanterior corners, bridging syndesmophytes,ossification of the anterior longitudinal ligamentand facet joint fusion. All these changes produce
the typical ‘bamboo’ spine. Erosive changes may
be seen in the symphysis pubis, the ischialtuberosities and peripheral joints. Osteoporosis andatlantoaxial dislocation can occur.
Management
/square6The goals of treatment are to relieve pain and stiffness,
maintain skeletal mobility and prevent deformity.
Non-pharmacological Measures
/square6Education of the patient about the disease.
/square6Regular daily back extension exercises, including a
morning ‘warm-up’ routine.
/square6Avoid prolonged periods of inactivity.
/square6Poor bed and chair posture must be avoided.
Drug Therapy
/square6NSAIDs —relieve the symptoms but do not alter the
course of the disease.
/square6A long-acting NSAID at night is particularly helpfulfor marked morning stiffness.
/square6Anti-rheumatic drugs— sulfasalazine, methotrexate
or azathioprine may control peripheral arthritis buthave little effect on spine inflammation.
/square6Anti-TNF agents —etanercept, infliximab, and
adalimumab have been shown to improve signs and
symptoms of AS, including spinal mobility.
/square6Steroids —local corticosteroid injections are helpful
in persistent plantar fasciitis and enthesitis. Oral
steroids are useful in acute uveitis but should other-
wise be avoided.
Surgery
/square6Severe hip, knee or shoulder restriction may requiresurgery. Total hip replacement (total hip arthroplasty),

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
10552 cervical fusion for atlantoaxial subluxation, and
wedge osteotomy for severe flexion deformities ofthe spine are the surgical procedures that may berequired.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investiga-
tions, and management of reactive arthritis.
Q.Reiter syndrome.
/square6The term “reactive arthritis” refers to an arthritis
that is associated with a recent or co-existing extra-articular infection usually gastrointestinal or genito-urinary infections.
/square6Reiter syndrome refers to the triad of reactivearthritis, urethritis, and conjunctivitis.
Etiology
/square6Gastrointestinal infections : Salmonella, Shigella,
Campylobacter and Yersinia.
/square6Genitourinary infections:  Chlamydia, N. gonorrhea.
/square6Genetic predisposition:  The prevalence of the HLA-
B27 allele in patients is 63 to 96% vs 6 to 15% in
healthy white controls, thus supporting a geneticpredisposition.
Clinical Features
/square6Reactive arthritis commonly affects young men aged
16–35 years. However, it may occur at any age.
/square6Presentation is usually acute onset oligoarthritis
affecting the large and small joints of the lowerlimbs 1 to 3 weeks following sexual exposure or anattack of dysentery. Symptoms and signs of
urethritis or conjunctivitis may be minimal or
absent and there may be no clear history of priordysentery.
/square6Extra-articular features are Achilles tendonitis,
plantar fasciitis, circinate balanitis, keratoderma
blennorrhagica, nail dystrophy and buccal ulcers.Circinate balanitis is superficial erosions in acircular pattern on the coronal margin of the glanspenis. Keratoderma blennorrhagica are hyper-keratotic skin lesions with desquamating margins.
/square6Systemic features like fever, fatigue and weight losscan occur.
Investigations
/square6ESR and CRP are raised.
/square6Normocytic, normochromic anemia.
/square6Synovial fluid analysis—shows features of inflamma-
tion such as low viscosity, turbid appearance and
presence of giant macrophages (Reiter’s cells).
/square6Urine culture may grow N. gonorrhea  or Chlamydia.
/square6Stool culture—may grow the causative organism but
are usually negative by the time arthritis develops.
/square6Serologic testing—detection of antibodies against
the organism may help confirm previous dysentery./square6Rheumatoid factor and ANA are negative.
/square6Radiographic features:  Initially there are no changes.
With chronic disease, periarticular osteopenia, jointspace narrowing and marginal proliferative erosions
may develop. Periostitis, especially of metatarsals,
phalanges and pelvis, and large ‘fluffy’ calcanealspurs may be seen. Asymmetrical or unilateralsacroileitis and syndesmophytes can occur.
Management
/square6NSAIDs—control the pain and inflammation ofarthritis.
/square6Steroids—intra-articular or local corticosteroidinjections are helpful in relieving the symptoms ofarthritis or enthesitis. Systemic steroids are usedfor anterior uveitis.
/square6Antirheumatic drugs—sulfasalazine has been shownto be effective in reactive arthritis. Azathioprine ormethotrexate may be required in severe progressivearthritis and intractable keratoderma blennorr-hagica.
/square6Antibiotics—are used to treat acute infection.Chlamydial urethritis is treated with doxycycline.
Q.Discuss the clinical features, diagnosis, and manage-
ment of psoriatic arthritis.
/square6Psoriatic arthritis occurs in about 1 in 1000 of the
population and in 7% of patients with psoriasis.
/square6Psoriatic arthritis usually occurs in patients with
current or previous skin psoriasis. In some patients
it may precede the onset of psoriasis or may startsimultaneously with psoriasis. Rarely there may bearthritis without skin lesions.
/square6The onset is usually between 25 and 40 years of age.
/square6The exact cause of psoriatic arthritis is unknown.However, genetic, immunologic, and environmentalfactors all play a role in the causation of the disease.
Clinical Features
Articular Features
/square6Psoriatic arthritis usually presents as asymmetricaloligoarthritis. Both upper and lower limb joints canbe affected. The distal interphalangeal (DIP) jointsof fingers and toes are especially affected. Hand
deformity often results from tenosynovitis and soft
tissue contractures. Knees are affected often withvery large effusions.
Extra-articular Features
/square6Enthesitis  affects Achilles tendon, plantar fascia and
the pelvic bones.
/square6Tenosynovitis  affects the flexor tendons of the hands,
the extensor carpi ulnaris, or other sites.
/square6Dactylitis  is defined as uniform swelling of the soft
tissues of the digits. Such affected digits are also
called “sausage digit”.

/square6Diseases of Immune System, Connective Tissue and Joints553
10/square6Skin lesions  plaques with silvery white scales.
/square6Nail changes  include pitting, onycholysis, nailbed
hyperkeratosis, and splinter hemorrhages. Con-
junctivitis and uveitis.
Investigations
/square6ESR and CRP are elevated.
/square6Rheumatoid factor and ANA are usually negative.
/square6X-rays may be normal or show erosive changes with
new bone formation in the distal joints.
/square6MRI is more sensitive than plain X-rays in detectingarticular, periarticular, and soft-tissue inflamma-
tion.
Management
/square6General measures:  Regular exercise and attention to
posture should be prescribed as in those with
spondylitis. Splints and prolonged rest are avoidedbecause of the increased tendency to fibrous andbony ankylosis.
/square6NSAIDs:  These are first choice and help in pain relief
and control inflammation.
/square6Second line drugs:  These are indicated for persistent
arthritis. Examples are sulfasalazine methotrexateor azathioprine. Antimalarial agents such as
hydroxychloroquine should be avoided because itcan exacerbate psoriatic skin lesions.
/square6Surgery:  May be required for severe joint destruc-
tion causing immobility.
Q.Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) associated arthritis
(enteropathic arthritis).
/square6IBD associated arthritis refers to the arthropathies
associated with Crohn’s disease or ulcerative colitis.
/square6It is an acute inflammatory oligoarthritis mainlyinvolving large lower limb joints (i.e. knees, ankles,
hips) but upper limb joints such as wrists, elbowsand small joints of the fingers and toes can also beinvolved. Sacroiliac and spinal joint involvementis rare.
/square6Onset of arthritis may coincide with exacerbationsof inflammatory bowel disease.
Treatment
/square6NSAIDs.
/square6Sulfasalazine.
/square6Azathioprine and methotrexate in refractorycases.
Q.Comparison of various spondyloartropathies.
TABLE 10.2: Comparison of various spondyloartropathies
Feature Ankylosing spondylitis Reactive arthritis Psoriatic arthritis IBD associated arthritis
Age of onset Late teens to early Late teens to early 35–40 years Any age
adulthood adulthood
Male to female ratio More common in males More common in males Equal Equal
Sacroiliac joint Common Less common Less common Rare
involvement
Spondylitis Common Less common Less common Rare
Peripheral joint Rare Common Common Common
involvement
Course of disease Chronic Acute or chronic Chronic Acute or chronic
HLA-B27 95% 30–60% 20% 20%
Enthesitis Less common Common Less common Less common
Common extra-articular Eye, heart Eye, urinary tract, GIT Skin, nails, eye GIT, eye
involvement
Q.Enumerate the crystal induced arthropathies.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of gout.
/square6Crystal arthropathies are due to intra-articular
deposition of tiny crystals which are as follows.
• Gout: Due to uric acid
• Pseudogout: Due to calcium pyrophosphate• Acute arthritis in dialysis patients: Calcium oxalateGout
/square6Gout refers to disease that occurs in response to
the presence of monosodium urate (MSU) crystals
in joints, bones, and soft tissues.
Etiology
/square6It occurs due to hyperuricemia (normal value less
than 7 mg/dl). Causes of hyperuricemia are as
follows:

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
10554Increased intake
• Intake of purine-rich foods (e.g. liver, kidney, meat, mushrooms)• Beer is particularly rich in guanosine, a purine nucleoside
Increased production
• Hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyltransferase (HGPRT)
deficiency
• Phosphoribosylpyrophosphate (PRPP) synthetase overactivity• Glucose-6-phosphatase deficiency (glycogen storage disease,
type I)
•Increased nucleoprotein turnover in hematologic conditions:
Lymphoma, leukemia, hemolytic anemia
•Increased rates of cellular proliferation and cell death: Psoriasis,
cancer chemotherapy, radiation therapy, malignancies
• Obesity
Decreased renal excretion (most common cause of hyper-
uricemia)
• Inherited isolated renal tubular defect (‘under-excretors’)• Renal failure• Lead poisoning• Diabetic ketoacidosis• Lactic acidosis• Hypothyroidism• Drugs (thiazides, pyrazinamide, cyclosporine)
Epidemiology
/square6Gout is more common in males (male:female ratio
>10:1). Prevalence increases with age and increasing
serum uric acid concentration.
Clinical Features
Three types of clinical presentation can be recognizedin the natural history of gout.
1. Acute gouty arthritis
2. Recurrent and chronic gout
3. Chronic tophaceous gout
Acute Gout
/square6The typical attack of acute gouty arthritis, includes
the following clinical features:
/square6Usually involves single distal joint. Most commonly
involved joint is base of the great toe (first meta-tarsophalangeal joint, known as podagra), or the
knee. Other common sites (in order of decreasing
frequency) are the ankle, midfoot, knee, small jointsof hands, wrist and elbow. Spine and large proximaljoints are rarely involved and never as the first site.
/square6Onset of arthritis is sudden and there is severe pain,redness, and swelling of the affected joints.Complete resolution occurs within a few days toseveral weeks.
/square6There may be periarticular swelling and erythema,accompanying fever, malaise and even confusion,especially if a large joint such as the knee is involved.As the attack subsides, pruritus and desquamationof overlying skin are common.
/square6Acute attacks may also manifest as bursitis, teno-synovitis or cellulitis.Recurrent and Chronic Gout
/square6After an acute attack some people never have asecond episode. However, some may have a secondattack usually within 1 year and the frequency of
attacks gradually increases with time leading to
joint damage and chronic pain.
Chronic Tophaceous Gout
/square6Tophaceous gout is characterized by collections ofsolid urate in connective tissues (which may becalcified).
/square6These collections produce irregular firm nodules(‘tophi’) at the usual sites for nodules aroundextensor surfaces of fingers, hands, forearm,elbows, Achilles tendons and sometimes the helixof the ear. They may be clinically visible or detectedby imaging.
/square6Tophi are usually painless and nontender. Large tophimay ulcerate, discharging white gritty material.
Renal and Urinary Tract Manifestations
/square6Uric acid stones may form and cause renal colic.
/square6Urate crystal deposition in the interstitium of themedulla and pyramids leads to chronic inflamma-tion, fibrosis, glomerulosclerosis and secondarypyelonephritis.
Investigations
/square6Polarizing microscopy—definitive diagnosis requiresidentification of monosodium urate crystals in theaspirate from a joint, bursa or tophus.
/square6Histologic examination—birefringent urate crystalsmay be visible in biopsy specimens.
/square6Uric acid levels in the blood—these are elevated(>7 mg/dl). However, occasionally it can be normal(<7 mg/dl).
/square624-hour urinary uric acid excretion—can identify
uric acid over-producers.
/square6Urea, creatinine should be measured to rule out
renal dysfunction.
/square6Complete blood picture, ESR and peripheral bloodsmear should be done to rule out any myelo-proliferative disorders.
/square6X-rays—can assess the degree of joint damage.In early disease they are usually normal, but inadvanced disease, narrowing of joint space, sclerosis,cysts and osteophyte (changes of OA) may develop.Calcified tophi may be visible on X-rays.
Management
Acute Attack
/square6Oral NSAID (e.g. naproxen, diclofenac, indomethacin)can give effective pain relief and is the standardtreatment.
/square6Oral colchicine is effective in acute attacks but cancause vomiting and diarrhea.

/square6Diseases of Immune System, Connective Tissue and Joints555
10/square6Steroids, either oral or intra-articular can give rapid
relief. Can be used if symptoms are very severe.
/square6Aspiration of the joint gives instant relief and, whencombined with an intra-articular corticosteroid
injection effectively aborts the attack.
/square6Note that allopurinol and uricosuric drugs should
not be given during acute attack because they canworsen the attack.
Long-term Management
/square6Lifestyle changes:  Correct obesity and reduce alcohol
consumption. Avoid high purine diet (seafood, red
meat and offal). Stop diuretics if possible.
/square6Hypouricemic drugs:  Allopurinol  inhibits xanthine
oxidase and reduces conversion of hypoxanthineand xanthine to uric acid. Dosage is 100–300 mgdaily. The sharp reduction in tissue uric acid levelsafter allopurinol therapy can dissolve monosodium
urate crystals and trigger acute attacks. This risk
can be minimized by starting at low dose (100 mg).Since it can exacerbate acute attacks, it should bewithheld till the acute attack subsides. Febuxostat,
is a new drug and is a nonpurine selective inhibitorof xanthine oxidase. Febuxostat is given orally and
is metabolized mainly in the liver. In contrast, allo-
purinol and its metabolites are excreted primarilyby the kidney. Therefore, febuxostat can be usedin patients with renal impairment with no dosageadjustment.
/square6The goal of treatment is to reduce serum uric acidlevel to lower half of normal range. In most casesallopurinol will need to be continued indefinitely.
/square6Uricosuric drugs such as probenecid or sulfinpyra-zone also have equal efficacy to allopurinol but
require more frequent dosing. Uricosurics are
contraindicated in over-producers (they alreadyhave gross uricosuria), those with renal impairment(ineffective), and in patients with urolithiasis(increased stone formation).
/square6Pegloticase is a pegylated form of recombinanturicase an enzyme that converts urate to allantoin,
which is more soluble. Pegloticase is used in patients
with gout in whom other treatments have beenunsuccessful in lowering the serum urate level.
/square6Asymptomatic hyperuricemia need not be treatedunless the levels are very high (>10 mg/dl) or thereis strong family history of gout or urolithiasis.
Q.Calcium pyrophosphate arthritis (pseudogout;
chondrocalcinosis).
/square6Pseudogout is a form of arthritis that develops in
some people in response to the presence of calcium
pyrophosphate dihydrate (CPPD) crystals.
/square6The term “pseudogout” is commonly used becausethe symptoms of the disorder are very similar to
those caused by gout. Chondrocalcinosis refers tocrystal deposition in hyaline and/or fibrocartilage
without signs of arthritis.
/square6Pseudogout is rare under the age of 55. The knee(hyaline cartilage and menisci) is the most
commonly affected site, followed by the wrist and
pelvis.
Etiology
/square6The exact cause of crystal formation is not clear.The crystals first develop in the joint cartilage andeventually move to synovium and joint fluid wherethey cause inflammation. This causes pain andswelling.
/square6Frequent association with joint trauma (includingsurgery), hypomagnesemia, hyperparathyroidism,gout, hemochromatosis, and old age, suggests thatcalcium pyrophosphate crystal deposits are secon-
dary to degenerative or metabolic changes in the
affected tissues. Some cases are familial.
/square6Recent studies indicate that the ankyrin protein playsa major role in increased CPPD crystal formation.
Clinical Features
/square6Patients present with acute monoarthritis. Acute
attack resembles acute gout and is characterized by
severe pain, stiffness and swelling of affected joint.Knee is the commonest site, followed by wrist,shoulder, ankle and elbow. Some patients maydevelop chronic arthritis, early morning stiffness,and functional impairment. Acute attacks may be
superimposed on chronic arthritis.
/square6Joint trauma, intercurrent illness or surgery may
trigger an acute attack of pseudogout.
/square6Pseudogout should be differentiated from acutegouty arthritis and septic arthritis.
Investigations
/square6Demonstration of CPP crystals in synovial fluid.
/square6X-rays may show chondrocalcinosis.
/square6Screening for metabolic or familial causes shouldbe done in young patients.
Management
/square6Aspiration of joint effusion quickly reduces painand may alone be sufficient.
/square6Intra-articular injection of corticosteroid.
/square6Oral NSAIDs and colchicine.
Q.Discuss the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features,
diagnosis, and management of  systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE).
/square6Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronicautoimmune disease which affects multiple organsystems. It is the most common multisystem
connective tissue disease.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
10556 /square6Immunologic abnormalities, especially the produc-
tion of a number of antinuclear antibodies, areanother prominent feature of the disease.
/square6The prevalence is 50 to 150 per lakh population.
90% of affected patients are females, with peak
onset in the second and third decades. It is morecommon in urban than rural areas.
Etiology
/square6Exact etiology is unknown. Thought to be auto-immune.
/square6Genetic factors:  There is a high concordance rate of
SLE in monozygotic twins. It is more common inrelatives of SLE patients. Risk of SLE is increasedin those with HLA-B8, HLA-DR2, and HLA-DR3.
/square6Hormonal factors:  Female sex and hormonal influence
is a significant risk factor for SLE. Use of estrogen-containing contraceptive agents is associated withincreased risk of developing SLE. Elevated levelsof prolactin are seen in patients with SLE.
/square6Immune abnormalities:  SLE is primarily a disease
with abnormalities in immune regulation. Affectedpatients are not tolerant to their self-antigens, andconsequently develop an autoimmune response.Phagocytosis and clearing of immune complexes
and of apoptotic cells are defective in SLE.
/square6Environmental factors:  Some viruses, ultraviolet rays
and silica dust may increase the risk of developingSLE.
Pathogenesis
Figure 10.3
/square6Many components of intracellular and intra-nuclearmachinery act as autoantigens in SLE. In normalhealth these antigens are ‘hidden’ from the immunesystem and do not provoke an immune response.
/square6Interactions between susceptibility genes andenvironmental factors result in abnormal immuneresponses.
/square6This abnormal immune response results in theproduction of pathogenic autoantibodies andimmune complexes that deposit in tissues, activatecomplement, cause inflammation, and over timelead to irreversible organ damage.Clinical Features
/square6SLE affects almost all the organ systems.
Constitutional Symptoms
/square6Fatigue,  fever, weight loss and mild lymphadeno-
pathy.
Raynaud’s Phenomenon
/square6Cold or emotion-induced color changes of the digitsof the hands and/or feet is a frequent problem.
Musculoskeletal Features
/square6Joint symptoms occur in over 90% of patients with
SLE. The arthritis tends to be migratory and
asymmetrical. Only a few joints are usually affected,especially those of the hands. Joint deformities areusually rare.
/square6Avascular necrosis.
/square6Tenosynovitis.
Mucocutaneous Features
/square6The most common lesion is butterfly rash (erythemaover the cheeks and nose, which appears aftersun exposure). It spares the nasolabial folds. The
absence of papules and pustules helps distinguish
SLE from rosacea.
/square6Discoid rashes are characterized by hyperkeratosisand follicular plugging with a tendency to scar.
/square6Vasculitic skin lesions may include mottlederythema on the palms and fingers, periungualerythema, nail-fold infarcts, urticaria, and palpablepurpura.
/square6Other skin manifestations include livedo reticularis,photosensitivity, Raynaud’s phenomenon, andalopecia (hair loss).
/square6Mucous membrane manifestations are painless oraland/or nasal ulcers.
Figure 10.4 Butterfly rash


/square6Diseases of Immune System, Connective Tissue and Joints557
10Renal Features
/square6Kidney is the most commonly involved visceral
organ in SLE.
/square6Initially it may be asymptomatic. Hence, regularurine analysis for proteinuria, and serum creatininemeasurements are important.
/square6Proliferative glomerulonephritis (lupus nephritis)characterized by hematuria, proteinuria andurinary casts.
Cardiovascular Features
/square6Pericarditis leading to chest pain and pericardialeffusion.
/square6Myocarditis and sterile Libman-Sacks endocarditis.Libman-Sacks endocarditis is characterized by non-infectious vegetations, formed as a result of pro-
coagulability in association with antiphospholipid
antibodies.
/square6Increased risk of venous thromboembolism due to
the presence of antiphospholipid antibodies.
/square6Coronary vasculitis causing angina is rarely
reported.
Pulmonary Features
/square6Pleuritis and pleural effusion.
/square6Pneumonitis.
/square6Interstitial lung disease.
/square6Pulmonary hypertension.
/square6Alveolar hemorrhage.
/square6Shrinking or vanishing lung syndrome.
/square6Pulmonary embolism.
Neuropsychiatric Features
/square6Fatigue, headache, poor concentration.
/square6Visual hallucinations.
/square6Chorea (also associated with antiphospholipid
antibody syndrome).
/square6Organic psychosis.
/square6Transverse myelitis.
/square6Lymphocytic meningitis.
/square6Seizures.
Hematological Features
/square6Coombs’ positive hemolytic anemia.
/square6Pancytopenia (anemia, leucopenia and thrombo-
cytopenia) due to antibody-mediated destructionof peripheral blood cells.
/square6Splenomegaly and lymphadenopathy.
Gastrointestinal Features
/square6Nonspecific abdominal pain.
/square6SLE vasculitis can lead to pancreatitis, peritonitis,
and colitis.
/square6Mesenteric vasculitis.
/square6Hepatosplenomegaly.Ophthalmologic Features
/square6Keratoconjunctivitis sicca due to secondary Sjögrens
syndrome.
/square6Rare features are cotton wool exudates due toretinal vasculitis, episcleritis or scleritis, and uveitis.
Diagnosis
Investigations
/square6Complete blood count and differential count:
Anemia or pancytopenia is seen.
/square6Serum creatinine, urine analysis with micrscopy,
and 24-hour urinary protein excretion to rule outrenal involvement.
/square6ESR, CRP are elevated and complement levels (C3,and C4) are decreased.
/square6Autoantibody testing—antinuclear antibodies (ANA),
antiphospholipid antibodies, antibodies to double
stranded DNA and anti-Smith (Sm) antibodies maybe positive. Antinuclear antribody (ANA) test is the
best diagnostic test for SLE. ANA is positive in
significant titer (usually 1:160 or higher) in virtuallyall patients with SLE. However, ANA is not specific
for SLE and it can be positive in Sjögren’s syndrome,
scleroderma, and rheumatoid arthritis. Anti dsDNAand anti-Sm antibodies are highly specific for SLE.
Other antibodies that can be positive in SLE are anti-
bodies to single-stranded DNA and nucleoprotein(NP), antibodies to ribonucleoprotein (anti-RNP),
antibodies to Ro (SS-A) and La (SS-B)
/square6Chest X-ray— to look for pneumonitis, interstitial
lung disease, etc.
/square6CT or MRI brain in people who present with
seizures.
/square6Biopsy—biopsy of an involved organ (e.g. skin orkidney) is necessary in some cases.
Diagnostic Criteria
/square6Revised American College of Rheumatology (ACR)
criteria for SLE.
/square6A patient is classified as having SLE if the patient
has biopsy-proven lupus nephritis with ANA , or anti-dsDNA antibodies or if the patient satisfies 4 of the
following 11 diagnostic criteria (Table 10.3).
Management
/square6Educate the patient to avoid sun and UV light expo-sure, and to use sun block preparations.
/square6NSAIDs are enough for mild joint pain.
/square6Hydroxychloroquine (200–400 mg daily) is indicatedfor all patients with SLE regardless of disease seve-
rity because it decreases disease flares and decreasesmortality. It is especially useful in troublesome
cutaneous and joint symptoms.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
10558
/square6Steroids—steroids are required for mild to moderate
disease activity (e.g. rashes, synovitis, pleuro-
pericarditis). High dose steroids (oral prednisolone40–60 mg daily or IV methylprednisolone 500 mg-1 g) in combination with pulse iv cyclophospha-mide is required for life-threatening disease (i.e.renal, cerebral involvement, systemic vasculitis,
diffuse alveolar hemorrhage). For maintenancetherapy oral prednisone ≤7.5 mg once a day or its
equivalent can be used along with hydroxychloro-quine or azathioprine.
/square6Immunosuppressive drugs (azathioprine, metho-trexate, ciclosporin, tacrolimus, mycophenolatemofetil)—these are useful either alone or incombination with steroids for severe but non-life-
threatening manifestations or as step-down therapy
after cyclophosphamide.
/square6Belimumab inhibits the production of antibodies
by preventing the maturation of B cells into plasma
cells. It is indicated for active, autoantibody-positive SLE which is not responding to standardtherapy.
/square6Rituximab can be used in CNS lupus includingtransverse myelitis. It is also helpful in refractorycases of hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia.
/square6Anticoagulants—such as warfarin is required life-long for patients with the antiphospholipid antibodysyndrome with thrombotic events.TABLE 10.3: Diagnostic criteria for SLE
1. Malar rash
2. Discoid rash (erythematosus raised patches with adherent
keratotic scaling and follicular plugging)
3. Photosensitive rash4. Oral ulcers5. Pleuritis or pericarditis6. Non-erosive arthritis involving 2 or more peripheral joints7. Glomerulonephritis or proteinuria8. Seizures or psychosis—in the absence of offending drugs
or known metabolic derangements
9. Hemolytic anemia or leukopenia or lymphopenia or
thrombocytopenia
10. Positive ANA test that is not caused by a medication11. Immunologic laboratory abnormalities such as positive
antiphospholipid antibody or anti-dsDNA or anti-Sm
Q.Autoantibodies in SLE.
TABLE 10.4: Autoantibodies in SLE
Test Description
ANA (antinuclear antibody) Antinuclear antibodies are autoantibodies that bind to contents of the cell nucleus.
ANA is used as a screening test for diagnosing connective tissue diseases; ANA is
positive in significant titer (usually 1:160 or higher) in virtually all patients with
SLE. However, ANA is not specific for SLE and it can be positive in Sjögren syndrome,scleroderma, and rheumatoid arthritis. There are many subtypes of ANA which are
anti-dsDNA, anti-Sm, anti-SSA, anti-SSB, anti-ribosomal P, anti-RNP (ribonucleic
protein), etc.
Anti-dsDNA (double-stranded DNA) Has high specificity for the diagnosis of SLE; sensitivity only 70%. Anti-dsDNA
levels correlate with disease activity in SLE; high levels indicate more active
lupus.
Anti-Sm (Smith) Most specific antibody for SLE; only 30-40% sensitivity. They are associated with
central nervous system involvement, kidney disease, lung fibrosis and pericarditis
in SLE, but they are not associated with disease activity.
Anti-SSA (Sjögren syndrome A) or Present in 15% of patients with SLE and other connective-tissue diseases such as
Anti-SSB (Sjögren syndrome B) Sjögren syndrome.
Anti-ribosomal P Uncommon antibodies that may correlate with risk for CNS disease, including
increased risk of psychosis.
Anti-RNP (ribonucleic protein) Presence of this antibody indicates mixed connective-tissue disease with overlap
SLE, scleroderma, and myositis.
Anticardiolipin These are IgG/IgM antiphospholipid antibodies used to screen for antiphospholipid
antibody syndrome (APLA) which can occur in SLE.
Lupus anticoagulant (LA) LA is tested along with anticardiolipin antibody to diagnose APLA. It can be positive
in SLE. Lupus anticoagulant is a misnomer, as it is actually a prothrombotic agent.
Direct Coombs’ test Positive test indicates presence of antibodies on RBCs.Anti-histone Drug-induced lupus ANA antibodies are often of this type (e.g. with procainamide
or hydralazine. p-ANCA is positive in minocycline-induced drug-induced lupus).

/square6Diseases of Immune System, Connective Tissue and Joints559
10Q.Raynaud’s syndrome (Raynaud’s phenomenon).
/square6Raynaud’s syndrome is characterized by recurrent
vasospasm of the fingers and toes on exposure to
cold temperature or emotional stress. It is due to
an exaggerated vascular response and was firstdescribed by Maurice Raynaud’s, a medical student.
Types
Primary Raynaud’s Syndrome
/square6This is characterized by the occurrence of the vaso-spasm alone, without any underlying disorder.
Secondary Raynaud’s Syndrome
/square6This is occurrence of the vasospasm which is asso-ciated with an underl ying disorder, most commonly
an autoimmune disease.
Etiology
The cause of primary Raynaud’s syndrome remains
unknown. The causes of secondary Raynaud’s syn-
drome include the following:
/square6Autoimmune diseases: Progressive systemic sclerosis
(scleroderma), SLE, mixed connective-tissue disease,dermatomyositis and polymyositis, rheumatoid
arthritis, Sjögren syndrome, vasculitis.
/square6Infectious diseases: Hepatitis B and C, mycoplasma.
/square6Neoplastic diseases: Lymphoma, leukemia, myeloma,
waldenstrom macroglobulinemia, carcinoidsyndrome, paraneoplastic disorders.
/square6Environmental factors: Vibration injury, vinyl
chloride exposure, frostbite.
/square6Endocrine disorders: Acromegaly, myxedema,
pheochromocytoma.
/square6Hematologic diseases: Paroxysmal nocturnal hemo-
globinuria, polycythemia, cryoglobulinemia.
/square6Drugs: Oral contraceptives, ergot alkaloids, nicotine,
cocaine, bromocriptine, sympathomimetics.
Pathophysiology
/square6Various abnormalities have been found in thevessels of patients with Raynaud’s syndrome. Theseinclude endothelial dysfunction, deficiency of vaso-dilators such as nitric oxide, calcitonin gene-relatedpeptide, and increase in vasoconstrictors such as
endothelin- 1, neuropeptide Y and thrombo xane A2.
Various neural abnormalities leading to an exagge-
rated vasospasm have also been documented.
Clinical Features
/square6Females are affected more commonly than males.
/square6Acral areas such as digits of the fingers are affectedcommonly, but toes, nose, and ears are affectedoccasionally.
/square6Affected areas show color changes usually in the
order of white (pallor), blue (cyanosis), and red(hyperemia). Pallor is due to vasospasm. Cyanosis
is due to reduction of blood flow. Red color is dueto compensatory increase in blood flow (hyperemia).These color changes are usually transient but mayrarely lead to local ischemia and gangrene. Numb-ness and pain in the affected areas may be present.
/square6There may be signs and symptoms of an underlyingdisorder (such as connective tissue disease).
Investigations
/square6Routine blood tests.
/square6Antinuclear antibody (ANA) and rheumatoidfactor—may be positive in autoimmune diseases.
/square6Hepatitis panel: Positive for B or C infection in many
patients with cryoglobulinemia.
/square6Other tests as per the suspected underlying disease.
Treatment
/square6General measures: These include reassurance,
application of warmth to affected areas, stopping
of any offending drugs. Patient should avoid cold
environment.
/square6Vasodilators such as calcium channel blockers areuseful as they prevent vasospasm. Nifedipine is most
commonly used. Other drugs such as nicardipine,
amlodipine, or diltiazem can also be used. Trans-dermal nitroglycerin can be added in severe cases.
/square6Parenteral prostaglandins such as prostaglandin E1
(PGE1), prostacyclin (PGI2), and iloprost (a PGI2
analog) have been shown to be of benefit in severeattacks causing digital ischemia.
/square6Cervical sympathectomy is useful for patients with
recurrent attacks. It is more useful in patients with
primary Raynaud’s syndrome. Localized micro-surgical digital sympathectomy has been gainingsupport as an alternative to cervical sympathec-tomy.
/square6Any underlying disorder should be treated.Figure 10.5 Raynaud’s phenomenon


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
10560 Q.Discuss the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features,
diagnosis, and treatment of systemic sclerosis
(scleroderma, CREST syndrome).
/square6Systemic sclerosis (previously called ‘scleroderma’)is a multisystem connective tissue disorder affectingthe skin, internal organs and vasculature.
/square6Thickened skin (scleroderma) is the hallmark of this
disease.
/square6It is more common in females (4:1 female : male
ratio) and the peak age of onset is in the fourth andfifth decades.
/square6It is subdivided into diffuse cutaneous systemicsclerosis (DCSS) and limited cutaneous systemicsclerosis (LCSS). LCSS may have features of ‘CREST’syndrome (calcinosis, Raynaud’s, esophageal
involvement, sclerodactyly, telangiectasia).
Etiology and Pathogenesis
/square6The exact etiology is unknown.
/square6Many environmental factors such as exposure to
silica dust, vinyl chloride, epoxy resins and tri-chloroethylene have been suspected to play a role
in the causation of the disease.
/square6There is infiltration of skin by T lymphocytes and
abnormal fibroblast activation leading to excesscollagen formation and thickening of skin (sclero-
dactyly). Fibrosis can happen in any organ leading
to organ damage and functional impairment. Vesselwall inflammation and intimal thickening leads tonarrowing of blood vessels.
/square6Systemic sclerosis can overlap with other autoimmune
rheumatic disorders, e.g. sclerodermatomyositis
(tight skin and muscle weakness indistinguishablefrom polymyositis) and mixed connective tissuedisease.
Clinical Features
Skin Features
/square6Raynaud’s phenomenon is seen in almost allpatients and may precede other clinical features.
/square6Edematous swelling and erythema of the skin mayprecede skin thickening.
/square6Thickening and hardening of the skin. The skin offingers, hands and face is first affected. Skinbecomes taut and shiny. Skin creases disappear.Thickening of facial skin results in mask-like-facies
and microstomia (small mouth).
/square6Skin involvement restricted to sites distal to the
elbow or knee (apart from the face) is classified as‘limited cutaneous disease’ or CREST syndrome.
Involvement proximal to the knee and elbow and on
the trunk is classified as ‘diffuse cutaneous disease’.
Musculoskeletal Features
/square6Arthralgia
/square6Morning stiffness/square6Tenosynovitis
/square6Myositis
Gastrointestinal Features
/square6Smooth muscle atrophy and fibrosis in the eso-phagus lead to esophageal reflux, dysphagia and
odynophagia (painful dysphagia).
/square6Involvement of the stomach causes early satiety and
occasionally outlet obstruction.
/square6Vascular ectasia in the stomach (“watermelonstomach”) is frequent, and may cause recurrentgastrointestinal bleeding and anemia.
/square6Small and large bowel involvement may lead tomalabsorption due to bacterial overgrowth, bloating,pain or constipation and pseudo-obstruction.
Pulmonary Features
/square6Interstitial lung disease.
/square6Pulmonary hypertension leading to progressivedyspnea, right heart failure and angina.
/square6Increase in the incidence of lung cancer.
Cardiac Features
/square6Right heart failure and angina due to pulmonaryhypertension.
/square6Pericarditis.
/square6Myocardial fibrosis.
/square6Arrhythmias.
Renal Features
/square6Proteinuria.
/square6Scleroderma renal crisis—this is a life-threatening
renal disease and is more frequent in patients with
DCSS. It is characterized by acute onset of renalfailure and malignant hypertension.
Neurological Features
/square6Cranial, entrapment, peripheral, and autonomicneuropathies.
/square6CNS involvement, including headache, seizures,stroke, vascular disease, radiculopathy, and myelo-pathy.
Genitourinary Features
/square6Erectile dysfunction in men.
/square6Decreased vaginal lubrication or constriction of the
vaginal introitus in women leading to dyspareunia.
Diagnosis
/square6Systemic sclerosis is mainly a clinical diagnosis
based on the presence of typical skin thickening and
hardening (sclerosis) along with the presence of
extracutaneous features and characteristic autoanti-bodies.
/square6ESR is elevated. Anemia may be present.

/square6Diseases of Immune System, Connective Tissue and Joints561
10/square6Skin biopsy is usually not essential but required
if the diagnosis is in doubt. It is also helpful todifferentiate from other causes of skin thickening.
/square6Autoantibodies—presence of many autoantibodies
support the diagnosis of systemic sclerosis. These
include anti-centromere, anti-topoisomerase-I (Scl-70), anti-RNA polymerase, or U3-RNP antibodies.ANA with a nucleolar staining pattern is frequentlypresent.
/square6X-ray and CT scan chest if there is suspicion of ILD.
/square6Echocardiogram to rule out pulmonary hyper-tension and cardiac involvement.
/square6RFT and urine analysis to rule out renal damage.
Management
/square6Regular monitoring of BP, renal function tests andblood counts.
/square6Intravenous cyclophosphamide has been shown toslow the progression of the disease, but the drughas significant side effects.
/square6Corticosteroids and immunosuppressive agents areindicated in patients with myositis or interstitiallung disease.
/square6Raynaud’s phenomenon—avoidance of cold expo-sure and use of vasodilators such as calcium channel
blockers (nifedipine, amlodipine) or angiotensin IIreceptor blockers (e.g. valsartan) may be helpful.Sympathectomy may be tried in patients who donot respond to medical therapy.
/square6Esophageal dysmotility and acid reflux—this canbe improved by proton pump inhibitors, and pro-kinetic agents such as itopride.
/square6Infection of ulcerated skin should be treated withprompt antibiotic therapy.
/square6For severe digital ischemia, intermittent infusions
of epoprostenol may be helpful.
Q.Sarcoidosis.
Definition
/square6Sarcoidosis is a chronic, systemic disease of un-
known etiology characterized by the presence ofnon-caseating granulomas in one or more organ
systems.
/square6Although it is a systemic disease, lungs and lymphatic
system are affected more commonly.
/square6The clinical picture can vary from asymptomaticto multiorgan failure.
Epidemiology
/square6Sarcoidosis has worldwide distribution, but more
common in northern Europe, North America, and
Japan. It mainly affects whites. It is less common inAsian countries like China, Africa, India, and Russia.
/square6Most patients present between 20 and 40 years of
age. Women are affected more often than men./square6It occurs more commonly in nonsmokers unlike
other lung diseases which occur in smokers.
Etiology
/square6Exact cause of sarcoidosis is unknown. Availableevidence implicates exaggerated cellular immuneresponse as the etiological factor. Immunological
response is triggered by some antigens. Genetic
factors may also make a person more susceptible.
/square6A variety of exogenous agents, both infectious andnon-infectious, have been hypothesized as possible
causes of sarcoidosis. It has been suggested that an
exogenous agent induces immunologic sensitiza-tion, by acting as a “hapten” that binds to peptidesor alters major histocompatibility complex mole-cules. Some of the agents implicated are  Mycobac-
terium tuberculosis, atypical mycobacteria, viruses,
fungi, protozoa, pine pollen, etc. Beryllium can pro-
duce an identical illness in human beings. Recentworkers have found evidence of mycobacterialDNA in sarcoid tissue.
/square6Recurrence of disease can occur in the transplantedlung of patients who receive a transplant for end-stage sarcoidosis. In addition, sarcoidosis has beenreported to develop in the transplant recipient oftissue from a donor with sarcoidosis.
Pathogenesis
/square6The unknown antigen triggers a cell-mediatedimmune response. The first manifestation ofsarcoidosis is an accumulation CD4+ T lymphocytes
and mononuclear phagocytes in affected organs.This inflammatory process is followed by theformation of granulomas, aggregation of macro-
phages, epithelioid cells, and multinucleated giant
cells. Organ dysfunction results from the granulomasand accumulated inflammatory cells distorting thearchitecture of the affected tissue. Chronic inflamma-tion in the organs may lead to fibrosis and perma-nent damage.
/square6Hypercalcemia may occur because vitamin Danalogs are produced by activated macrophages.Nephrolithiasis and nephrocalcinosis may occur,sometimes leading to chronic kidney disease.
Clinical Manifestations
/square6Sarcoidosis is notable for its protean manifestationsand variable course. Any organ can be affected, butthe respiratory system is most commonly affected. Inaddition to the symptoms attributable to the involvedorgan systems, systemic symptoms like fever, malaise,
weight loss and joint pains can also occur.
/square6Respiratory system:  90% of patients with sarcoidosis
have pulmonary involvement on chest X-ray.Upper lobes tend to be more affected than the lower
lobes. Pleura and airways can also be affected.
Severe disease may lead to irreversible fibrosis and

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
10562 honeycombing. Patients usually present with
respiratory symptoms, such as dyspnea and cough.Crepitations may be heard on auscultation of lungs.Extrapulmonary disease can occur without con-comitant pulmonary involvement but rare.
/square6Hematologic:  Lymphocytopenia, anemia of chronic
disease, pancytopenia due to granulomatousinfiltration of bone marrow, splenic sequestrationcausing thrombocytopenia, leukopenia.
/square6CVS:  Involvement results in conduction defects,
arrhythmias, and heart failure.
/square6Nervous system:  Manifestations include facial nerve
palsy (most common manifestation), seizures,
meningitis, peripheral neuropathy, and psychiatricsymptoms. Virtually any part of the nervous systemcan be involved
/square6GIT:  Hepatosplenomegaly is common. Parotid
involvement leads to bilateral swelling. Pancreasalso can be involved.
/square6Skin: Cutaneous manifestations include papules,
plaques, nodules, erythema nodosum, infiltration
of old scars, and lupus pernio.
/square6Eye: Involvement takes the form of anterior or
posterior uveitis, conjunctival involvement, and
papilledema. Heerfordt’s syndrome or uveoparotid
fever, is a form of sarcoidosis in which anterioruveitis is accompanied by parotid gland enlarge-ment and often fever and facial palsy.
/square6Musculoskeletal system:  Effusion into joints, myalgia
and arthralgia may occur.
/square6Endocrine system: Diabetes insipidus may result
from hypothalamus lesions. Diabetes mellitus can
occur due to pancreas involvement. Hypopituitarism
and hypothyroidism have also been recorded.
Investigations
/square6Elevation of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)and calcium can occur. Hypercalcemia may bedue to elevated levels of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin Dproduced by macrophages within the granulomas.
Elevation in ACE is believed to be due to production
of the enzyme by epithelioid cells and macrophageswithin the granulomas.
/square6The diagnosis of sarcoidosis is confirmed by the
finding of non-caseating granulomas in the affected
organs, with appropriate additional investigationsto exclude other causes of granulomas. Flexiblebronchoscopy with transbronchial lung biopsy isparticularly useful.
/square6Kveim test is done by intradermal injection of avalidated antigen. Formation of a typical granu-loma is highly specific and sensitive. Tuberculin testis usually negative in sarcoidosis.
/square6Chest X-ray shows hilar lymphadenopathy, andinvolvement of the pulmonary parenchyma.Interstitial, alveolar and nodular pattern opacitiesmay also be seen./square6High resolution CT scan of chest shows mediastinallymphadenopathy and opacities better than chestX-ray.
/square6Gallium scanning may demonstrate uptake of this
isotope in regions involved with granulomatous
inflammation but not routinely recommended.Recently PET scanning is being preferred over galliumscanning. PET scan is very sensitive in detectingbone and other extrapulmonary sarcoidosis.
Natural History and Prognosis
/square6The natural history of sarcoidosis is variable,ranging from spontaneous resolution to progressive
disease. Patients with progressive disease can
become disabled from significant organ systeminvolvement, particularly respiratory failure frominterstitial lung disease.
Treatment
/square6Because sarcoidosis has a variable natural course,it is often difficult to decide whether and whentherapy should be started. Serial evaluation can
assess whether the disease is improving sponta-
neously. Whenever there is significant ocular,myocardial, or neurologic involvement, treatmentis started early. Intrathoracic lymph node involve-ment does not require treatment, but lung paren-chymal involvement requires treatment.
/square6Corticosteroids are the drugs of choice to suppressinflammation. Prednisolone is started at a dose of0.5–1 mg/kg/day, and continued for several weeksand then tapered to a lower dose which is continued
for 6–12 months. The optimum duration of therapy
is not known and needs to be individualized basedon response. Premature discontinuation of therapymay lead to recurrence of disease. Alternative agentsinclude methotrexate (7.5 to 15 mg per week), orother immunosuppressive or cytotoxic agents such
as cyclophosphamide and azathioprine.
/square6Hydroxychloroquine has been used for serious and
disfiguring cutaneous sarcoidosis. Dose is 250 to750 mg/day for 6 to 9 months.
/square6Tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor antagonistssuch as etanercept and infliximab have shown benefitin some trials.
/square6In patients with severe, end-stage pulmonary disease,lung transplantation is an important option, but thedisease may affect the transplanted lungs also.
Q.What are idiopathic inflammatory myopathies?
Q.Discuss the etiology, classification, clinical features,
diagnosis, and management of polymyositis-
dermatomyositis.
/square6Idiopathic inflammatory myopathies are rare connec-
tive tissue disorders characterized by the presence
of muscle inflammation (myositis) and weakness.

/square6Diseases of Immune System, Connective Tissue and Joints563
10/square6These include polymyositis, dermatomyositis and
inclusion body myositis.
/square6The term polymyositis is used when the conditionspares the skin and the term dermatomyositis is
used when the condition involves the skin.
/square6They are more common in females (2:1 ratio).
Etiology
/square6The exact etiology is unknown.
/square6Genetic factors may play a role.
/square6Other connective tissue diseases such as SLE or
vasculitis can cause myositis.
/square6They may be associated with malignancy.
Clinical Features
Polymyositis
/square6The onset is usually between 40 and 60 years of ageand is insidious.
/square6The most common presentation is symmetricalproximal muscle weakness, usually affecting thelower limbs first. There is difficulty in getting fromsitting position and climbing stairs. Muscle pain
may be present. Respiratory or pharyngeal muscle
involvement leads to dyspnea and aspiration.
/square6Systemic features such as fever, weight loss andfatigue may be present.
/square6Interstitial lung disease causes progressive dyspneaand dry cough.
Dermatomyositis
/square6Muscle manifestations are similar to polymyositis.
/square6Skin manifestations are as follows.
/square6Gottron’s papules are scaly erythematous plaquesor papules occurring over the extensor surfaces ofinterphalangeal joints.
/square6Heliotrope rash is a violaceous eruption on theupper eyelids, often accompanied by eyelid edema.
/square6Shawl sign and V sign—shawl sign is an erythema-tous lesion occurring over the chest and shoulders(shawl distribution) or in a V-shaped distributionover the anterior neck and chest.
/square6Periungual nail-fold capillaries are often abnormal.
/square6Mechanic’s hands—this is roughening and crackingof the skin of the tips and lateral aspects of thefingers resembling those of a manual laborer.
/square6Systemic features such as fever, weight loss andfatigue may be present.
Diagnosis
/square6These conditions should be suspected when there
is proximal muscle weakness without neuropathy,
and there is evidence of systemic disease.
/square6Creatine kinase (CK) is usually elevated.
/square6Electromyography (EMG) to confirm myopathyand exclude neuropathy./square6Muscle biopsy shows features of inflammation,necrosis, and regeneration. MRI is useful to identifyareas of abnormal muscle for biopsy.
/square6CT scans of chest/abdomen/pelvis, and mammo-
graphy to rule out any underlying malignancy.
Management
/square6Steroids:  Oral steroids (e.g. prednisolone 40–60 mg
daily) are the mainstay of treatment. Intravenous
steroids (methylprednisolone 1 g daily for 3 days)
may be required for severe weakness or respiratoryor pharyngeal weakness. Steroids should be taperedslowly to a maintenance dose of 5 to 7.5 mg per day.
/square6Immunosuppressive agents:  These are required if there
is inadequate response to steroids. Azathioprine andmethotrexate are the first choice and ciclosporin,cyclophosphamide, tacrolimus and intravenousimmunoglobulin are alternatives.
/square6General measures:  Physiotherapy, avoidance of sun-
light, prevention of opportunistic infections, etc.
Q.Marfan syndrome.
/square6Marfan syndrome is an autosomal dominant
inherited disorder of connective tissue. It occurs dueto mutation of Marfan syndrome gene (MFS1) for
fibrillin on chromosome 15q21. It affects approxi-
mately 1 in 5000 population.
Clinical Features
/square6Marfan syndrome affects the heart (aortic aneurysm
and dissection, mitral valve prolapse), eye (dislocatedlenses, retinal detachment) and skeleton (tall, thin
body build with long arms, legs and fingers; scoliosis
and pectus deformity). For clinical diagnosis, twoout of three major systems should be affected.
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray may be normal or show signs of aorticaneurysm and widened mediastinum. Scoliosismay also be seen.
/square6Echocardiography shows mitral valve prolapse,
mitral regurgitation, and aortic root dilatation.
/square6Genetic study to demonstrate Marfan syndrome
gene (MFS1).
Management
/square6Beta-blocker therapy slows the rate of dilatation of
the aortic root.
/square6Prolonged exertion should be avoided because ofcardiac defects.
/square6Aortic root diameter of 5 cm or more requires aorticroot replacement.
Q.Inclusion body myositis.
/square6This is the most common disease of muscle in
patients over the age of 50.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
10564 /square6It affects men more often than women.
/square6Distal muscle weakness is more common than
proximal weakness. Other clinical features aresimilar to polymyositis.
/square6Investigation findings are similar to polymyositisand dermatomyositis. However, muscle biopsy showscharacteristic rimmed vacuoles and filamentousinclusions in the nucleus and cytoplasm of muscle
fibers (hence called inclusion body myositis).
/square6Treatment is with steroids and immunosuppressive
agents. However, the response is poor.
Q.Discuss the clinical features, investigations and
management of Sjögren syndrome.
Q.Keratoconjuctivitis sicca.
/square6Sjögren syndrome (SS) is an autoimmune disorder
of unknown etiology characterized by lymphocyticinfiltration of exocrine glands, leading to glandularfibrosis and exocrine failure. Salivary and lacrimalglands are commonly involved.
/square6Sjögren syndrome can be classified into primary SSor secondary SS. Primary SS is not associated withother diseases. Secondary SS occurs as a complica-tion of other rheumatic disorders such as rheuma-
toid arthritis, SLE, polymyositis or scleroderma.
Clinical Features
/square6Patients are generally old (mean age 50 years) and
more than 90% are women.
Exocrine Gland Involvement
/square6Dry eyes (keratoconjunctivitis sicca) occur due tolacrimal gland involvement. The ocular symptomsof dry eyes are irritation, grittiness, and a foreignbody sensation. Conjunctivitis and blepharitis are
frequent but keratitis can also occur.
/square6Dry mouth (xerostomia) occurs due to salivary gland
involvement. Salivary glands may be enlarged.Decreased salivary secretion leads to difficulty
swallowing dry food without water. Oral dryness
leads to increased risk of dental caries and perio-dontal disease.
/square6Vaginal dryness can lead to dyspareunia.
/square6Exocrine gland involvement in the skin may leadto xerosis.
Extra-glandular Features
/square6Musculoskeletal system:  Non-erosive arthritis.
/square6Nervous system:  Peripheral neuropathy.
/square6Kidneys:  Glomerulonephritis, renal tubular acidosis.
/square6Heart:  Pericarditis.
/square6RS: Interstitial lung disease.
/square6GIT:  Dysphagia.
/square6Lymphadenopathy.
/square6Thyroid:  Hypothyroidism./square6Vascular:  Vasculitis, Raynaud’s phenomenon.
/square6Increased incidence of lymphoma.
/square6Low-grade fever, fatigue.
Investigations
/square6Anemia, leucopenia, thrombocytopenia.
/square6Elevated ESR.
/square6Cryoglobulinemia.
/square6Autoantibodies: ANA and rheumatoid factor are
usually positive. Other antibodies which can bepresent are SS-A (anti-Ro), SS-B (anti-La) and gastric
parietal cell antibodies.
/square6Schirmer test:  It is done by placing absorbent paper
strips in the lower lacrimal sac for 5 minutes. Lessthan 5 mm of wetting is abnormal.
/square6Biopsy:  Diagnosis can be confirmed by finding
lymphocytic infiltrate in the minor salivary glandson lip biopsy.
Management
/square6Artificial lubrication is the mainstay of symptomatictreatment. Artificial tears such as hypromellose
drops can be used for the eyes. Occlusion of the
lacrimal ducts can increase the tear content of theeyes. Artificial saliva and oral gels can be tried forxerostomia. Stimulation of saliva flow by sugar-freechewing gum or lozenges may be helpful. Oralhygiene is important to prevent caries and gum
problems. Vaginal dryness is treated with lubricants
such as K-Y jelly.
/square6Extra-glandular manifestations can be treated bysteroids and immunosuppressive drugs such as
azathioprine. Immunosuppression has no effect on
sicca symptoms.
Q.Define vasculitis. Discuss the classification, clinical
features, investigations and management of
vasculitis (systemic vasculitis).
/square6Vasculitis refers to inflammation of blood vessels.Vasculitis can affect any blood vessel—arteries,arterioles, veins, venules, or capillaries.
/square6Vasculitis may be primary or secondary. Primary
vasculitis mainly affects blood vessels and has no
known cause. Secondary vasculitis may be triggeredby an infection, a drug, or a toxin or may occur aspart of another inflammatory disorder or cancer.
/square6Exact etiology is unknown, although geographic,environmental and genetic factors may play a role.
/square6Vasculitis may lead to blockage of the involvedblood vessels and this leads to ischemia of the
tissues supplied by the vessel.
Classification
/square6Vasculitis has been classified based on the pre-
dominant size of blood vessels affected. However,there is often substantial overlap.

/square6Diseases of Immune System, Connective Tissue and Joints565
10Large vessel vasculitis
• Giant cell arteritis• Takayasu’s arteritis
Medium vessel vasculitis
• Polyarteritis nodosa (PAN)• Kawasaki disease
Small vessel vasculitis
• Microscopic polyangiitis• Wegener’s granulomatosis• Churg-Strauss syndrome• Henoch-Schönlein purpura• Mixed essential cryoglobulinemia• Hypersensitivity vasculitis (due to drugs, etc.)• Vasculitis secondary to connective tissue disorders (SLE, RA)• Vasculitis secondary to viral infection (hepatitis B and C)
Clinical Features
/square6Clinical features are produced due to a combination
of local tissue ischemia caused by vessel block and
the systemic inflammation.
/square6Systemic vasculitis should be suspected in a patient
with fever, weight loss, fatigue, multisystem involve-ment, rashes, raised inflammatory markers and
abnormal urinalysis.
Systemic: Fever, night sweats, weight loss.
Musculoskeletal: Arthralgia, myalgia.
Ear, nose and throat : Epistaxis, recurrent sinusitis, deafness.
Ophthalmologic:  Vision loss in giant cell arteritis (temporal
arteritis).
Respiratory:  Cough, hemoptysis, wheezing.
Gastrointestinal : Mouth ulcers, diarrhea, abdominal pain (due
to mucosal inflammation or enteric ischemia).
Neurological : Mononeuritis multiplex, polyneuropathy,
radiculopathy, stroke.
Renal: Hematuria, proteinuria.
Rashes: Palpable purpura, pulp infarcts, ulceration, livedo
reticularis.
Investigations
/square6ESR and CRP are elevated.
/square6Routine biochemistry.
/square6Urinalysis (may show proteinuria and hematuria).
/square6Autoantibodies (ANA, antineutrophil cytoplasmic
antibodies (ANCA), RA factor, cryoglobulins).
/square6Hepatitis-B and C serology.
/square6HIV ELISA.
/square6Biopsy:  Biopsy from an involved site such as skin,
nasal mucosa can show vessel wall inflammation.
/square6Visceral angiography to detect microaneurysms(e.g. classical polyarteritis nodosa) is useful ifbiopsy is difficult to take from involved tissue.
Management
/square6Management depends on the nature and severityof the vasculitis./square6Hypersensitivity vasculitis may respond to with-drawal of the offending drug, antihistamines anda short course of steroids.
/square6Oral steroids plus cytotoxic (cyclophosphamide)
drugs are required for severe systemic vasculitis
with multiorgan involvement.
/square6Azathioprine and methotrexate can be used in lesssevere forms of vasculitis and as maintenance
therapy after remission has been induced by cyclo-
phosphamide.
Q.Giant cell arteritis (temporal arteritis).
/square6Temporal arteritis (giant cell arteritis) is a systemic
inflammatory vasculitis occurring commonly inolder individuals.
/square6Giant cell arteritis (GCA) commonly affects thesuperficial temporal arteries and its branches—hence the term temporal arteritis. In addition, GCAalso affects the ophthalmic, occipital, vertebral, andposterior ciliary arteries. It can cause permanentblindness by causing occlusion of the posterior
ciliary or central retinal arteries.
Pathophysiology
/square6Basically there is inflammation of the vessel wall
leading to edema of the vessel wall and occlusion.Biopsy shows inflammatory cell infiltration into allthree layers of the vessel wall.
Clinical Features
/square6GCA may begin with constitutional symptoms suchas fever, anorexia, fever, malaise, and myalgia.
/square6Headache, orbital or frontotemporal, dull and cons-tant in nature, aggravated by cold temperatures.
/square6Jaw claudication noted as fatigue or discomfort ofthe jaw muscles during chewing. Jaw claudication
is almost pathognomonic of temporal arteritis, and
it is a result of ischemia of the maxillary arterysupplying the masseter muscles.
/square6Ophthalmologic symptoms:  Unilateral visual blurring
or vision loss, or occasionally diplopia. A partial
field defect may progress to complete blindnessover days. Fundus examination may show pale orswollen optic disc, retinal splinter hemorrhages ora pale retina, and cherry-red spot (i.e. central retinalartery infarction).
/square6Tenderness may be present on the scalp and overthe temporal artery.
Investigations
/square6ESR is the best screening test and is usuallymarkedly elevated (i.e. >50). A normal ESR doesnot rule out GCA.
/square6CRP is also elevated.
/square6Temporal artery biopsy is required for definitive
diagnosis.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
10566 /square6Color duplex ultrasonography of the temporal
artery has emerged as a promising alternative or
complement to biopsy.
Treatment
/square6Treatment with steroids should be initiated promptly
on suspecting temporal arteritis. Otherwise,
permanent visual loss can occur. Intravenous
methylprednisolone (500 to 1000 mg every 12 hours
for 48 hours) followed by oral prednisone (80 to
100 mg/day for 14 to 21 days), with a gradual taper
over 12 to 24 months.
/square6Alternative immunosuppressant agents (e.g. cyclo-
sporine, azathioprine, methotrexate) may be started
later in the course of treatment. They are useful as
steroid-sparing agents in patients who require
prolonged treatment with high dose steroids.
Q.Takayasu arteritis (pulseless disease; occlusive
thromboaortopathy; aortic arch syndrome).
/square6Takayasu arteritis is a large vessel vasculitis. It
mainly affects aorta, carotid, ulnar, brachial, radial
and axillary arteries.
/square6The etiology is unknown.
/square6It is more common in women (female: male ratio
8:1) between 25 and 30 years.
/square6Clinical features are claudication with systemic
symptoms (fever, arthralgia and weight loss). There
may be absent pulses and bruits.
/square6Investigations show high ESR and anemia. Angio-
graphy shows coarctation, occlusion and aneurysmal
dilatation.
/square6Treatment is with steroids (oral prednisolone).
Additional therapy with methotrexate or cyclo-
phosphamide is usually required.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, diagnosis,
and management of polyarteritis nodosa (PAN).
/square6PAN is a systemic necrotizing vasculitis which
mainly affects medium-sized arteries.
/square6It affects all age groups, with a peak incidence in
the fourth and fifth decades.
/square6It is more common in males (male : female ratio of
2:1).
Etiology
/square6Exact etiology is unknown.
/square6Hepatitis B and C can be associated with PAN.
Pathology
/square6Inflammation of vessel wall leads to narrowing of
the lumen and occlusion of the vessel. Inflammation
also leads to weakening of vessel wall leading to
aneurysmal dilatation at multiple points which gives
rise to string of beads appearance in angiogram.Clinical Features
/square6Systemic symptoms:  Fever, weight loss, arthralgia
and myalgia.
/square6Skin lesions:  Ulceration, livedo reticularis, infarction
and gangrene of fingers or toes.
/square6Nervous system:  Involvement of vasa nervosum
(vessels supplying nerves) leads to neuropathy
which commonly presents as mononeuritis multi-
plex. CNS involvement can present with headache,
seizures and ischemic stroke.
/square6Cardiac:  Involvement of coronary arteries can cause
angina and heart failure.
/square6Gastrointestinal:  Vasculitis of the liver or gallbladder
causes right upper quadrant pain. Vasculitis of
mesenteric arteries causes abdominal pain, bloody
diarrhea, malabsorption, intestinal perforation, and
acute abdomen.
/square6Renal:  Hypertension, oliguria, uremia. Renal failure
may occur due to multiple renal infarctions.
/square6Genital:  Orchitis with testicular pain and tenderness
can occur.
Diagnosis
/square6Raised ESR and anemia.
/square6Angiography shows multiple aneurysms and
smooth narrowing of medium sized arteries such
as mesenteric, hepatic or renal arteries.
/square6Testing for hepatitis B and C.
/square6Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA)
are usually absent.
/square6Autoantibody testing to rule out other connective
tissue diseases which can cause vasculitis. These are
ANCA, rheumatoid factor, anticyclic citrullinated
peptides (CCP), ANA, complement levels, anti-Smith,
anti-Ro/SSA, anti-La/SSB, and anti-RNP), etc.
/square6Tissue biopsy (muscle or sural nerve) may show
vessel wall inflammation.
Treatment
/square6Steroids and cyclophosphamide to control vessel
wall inflammation.
/square6Treat the underlying cause such as hepatitis B or C
infection.
Q.Microscopic polyangiitis.
/square6Microscopic polyangiitis is a necrotizing vasculitis
affecting microscopic vessels such as capillaries,
venules, or arterioles.
/square6Other diseases causing small vessel vasculitis
are granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener
granulomatosis), and Churg-Strauss syndrome. AllFigure 10.6 String of beads appearance


/square6Diseases of Immune System, Connective Tissue and Joints567
10these three diseases cause small vessel vasculitis
related to antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies(ANCAs) and are characterized by a paucity ofimmune deposits. However, Wegener granuloma-tosis is characterized by granuloma formation andupper respiratory tract involvement which is absent
in microscopic polyangiitis.
/square6Also note that microscopic polyangiitis differs from
PAN in that PAN does not involve small vesselssuch as capillaries, venules, or arterioles.
Clinical Features
/square6The mean age of onset is ~57 years, and males are
more affected than females.
/square6Systemic symptoms include fever, weight loss,
arthralgia and myalgia.
/square6Glomerulonephritis occurs in majority of patientsand can be rapidly progressive, leading to renalfailure.
/square6Pulmonary capillaritis can cause alveolar hemorr-hage.
/square6Other manifestations include neuropathy, gastro-intestinal tract and cutaneous vasculitis.
Investigations
/square6Elevated ESR, anemia, leukocytosis, and thrombo-
cytosis.
/square6p-ANCA is positive in majority of patients.
/square6Biopsy of the involved tissue shows vessel wall
inflammation.
Treatment
/square6Life-threatening disease should be treated with intra-venous methylprednisolone and cyclophospha-
mide.
/square6Maintenance treatment is with oral steroids and oralcyclophosphamide.
/square6Plasma exchange may help in ANCA-positivepatients with acute renal failure.
Q.Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s granulo-
matosis).
/square6Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (formerly known
as Wegener’s granulomatosis)  is a type of small
vessel vasculitis characterized by necrotizinggranulomatous vasculitis which predominantlyaffects respiratory tract and kidneys.
Clinical Features
/square6Most common presentation is with upper airwayinvolvement which may produce epistaxis, nasal
crusting and sinusitis, mucosal ulceration and
deafness due to serous otitis media. Untreated nasaldisease leads to destruction of bone and cartilage.
/square6Pulmonary involvement may produce cough,
dyspnea and hemoptysis./square6Renal involvement produces acute glomerulo-
nephritis, hematuria, and proteinuria.
/square6Proptosis may be present due to inflammation ofthe retro-orbital tissue.
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray:  Migratory pulmonary infiltrates and
nodules.
/square6C-ANCA (cytoplasmic antineutrophil cytoplasmic
antibodies) is usually positive.
/square6Biopsy of the involved tissue:  Lung biopsy may show
characteristic necrotizing granulomatous vasculitis.Renal biopsy may show necrotizing crescenticglomerulonephritis without immunoglobulin de-position (pauci-immune).
Treatment
/square6It is same as microscopic polyangiitis.
Q.Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis
(Churg-Strauss syndrome).
/square6Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis
(EGPA, formerly called Churg-Strauss syndrome)
is a systemic small and medium vessel vasculitis,characterized by extravascular granulomas, eosino-philia, and tissue infiltration by eosinophils.
Etiology
/square6Exact cause is unknown. It is probably due to anallergic or autoimmune reaction to an environ-mental agent or drug.
Clinical Features
/square6The most common organ involved is lung, followedby skin. However, any organ can get affected.
/square6Clinical manifestations occur in several sequential
phases:
– Prodromal phase—it is characterized by atopic
disease, allergic rhinitis, and asthma.
– Eosinophilic phase—there is peripheral blood
eosinophilia and eosinophilic infiltration ofmany organs, especially the lung and gastro-intestinal tract.
– Vasculitic phase—there is life-threatening syste-
mic vasculitis of the small and medium vessels.Vasculitis phase may be associated with systemicsymptoms such as fever, weight loss, and fatigue.
/square6Skin manifestations include purpura or nodules.
/square6Pulmonary infiltrates and pleural or pericardialeffusions due to serositis may be present.
/square6Abdominal symptoms may be present due tomesenteric vasculitis.
Investigations
/square6Elevated ESR and CRP.
/square6Peripheral blood eosinophilia (>10%).

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
10568 /square6Urine shows RBC casts and proteinuria.
/square6Chest X-ray may show infiltrates and pleural or
pericardial effusions.
/square6P-ANCA is usually positive.
/square6Biopsy of the affected tissue shows vasculitis withextravascular eosinophils.
Treatment
/square6Same as microscopic polyangiitis.
Q.Henoch-Schönlein purpura (HSP) or anaphylactoid
purpura.
/square6HSP is a small vessel vasculitis which mainly occurs
in children and young adults.
/square6HSP is self-limited in majority of cases.
Clinical Features
/square6The classic tetrad of HSP includes: Palpable
purpura, arthritis/arthralgia, abdominal pain and
renal disease. The onset usually follows an upperrespiratory tract infection.
/square6Palpable purpura are due to vasculitis involving
skin blood vessels and mainly found over the
buttocks and lower legs.
/square6Abdominal symptoms include colicky pain andbleeding.
/square6Arthritis/arthralgia usually involves knee or ankle.
/square6Renal involvement produces hematuria, proteinuriaand in some cases renal failure.
Investigations
/square6ESR and CRP are elevated.
/square6Serum IgA levels may be elevated.
/square6Abnormal renal function tests and proteinuria.
/square6Biopsy of the skin (purpuric spot) or kidney mayshow IgA deposition within and around bloodvessel walls.
Treatment
/square6Steroids are effective for gastrointestinal and jointinvolvement.
/square6Renal involvement requires treatment with bothpulse IV steroids and immunosuppressants(cyclophosphamide, azathioprine).
/square6Plasmapheresis may be effective in delaying theprogression of kidney disease.
Q.Behçet disease.
/square6Behçet disease is a chronic, relapsing, autoimmune
disease characterized by triple-symptom complexof recurrent oral aphthous ulcers, genital ulcers, anduveitis.
Etiology
/square6Exact cause is unknown./square6Immunologic (including autoimmune) and viral orbacterial triggers have been suggested, and HLA-B51 is associated with some cases.
Clinical Features
/square6Behcet disease involves multiple systems. The mostcommon feature is the presence of recurrent muco-cutaneous ulcers.
/square6Oral ulcerations:  Most patients have recurrent oral
aphthous ulcerations. The ulcers are painful andrange in size from a few millimeters to two centi-meters. These ulcers heal spontaneously but recuragain and again.
/square6Genital ulcers:  These are similar to oral ulcers and
are painful. They commonly occur on the scrotumand vulva.
/square6Skin lesions:  They include acneiform lesions, papulo-
vesiculopustular eruptions, nodules, erythemanodosum, superficial thrombophlebitis, andpyoderma gangrenosum. Pathergy refers to anerythematous papular or pustular response to local
skin injury. It is defined as a greater than 5 mm
lesion that appears 24 to 48 hours after skin prickby a needle.
/square6Ocular disease:  Uveitis is the main feature. It is
bilateral and episodic. Other manifestations are
retinal vasculitis, vascular occlusion, and opticneuritis. All these may lead to blindness if untreated.
/square6Vascular disease:  Behcet’s disease can involve blood
vessels of all sizes. Most clinical manifestations of
Behcet’s disease are believed to be due to vasculitis.
/square6Other features are arthritis, meningoencephalitis,epididymitis, intestinal ulcerations, renal, cardiac
and lung involvement.
Diagnosis
/square6Criteria for the diagnosis of Behçet disease
• Recurrent oral ulceration—aphthous (idiopathic) ulceration,
observed by physician or patient, with at least three episodesin any 12 month.
Plus two of:
• Recurrent genital ulceration• Eye lesions—anterior or posterior uveitis or retinal vasculitis• Skin lesions—erythema nodosum, pseudofolliculitis, papulo-
pustular lesions, acneiform nodules
• Positive pathergy test
Treatment
/square6Oral ulcers are treated with topical steroid prepara-
tions. Thalidomide is very effective for resistant oraland genital ulceration but is teratogenic and neuro-toxic.
/square6Colchicine is effective for erythema nodosum andarthralgia.
/square6Systemic disease requires oral steroids with otherimmunosuppressive drugs.

/square6Diseases of Immune System, Connective Tissue and Joints569
10Q.Fibromyalgia (myofascial pain syndrome; fibrositis;
fibromyositis).
/square6Fibromyalgia is a chronic pain disorder of unknown
etiology. It is a very common cause of multiple
regional musculoskeletal pain and disability.
/square6It is more common in females and increases withage.
Etiology
/square6Exact etiology is unknown. Current evidence
suggests fibromyalgia may be a centrally mediated
disorder of pain sensitivity. Risk factors are psycho-social stresses such as divorce, marital disharmony,alcoholism in the family, assault, low income, etc.Reduced delta waves during NREM sleep havebeen found in patients with fibromyalgia. Delta
wave sleep has restorative function.
Clinical Features
/square6Multiple regional pain, often focusing on the neck
and back. Pain does not respond to analgesics andNSAIDs. Reduced threshold to pain perception andtolerance are present. Fatigability is another majorproblem. Other features are low mood, irritability,weepiness, swelling of hands and fingers, numb-
ness and tingling of fingers, non-throbbing bifrontal
headache.
/square6Examination of musculoskeletal and neurologicalsystem is normal. The main finding is hyperalgesiaat tender sites.
Differential Diagnosis
/square6Chronic fatigue syndrome can cause similar genera-lized myalgias and fatigue and laboratory testresults are typically normal.
/square6Polymyalgia rheumatica can cause generalizedmyalgias. However, it usually affects older adults,tends to affect proximal muscles selectively and ESRis high.
Management
/square6Involves education concerning the nature of theproblem, pain control and improvement of sleep.Low-dose amitriptyline (10–75 mg at night) with
or without fluoxetine may be useful.
Q.Polymyalgia rheumatica (PMR).
/square6Polymyalgia rheumatica  is a rheumatic condition
associated with muscle pain and stiffness and an
increased ESR.
/square6It is not a true vasculitis but there is a close associa-tion with giant cell arteritis. Polymyalgia rheumatica
occurs in about 50 percent of patients with giant
cell arteritis.
/square6People over 50 years of age are mainly affected.Women are affected more often than men (3:1 ratio).Clinical Features
/square6Main features are subacute or chronic onset ofmuscle stiffness and pain in the shoulders, hipgirdles, neck and torso in patients over the age of
50. There is marked early morning stiffness, often
with night pain.
/square6Examination shows stiffness and restriction ofactive movements but passive movements are
normal. There may be muscle tenderness but no
muscle-wasting. If muscle wasting is there, thenprimary muscle or neurological disease should besuspected.
/square6Systemic features are weight loss, fatigue, and nightsweats.
Investigations
/square6Elevated ESR and CRP.
/square6Normochromic, normocytic anemia.
Management
/square6Treatment is with steroids (prednisolone). There isdramatic response within 72 hours. If there is no
response by 72 hours or an incomplete response by
7 days, then other conditions should be suspected.
/square6Most patients need steroids for an average of12–18 months. Immunosuppresants such as metho-
trexate or azathioprine can be considered if steroids
cannot be withdrawn at 2 years.
Q.Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA).
/square6ANCA are autoantibodies directed against certain
proteins in the cytoplasm of neutrophils and mono-cytes. They are mainly of the IgG type.
/square6ANCA can be measured by two methods; indirectimmunofluorescence assay and enzyme-linkedimmunosorbent assay (ELISA)
/square6There are two major types of ANCA: c-ANCA and
p-ANCA. c-cANCA (cytoplasmic ANCA) refers to
cytoplasmic staining pattern observed by immuno-fluorescence microscopy when serum antibodiesbind to indicator neutrophils. p-ANCA (perinuclearANCA) refers to perinuclear or nuclear stainingpattern of the indicator neutrophils.
Significance
/square6ANCA are positive in systemic vasculitis syndromes,particularly Wegener’s granulomatosis and micro-
scopic polyangiitis, and in patients with necrotizing
and crescentic glomerulonephritis.
/square6ANCA can also be positive in non-vasculiticrheumatic diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis,
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), Sjögren’s
syndrome etc. Hence, ANCA positivity alone is notdiagnostic of vasculitis.
/square6The levels of ANCA do not correlate with disease
activity.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
10570 Q.Antinuclear antibodies (ANA).
/square6ANA are autoantibodies directed against various
nuclear antigens.
Conditions Associated with Positive ANA
Systemic autoimmune diseases
• Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
• Scleroderma• Mixed connective tissue disease
• Polymyositis/dermatomyositis
• Rheumatoid arthritis• Sjögren’s syndrome
Specific organ autoimmune disease
• Hashimoto’s thyroiditis• Graves’ disease
• Autoimmune hepatitis
• Primary biliary cirrhosis• Idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension
Infections
• Hepatitis C infection• Subacute bacterial endocarditis
• Tuberculosis
• HIV infection
Significance
/square6ANA are serologic hallmarks of patients with
systemic autoimmune diseases. Testing for anti-
nuclear antibodies (ANA) is commonly used when
evaluating patients who are suspected of havingan autoimmune or connective tissue disorder.
/square6Very high concentrations of antibody (titer >1:640)
should arouse suspicion of an autoimmune dis-
order even in a patient without any symptoms.
/square6ANA is also useful to monitor disease activity andto determine the specific type of disease.
Types of ANA
/square6Certain types of antinuclear antibodies are some-
what specific to certain diseases. The main types of
ANA are as follows.
/square6Antibodies to double-stranded DNA (anti-dsDNA) —
these are found in SLE and rheumatoid arthritis.
/square6Antibodies to histone proteins —these are found in SLE
and drug-induced lupus.
/square6Antibodies to chromatin —these are especially pre-
valent in SLE patients with renal disease.
False Positive Tests
/square6The ANA test is said to be false positive when aperson tests positive but does not have any otherfeatures of autoimmune disease. False positiveresult occurs often in women and elderly people.Drugs such as hydralazine, isoniazid, and
procainamide can cause false positive results.Q.Antiphospholipid syndrome (antiphospholipid
antibody syndrome; APLA).
/square6The antiphospholipid syndrome (APLS) also known
as antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (APLA) is
a multisystemic autoimmune disorder. It is charac-terized by the presence of antiphospholipid anti-bodies (APLA), arterial and venous thrombosis, andrecurrent abortions.
/square6These antiphospholipid antibodies (APLA) includelupus anticoagulant (also known as lupus antibody)and anticardiolipin (aCL) antibody. The antibodiesin APLS have prothrombotic effect and also haveaction on vascular tone causing the clinical manifes-
tations of APLS.
Etiology
/square6APLS can be primary without any underlying cause
or it can be secondary to an underlying cause whichare as follows.
/square6Autoimmune diseases: SLE, Sjögren syndrome,
rheumatoid arthritis.
/square6Infections:  Syphilis, hepatitis C infection, HIV infection
/square6Drugs:  Procainamide, quinidine, propranolol,
hydralazine, phenytoin, chlorpromazine.
/square6Genetic predisposition: Relatives of persons with
known APS are more likely to have APS.
/square6HLA associations:  Individuals who carry certain HLA
genes  DR7  and DR4 have increased risk of developing
APS .
Clinical Features
/square6These patients may have a variety of clinical mani-
festations including venous and arterial thrombosis,recurrent fetal losses, neurologic events, and
thrombocytopenia.
/square6Thrombotic events:  Deep vein thrombosis and
pulmonary embolism, ischemic stroke, peripheraland intra-abdominal vascular occlusion.
/square6Obstetric complications:  Recurrent spontaneous
abortions and fetal growth retardation, whichprobably are due to thrombosis of placental vessels.
/square6Catastrophic APS1 is the most severe form of APSwith clinical evidence of multiple organ involve-ment developing over a short time with histopatho-logical evidence of small vessel occlusions. It is amedical emergency with high mortality.
Diagnosis
/square6Diagnosis of antiphospholipid syndrome is based
on a combination of clinical history and laboratory
testing. APLS should be suspected if there is:
– Occurrence of one or more otherwise un-
explained thrombotic or thromboembolic events.
– Recurrent abortions.
– Unexplained thrombocytopenia or prolongation
of a test of blood coagulation (e.g. PT or aPTT).

/square6Diseases of Immune System, Connective Tissue and Joints571
10/square6Presence of lupus anticoagulant and anticardiolipin
antibodies should be tested.
Treatment
Prophylactic Therapy to Prevent Rhrombosis
/square6Prophylaxis is needed during surgery or hospitaliza-tion. Low-dose aspirin or clopidogrel can be used
to prevent thrombotic events.
Patients with History of Thrombosis
/square6Intravenous heparin followed by warfarin should
be used. International normalized ratio (INR)should be maintained between 2 to 3. Lifelong treat-ment may be required for patients with recurrentthrombotic events.
Pregnant Women with APS
/square6Treatment of antiphospholipid syndrome duringpregnancy reduces the risks of pregnancy loss,
pre-eclampsia, placental insufficiency, preterm
birth, and thrombosis. Women with antiphospho-lipid syndrome and no history of thrombosis shouldreceive heparin and low-dose aspirin duringpregnancy and for six to eight weeks postpartum.Patients who require heparin administration
throughout pregnancy should receive calcium and
vitamin D supplementation to help avoid heparin-induced osteoporosis.
/square6Some studies have shown that aspirin alone is as
efficacious as heparin plus aspirin.
Q.Lupus anticoagulant.
/square6The lupus anticoagulant (also known as lupus anti-
body) is an IgM or IgG immunoglobulin which bindsto phospholipids and proteins associated with thecell membrane. Lupus anticoagulant is a misnomeras it is actually a prothrombotic agent. It producesa prolonged PTT by binding to the phospholipid
used in the in vitro  PTT assay; hence it is called lupus
anticoagulant.
Etiology
/square6Lupus anticoagulant (LA) is seen in 20–45% of patientswith systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Patientswith HIV infection also have a high incidence ofLA. Drugs such as procainamide, hydralazine,isoniazid, dilantin, phenothiazines, quinidine, and
ACE inhibitors are known to induce LA.
Effects of Lupus Anticoagulant
/square6Some patients can be asymptomatic. Many elderly
patients have lupus anticoagulant./square6LA is associated with antiphospholipid syndrome(APLS or APLA). See APS for detailed clinicalfeatures.
Diagnosis
/square6Lupus anticoagulant should be suspected in casesof a markedly prolonged APTT without clinicalbleeding. APTT fails to correct when the patient’splasma is mixed with normal plasma.
/square6The Russell viper venom (RVV) time is test of choiceto detect the presence of lupus anticoagulant.
/square6Lupus anticoagulant can cause a false-positiveVDRL test for syphilis.
Treatment
/square6Anticoagulant therapy should be started for patientswith thrombosis. Heparin therapy is difficult tomonitor due to already prolonged APTT and hence,low-molecular-weight heparin is preferred.
Q.Enumerate the causes of low back ache.
Causes of Low Back Ache
Mechanical Problems
/square6Lumber strain.
/square6Degenerative process of disks and facets.
/square6Intervertebral disc prolapse.
/square6Spinal stenosis.
/square6Osteoporotic compression fracture.
/square6Spondylolisthesis.
/square6Traumatic fracture.
/square6Congenital disease (severe kyphosis and scoliosis).
/square6Spondylolysis.
Nonmechanical Problems
/square6Neoplasia (multiple myeloma, metastatic carci-
noma, lymphoma, leukemia, etc.).
/square6Infection (osteomyelitis, discitis, paraspinal abscess,shingles).
/square6Inflammatory arthritis (ankylosing spondylitis,psoriatic spondylitis).
/square6Paget’s disease of bone.
Visceral Disease
/square6Disease of pelvic organs (prostatitis, endometriosis,pelvic inflammatory disease).
/square6Renal disease (nephrolithiasis, pyelonephritis,perinephric abscess).
/square6Aortic aneurysm.
/square6Gastrointestinal disease (pancreatitis, cholecystitis,penetrating ulcer).

11
572Q.Body mass index (BMI).
/square6Body mass index (BMI) is a measure of weight
adjusted for height, calculated as weight in kilograms
divided by the square of height in meters (kg/m2).
Although BMI is often considered an indicator ofbody fatness, it is a surrogate measure of body fat
because it measures  excess weight rather than excess
fat.
Uses of BMI
/square6BMI is a simple, inexpensive, and noninvasivesurrogate measure of body fat which can be usedbedside.
/square6BMI levels correlate with body fat and with future
health risks. High BMI predicts future morbidity
and death. Therefore, BMI is an appropriate measurefor screening for obesity and its health risks.
/square6Use of BMI at the population level has resulted in
an increased availability of published population
data that allows public health professionals to makecomparisons across time, regions, and populationsubgroups.
Limitations of BMI
/square6BMI is a surrogate measure of body fatness becauseit is a measure of excess weight rather than excessbody fat.
/square6Factors such as age, sex, ethnicity, and muscle masscan influence the relationship between BMI andbody fat.
/square6BMI does not distinguish between excess fat,muscle, or bone mass. For example, older adultstend to have more body fat than younger adultsfor an equivalent BMI. Women have more body fatthan men with the same BMI. Muscular individualsmay have a high BMI because of increased muscle
mass.Nutritional Disorders
Interpretation of BMI
BMI Interpretation
Below 18.5 Underweight
18.5–24.9 Normal25–29.9 Overweight
30–34.9 Mild obesity
35–39.9 Moderate obesity
>40 Extreme obesity
Alternatives to BMI
/square6Other measures of body fat, such as skinfold thick-
nesses, bioelectrical impedance, underwater
weighing, and dual energy X-ray absorption, maybe more accurate than BMI. But, most of thesemethods are cumbersome for routine clinical use.
Q.Discuss the assessment of nutritional status of a
person.
Nutritional Assessment
/square6Nutritional assessment is made by dietary history,
anthropometric measurements, clinical examina-
tion, and laboratory tests.
/square6Undernutrition can lead to protein energy mal-
nutrition, retarded growth, deficiencies of variousvitamins and minerals. Elderly, pregnant or
lactating women, and the poor and socially isolated
are at particular risk for undernutrition.
/square6Over-nutrition can lead to obesity with attendantincreased risks of diabetes and cardiovascular
diseases.
Dietary History
/square6Economic status.
/square6Regularity and availability of meals.
/square6Recent changes in appetite, intake, or body weight.

/square6Nutritional Disorders573
11/square6Use of special diets or dietary supplements.
/square6Use of alcohol, drugs, or medications.
/square6Food preferences and food allergies.
/square6Presence of illnesses affecting nutritional intakes,
losses, or requirements.
/square6Quantification of dietary intake can be roughlymade by 24-hour diet recalls or a complete 3- to5-day diet record.
Anthropometry
/square6This should include height, weight, body massindex, waist circumference and waist-hip ratio.Triceps skin fold thickness gives an idea about theamount of subcutaneous fat and mid arm musclecircumference about muscle bulk.
/square6BMI: Normal BMI is 18.5–24.9. BMI <18.5 is calledundernutrition. BMI >30 is called obesity. BMI isless reliable in old age as height is lost.
/square6Patients with increased abdominal circumference(>102 cm in men and 88 cm in women) or with highwaist–hip ratios (>1.0 in men and >0.85 in women)have a greater risk of diabetes mellitus, stroke,coronary artery disease, and early death.
Clinical Examination
/square6Look for muscle wasting, fat stores, volume status,and signs of nutrient deficiencies.
Laboratory Tests
/square6Serum albumin is low in protein–energy under-
nutrition.
/square6Fasting lipid profile (total cholesterol, HDL, tri-
glycerides, LDL).
/square6Hemoglobin, blood glucose, and electrolytes.
/square6Many sophisticated techniques are available forassessment of muscle and fat composition of the
body. These include bioelectrical impedance, dual-
energy X-ray absorptiometry, air-displacementplethysmography, MRI and body line scanners.
Q.Describe the calorie requirements of normal person.
/square6A nutrient is a substance providing nourishment
to the body and is necessary for both growth andmaintenance. Nutrients can fall into seven groupsthat include carbohydrate, protein, fat, fiber,
mineral, vitamin, and water.
/square6The average requirement for men is around 2500
kcal/day and for women, it is 2000 kcal. Thisrequirement is not static and depends on many
factors which are as follows.
– Age
– Gender
– Height
– Weight
– Physical activity
– Certain conditions like pregnancy or lactation.Carbohydrate
/square6At least 45–55% of total calories should be derived
from carbohydrates.
Protein
/square6For adults, the recommended dietary allowance
(RDA) for protein is about 0.6 g/kg desirable body
mass per day. Current recommendations for ahealthy diet call for at least 10 to 14% of calories
from protein.
Fat
/square6Fats are a concentrated source of energy. For
optimal health, fat intake should not be more than30% of calories. Saturated fat and trans-fat should
be limited to <10% of calories, and polyunsaturated
fats to <10% of calories, with monounsaturated fatscomprising the remainder of fat intake.
Water Intake
/square6The daily recommended water intake for men and
women is 3.7 L/day and 2.7 L/day, respectively.
Other Nutrients
/square6Such as fiber, vitamins and minerals should be taken
in the recommended quantity.
Q.Describe nutritional assessment and calorie require-
ment during illness.
/square6Proper nutrition is needed to prevent and recover
from illness. Malnutrition during illness decreases
immunity; increases susceptibility to nosocomialinfections; decreases wound healing and promotes
organ failure.
/square6Nutrition support refers to enteral or parenteral
provision of calories, protein, electrolytes, vitamins,minerals, trace elements, and fluids.
/square6Carbohydrates are the preferred energy source
during illness because fat mobilization is impaired.
Assessment of Nutritional Status during Illness
/square6Nutritional assessment in sick especially critically
ill patient is difficult. It can be done by anthropo-metric measurements, biochemical tools, clinical
assessment, and dietary assessment (remember A,
B, C, D).
Anthropometric Measurements
/square6It measures the current nutritional status.
/square6Body weight: 10% loss is considered significant,20% loss is considered critical, and 30% loss is
considered lethal.
/square6Other measurements include mid-arm circum-
ference, skinfold thickness, head-circumference,head chest ratio, and BMI (body mass index). BMI
is an independent predictor of mortality in seriously
ill patients.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
11574 Biochemical Tests
/square6Measuring hemoglobin, albumin, transferrin, pre-
albumin, lymphocyte count. Decreased levelscorrelate with malnutrition.
Clinical Assessment
/square6It is the simplest and most practical method.
/square6Nutritional history, general physical examination,loss of subcutaneous fat (chest and triceps), and
presence of edema and ascites are often found in
malnutrition.
Dietary Assessment
/square6It can be assessed by 24 hours dietary recall,frequency of food intake, and actual observationof food intake.
Nutritional Requirements
Total Energy and Fluid Requirements
/square6Energy requirements can be calculated in variousways but for all practical purposes–calorie intakeis 25 kcal/kg/24-hour after elective surgery and35 kcal/kg/24-hour in polytrauma, sepsis and
burns. Additional 10% calories are added for each
10°C rise in temperature.
/square6Baseline water requirement for adults is 30–35 mL/kg/hr. Addition must be made for fever (300–500 mL/
24 hours) for 10°C above normal and for other
losses.
Protein Requirement
/square6Proteins provide 10–15% of total calories. Dailyrequire ments of proteins during illness is
approximately 0.8–1.2 g/kg for normal metabolism
and 1.2–1.6 gm/kg in hypercatabolism.
Carbohydrate Requirement
/square6It provides up to 50–60% of total calories or 70–90%
of non-protein calories. Total glucose load may belimited to 3.5–5 gm/kg/24 hr depending uponseverity of stress.
Lipids
/square6Lipid emulsion provides 25–30% of total energy.Maximum dose should be limited to 1 gm/kg/24 hr.It provides 9.3 kcal/gm.
Route of Nutrition
/square6Nutritional support can be given through one ofthe three routes oral, enteral, and parenteral.
Oral
/square6If the patient can eat then they should be encouragedto do so. It is important to know that patient
receiving adequate nutrition or not.Enteral
/square6Indicated when oral intake has been inadequate for
1–3 days. Contraindications include circulatoryshock, intestinal ischemia, complete mechanical
bowel obstruction or ileus, severe diarrhea, and
pancreatitis. Methods of enteral feeding includenasogastric tube (most common method), naso-duodenal tube, nasojejunal tube, percutaneousfeeding gastrostomy and jejunostomy tube.
/square6Early enteral nutrition (within 24–48 hours after anacute illness) is indicated in severe trauma, majorburns, ARDS, cancer surgery, and acute malnutri-tion.
/square6There are many commercially prepared feedsavailable or feeds can be prepared immediatelybefore administration. There are disease specificformulae available: These are usually designed forliver diseases (contain low sodium and altered
amino acids contents to reduce encephalopathy),
for renal disease (contain low phosphate andpotassium), for respiratory disease (contain high fatto reduce CO
2 production).
Parenteral Nutrition
/square6The only absolute indication of parenteral nutritionis gastrointestinal failure.
/square6Parenteral nutrition can be given as separate compo-nents but is more commonly given as a sterileemulsion of water, protein, lipids, carbohydrates,electrolytes, vitamins and trace elements. It is giventhrough peripheral or central venous line.
/square6When 60% of total energy and protein requirementsare taken orally/enterally. PN may be stopped.
Q.Discuss the classification, etiology, clinical features,
investigations and management of malnutrition;protein energy malnutrition (PEM); undernutrition.
Q.Causes of weight loss.
/square6BMI less than <18.5 is called malnutrition or under-
nutrition.
Classification
BMI Classification
17–18.5 Mild
16–17 Moderate<16 Severe
Etiology of Undernutrition and Weight Loss
• Famine
• Endocrine disorders (hyperthyroidism, pheochromocytoma,
adrenal insufficiency)
• Uncontrolled diabetes mellitus• GI disorders (malabsorption syndromes, chronic pancreatitis,
IBD, parasitic infestation)
• Malignancy

/square6Nutritional Disorders575
11• Infections (tuberculosis, HIV, subacute bacterial endocarditis)
• COPD• Chronic renal failure• Psychiatric disorders (depression, mania, anorexia nervosa,
schizophrenia)
• Chronic alcoholism• Drugs (opiates, amphetamines, digoxin, metformin, NSAIDs,
anticancer drugs)
• Treatment of obesity• Anorexic drugs—amphetamines and derivatives• Distance runners, models, ballet dancers, gymnasts• Excessive physical activity (e.g. marathon runners)
Clinical Features
/square6In children, undernutrition (protein-energy mal-
nutrition, PEM) is manifest as the syndromes of
kwashiorkor (malnutrition with edema) and maras-mus (malnutrition with marked muscle-wasting).
/square6The clinical features of severe undernutrition in
adults are as follows:
– Weakness, apathy, loss of initiative, depression,
introversion.
– Thirst, craving for food.
– Weight loss.
– Muscle wasting, loss of subcutaneous fat.
– Amenorrhea or impotence.
– Pale dry skin with loss of turgor.
– Hair thinning or loss.
– Cold and cyanosed extremities, pressure sores.
– Edema, which may be present without hypo-
albuminemia.
– Subnormal body temperature, slow pulse, low
blood pressure.
– Distended abdomen, with diarrhea.
– Diminished tendon jerks.– Susceptibility to infections (gastroenteritis, tuber-
culosis, skin infections, etc.).
– In advanced starvation, patients become completely
inactive and may assume a flexed, fetal position.
In the last stage of starvation, death comes quietly
and often quite suddenly. All organs are atrophiedat necropsy, except the brain.
Investigations
/square6Mild anemia, leucopenia and thrombocytopenia.ESR is normal unless there is infection.
/square6Low blood glucose.
/square6Plasma free fatty acids are increased and there isketosis and a mild metabolic acidosis because ofbreakdown of fat for energy production.
/square6Albumin may be low but concentration is oftennormal because of normal liver function.
/square6Insulin secretion is low, glucagon and cortisol secre-tion is high.
/square6Urine has a fixed specific gravity and creatinineexcretion becomes low.
/square6Tests of delayed skin hypersensitivity, e.g. to tuber-culin, are falsely negative.
/square6ECG shows sinus bradycardia and low voltage.
Management
/square6People with mild malnutrition do not require anyactive treatment. Those with moderate malnutritionneed extra feeding. Severe malnutrition needshospital care.
/square6In severe malnutrition, initial efforts should bedirected at correcting fluid and electrolyte abnorma-
lities and infections. The second phase of treatmentis directed at repletion of protein, carbohydrates,and micronutrients. In severe malnutrition, there
TABLE 11.1: Clinical features of specific nutrient deficiency
Nutrient Features of deficiency
Vitamin A Night blindness, xeropthalmia, ulceration and necrosis of the cornea (keratomalacia),
perforation, endophthalmitis. Xerosis and hyperkeratinization of the skin
Vitamin D Rickets, osteomalacia
Vitamin E Areflexia, ataxia, ophthalmoplegia, hemolytic anemia
Vitamin K Coagulation disorder
Thiamin  (vitamin B1) Beriberi, Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome
Riboflavin  (vitamin B2) Cheilosis, angular stomatitis, glossitis
Niacin  (vitamin B3) Pellagra (dementia, diarrhea, dermatitis)
Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine) Peripheral neuropathy, anemia
Biotin Dermatitis, alopecia, paraesthesiae
Vitamin B12 (cobalamin) Anemia, peripheral neuropathy, subacute combined degeneration
Vitamin C  (ascorbic acid) Scurvy
Folate Anemia
Iron Anemia, platynychia, koilonychia
Iodine Goiter
Calcium Tetany, pathologic fractures due to osteomalacia, muscular irritability
Zinc Anorexia, weakness, tingling, impaired taste

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
11576 is atrophy of the intestinal epithelium and of the
exocrine pancreas, and the bile is dilute. Hence,refeeding should be initiated with small amountsof food which is easily digestible. Food should bepalatable and similar to the usual staple meal, forexample, a cereal with some sugar, milk powder
and oil. Either the enteral or parenteral route can
be used, although the former is better.
/square6About 1500–2000 kcal/day will prevent progressiveundernutrition, but additional calories are required
to regain weight. A weight gain of 5% body weight
per month is satisfactory. Patients should befollowed up closely.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, complica-
tions, investigations and management of obesity.
/square6Obesity is defined as an excess of adipose tissue.
Obesity is one of the most common disorders in
medical practice and among the most frustrating
and difficult to manage.
/square6Accurate quantification of body fat requiressophisticated techniques but physical examination
is usually sufficient to detect excess body fat.
/square6BMI closely correlates with excess adipose tissue
and obesity can be graded based on BMI.
/square6Abdominal obesity is a greater health hazard thangeneralized obesity. Visceral fat within the abdo-minal cavity is more hazardous to health thansubcutaneous fat.
Etiology
/square6Obesity is the result of an imbalance between dailyenergy intake and energy expenditure resulting inexcessive weight gain. There are multiple factorswhich can cause obesity which are as follows:
– Sedentary lifestyle.
–Dietary factors:  Overeating, high fat diet.
–Endocrine disorders:  Hypothalamic disease, hypo-
thyroidism, Cushing’s syndrome, polycysticovary syndrome, hypogonadism.
–Social factors:  Low socioeconomic status.
–Psychiatric disorders:  Night eating syndrome,
binge-eating.
– Genetic factors.
–Drugs: Steroids, clozapine, amitriptyline, cypro-
heptadine, thiazolidinediones.
Grading of Obesity
BMI Classification
18.5–24.9 Normal
25–29.9 Overweight
30–34.9 Mild obesity
35–39.9 Moderate obesity
>40 Extreme obesityPathophysiology
/square6Association of genetics and obesity is already well
established.
/square6Leptin is an adipocyte hormone which reduces foodintake and body weight. Cellular leptin resistanceis associated with obesity.
/square6Adipose tissue secretes adipokines and free fattyacids causing systemic inflammation which causesinsulin resistance and increased triglyceride levels,which subsequently contributes to obesity. Adipo-cytes have prothrombotic activity which can increase
the risk of strokes.
/square6Obesity can cause increased fatty acid depositionin the myocardium causing left ventricular dys-function. It has also been shown to alter the renin-angiotensin system causing increasing salt retention
and elevated blood pressure.
/square6Adiponectin has insulin-sensitizing and anti-
inflammatory properties and its levels are low thosewith visceral obesity.
Complications of Obesity
/square6Hypertension.
/square6Type 2 diabetes mellitus.
/square6Hyperlipidemia.
/square6Coronary artery disease.
/square6Degenerative joint disease (osteoarthritis).
/square6Increased incidence of cancers (colon, rectum, andprostate in men; uterus, biliary tract, breast, andovary in women).
/square6Thromboembolic disorders.
/square6Digestive tract diseases (gallstones, reflux eso-phagitis).
/square6Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH).
/square6Obstructive sleep apnea.
/square6Respiratory failure (Pickwickian syndrome).
/square6Psychosocial problems (low self esteem, depression).
/square6Varicose veins.
Clinical Assessment
History
/square6Age of onset, recent weight changes.
/square6Family history of obesity.
/square6Cigarette and alcohol use.
/square6Complete nutrition history.
/square6Physical activity.
/square6Sleep patterns.
/square6History of any depression and eating disorders.
/square6Use of any drugs and nutritional supplements.
Physical Examination
/square6Degree and distribution of body fat, overall nutritionalstatus, and signs of secondary causes of obesity.
/square6Look for any complication of obesity such as hyper-tension, atherosclerosis, etc.

/square6Nutritional Disorders577
11Investigations
/square6Blood sugar.
/square6Lipid profile.
/square6Urea, creatinine.
/square6Electrolytes.
/square6Thyroid function tests and other endocrine work
up if necessary.
/square6ECG to look for evidence of coronary artery disease.
Treatment
/square6Obesity needs multiprong treatment strategies andmay require lifelong treatment.
Dietary Therapy
/square6Low-fat, high-complex carbohydrate, high-fiber diet.
/square6Avoid foods with high calories without other
nutrients, i.e. fat, sucrose, and alcohol.
Exercise
/square6Increasing energy expenditure through physicalactivity helps in losing weight.  Aerobic exercise is
particularly useful for long-term weight mainte-
nance. When compared with no treatment, exercisealone results in small amounts of weight loss.Exercise plus diet results in greater weight loss thandiet alone. A greater intensity of exercise causesgreater amount of weight loss. Up to 1 hour of
moderate exercise per day is associated with long-
term weight maintenance in individuals who havesuccessfully lost weight.
Drug Therapy
/square6Drug therapy may be considered for those with aBMI greater than 30 or those with BMI >27 withcomorbid conditions. Obesity drugs may be usedas part of a comprehensive weight loss program.
/square6Medications for obesity include two major categories:Appetite suppressants ( anorexiants ) and gastro-
intestinal fat blockers. Appetite-suppressingmedications include phentermine, diethylpropion,
and mazindol. Two new appetite suppressants have
been approved; lorcaserin and phentermine/topiramate. Lorcaserin is a selective 5-HT2Creceptor agonist. Phentermine reduces the appetiteby satiety-center stimulation in hypothalamic andlimbic areas of the brain.
/square6Gastrointestinal fat blockers (e.g. orlistat) reducethe absorption of fat from the gastrointestinal tract.Orlistat can cause diarrhea, oily stools, and reducedabsorption of fat-soluble vitamins. The recommen-
ded dose of orlistat is 120 mg three times daily with
meals.
Liposuction
/square6Removal of fat by aspiration after injection of salinehas been used to remove and contour subcutaneousfat. However, it does not improve insulin sensitivity
or risk factors for coronary heart disease.
Surgery
/square6Bariatric surgery is a treatment option for patientswith severe obesity (BMI over 40, or over 35 ifobesity-related comorbidities are present). Theseare as follows:
–Gastric banding —this is a purely restrictive proce-
dure that compartmentalizes the upper stomachby placing a tight, adjustable prosthetic bandaround the entrance to the stomach. Gastricbanding results in less dramatic weight loss than
RYGB and fewer short-term complications.
Frequent follow-up is required to adjust thegastric band (Fig. 11.1).
–Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) —here a small
proximal gastric pouch is created and connected
to the rest of the gastrointestinal tract via a tightstoma and a Roux-en-Y small bowel arrangement
(Fig. 11.2). RYGB results in substantial amounts
of weight loss. Complications include peritonitisdue to anastomotic leak, abdominal wall hernias,
staple line disruption, gallstones, neuropathy,
marginal ulcers, stomal stenosis, wound infections,thromboembolic disease, gastrointestinal symp-toms, and nutritional deficiencies.
Figure 11.1 Gastric banding
Figure 11.2 Roux-en-Y gastric bypass

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
11578
Q.Vitamin A (retinol) deficiency.
/square6Vit A is lipid soluble and is obtained from diet in
two forms: Preformed vitamin A (retinol and retinylester) and provitamin A (beta-carotenoid).
/square6Preformed vitamin A is derived from animal sourcessuch as meat, dairy products, and fish. Provitamin A(beta-carotenoid) is derived from fruits and vege-tables.
/square6Vitamin A was the first fat-soluble vitamin to bediscovered.
/square6The recommended daily intake of Vit A is 800 to1000 mcg.
Functions of Vit A
/square6Night vision.
/square6Differentiation of epithelial cells.
/square6Normal growth, fetal development, fertility, hemato-
poiesis and immune function.
Causes of Vit A Deficiency
/square6Reduced intake : It is endemic in areas such as
southern and eastern Asia, where rice, devoid ofβ-carotene, is the staple food.
/square6Decreased bioavailability  of provitamin A.
/square6Interference with absorption or storage:  Celiac disease,
cystic fibrosis, pancreatic insufficiency, duodenalbypass, chronic diarrhea, bile duct obstruction,giardiasis, and cirrhosis.
Clinical Features of Vit A Deficiency
/square6Vitamin A deficiency is an important cause of blind-
ness globally especially in Asia./square6Night blindness is the earliest sign due to an impair-
ment of the dark adaptation process.
/square6Xerophthalmia —it is caused by inadequate function
of the lacrimal glands and is characterized by Bitot’s
spots, corneal xerosis and keratomalacia.
/square6Bitot’s spots —these are glistening white plaques of
desquamated thickened conjunctival epithelium,usually triangular in shape and firmly adherent to
the conjunctiva.
/square6Keratomalacia —it is the final consequence of defi-
ciency and leads to corneal ulceration, scarring andirreversible blindness.
/square6Poor bone growth.
/square6Dermatological abnormalities, such as hyperkera-
tosis and phrynoderma (follicular hyperkeratosis).
/square6Impairment of humoral and cell mediated immunity
via direct and indirect effects on the phagocytes andT cells.
Investigations
/square6Serum retinol level is low. A value of less than
0.7 mg/L in children younger than 12 years is consi-
dered low.
/square6A serum RBP (retinol binding protein) is lessexpensive than a serum retinol study. Level is low
in Vit A deficiency.
Treatment
/square6For treatment of xerophthalmia, vitamin A is given
in three doses. The first dose (2 lakh U) is givenimmediately on diagnosis, the second on thefollowing day, and the third dose at least two weeks
later. If there is vomiting or severe diarrhea, Vit A
is given by intramuscular injection.
/square6In countries where vitamin A deficiency is endemic,pregnant women should be advised to eat dark
green leafy vegetables and yellow fruits. A single
prophylactic oral dose (2 lakh U) is given to pre-school children. Repeated oral administration ofthese doses to children every 4–6 months is used insome endemic areas.
Q.Hypervitaminosis-A; Vit A toxicity.
/square6Acute toxicity occurs in adults if >25,000 IU/kg of
vitamin A is ingested. Symptoms include nausea,
vomiting, increased intracranial pressure, skin
desquamation, vertigo, and blurry vision (pseudo-tumour cerebri). In very high doses, drowsiness,malaise, and recurrent vomiting can follow theabove symptoms. In infants under six months ofage, even 20,000 IU may produce toxic effects.
/square6Chronic vitamin A toxicity may occur with intakeof 4000 IU/kg or more daily for 6–12 months. Signsand symptoms include low-grade fever, headache,fatigue, anorexia, intestinal disturbances, hepato-
splenomegaly, anemia, hypercalcemia, subcuta-
Figure 11.3 Vertical banded gastroplasty–Vertical banded gastroplasty —this is a restrictive
procedure in which the upper part of the stomachis partitioned by a vertical staple line with a tightoutlet wrapped by a prosthetic mesh or band. Itis often referred to as a stomach stapling opera-tion (Fig. 11.3). The small proximal pouch gets
filled quickly by food and prevents consumption
of a large meal.

/square6Nutritional Disorders579
11neous swelling, nocturia, joint and bone pain, and
skin changes such as yellowing, dryness, alopecia,and photosensitivity.
/square6Vitamin A is highly teratogenic if taken during
pregnancy. Hence pregnant women should not take
vitamin A supplements unless there is deficiency.
Q.Beriberi.
Q.Vit B1 (thiamine) deficiency.
Q.Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome.
/square6Thiamine is found in larger quantities in yeast,
legumes, pork, rice, and cereals.
Activity
/square6Thiamine is required for carbohydrate metabolism.Thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP) is an essential co-enzyme in the conversion of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA. This is the bridge between glycolysis and thetricarboxylic acid (Krebs) cycle.
/square6TPP is also the co-enzyme for transketolase of thepentose phosphate pathway.
/square6Thiamine is also important for nerve impulseconduction.
Thiamine Deficiency
/square6Cells cannot metabolize glucose aerobically leadingto accumulation of pyruvic and lactic acids, whichproduce vasodilatation and increased cardiacoutput. There is also less ATP generation.
/square6Thiamine deficiency is mainly seen in chronic alco-holics due to poor diet and impaired absorption.Deficiency is also seen in people eating mainlypolished rice.
Clinical Features
/square6Infantile beriberi  is seen in exclusively breastfed
infants of thiamin-deficient mothers, and is
invariably fatal.
/square6Dry beriberi  mainly affects nervous system and is
characterized by peripheral neuropathy with wristand/or foot drop, Wernicke’s disease and Korsakoff
psychosis. Wernicke’s disease is a triad of nystagmus,
ophthalmoplegia, and ataxia, along with confusion.Korsakoff’s psychosis is impaired short-termmemory and confabulation with otherwise grosslynormal cognition. These two are almost exclusivelyseen in alcoholics with thiamine deficiency.
/square6Wet beriberi  mainly affects heart and causes conges-
tive cardiac failure with pulmonary and peripheraledema.
Treatment
/square6Thiamine is given at a dose of 50 to 100 mg for 7 to14 days IV or IM. Then an oral dose of 10 mg per
day is given until full recovery is achieved./square6Korsakoff’s psychosis is irreversible and does not
respond to thiamin treatment.
Q.Niacin deficiency (pellagra).
/square6Niacin is a generic term for nicotinic acid and other
derivatives with similar nutritional activity. Niacinis an essential component of the coenzymes nicotin-amide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) and nicotin-
amide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP),
which are involved in many oxidation–reductionreactions.
/square6The major food sources of niacin are protein foods,
cereals, vegetables, and dairy products. It is also
synthesized by the body in small amounts fromtryptophan.
Causes of Niacin Deficiency
/square6Pellagra is now uncommon except in parts of Africa,alcoholics and in patients with anorexia nervosa,or malabsorptive disease.
/square6Pellagra can occur in Hartnup’s disease which ischaracterized by impaired absorption of severalamino acids, including tryptophan.
/square6It may also be seen in carcinoid syndrome, wheretryptophan is utilized for the production of 5-HTrather than the synthesis of niacin.
Deficiency (Pellagra)
/square6Pellagra (meaning “raw skin”) is characterized bythree Ds: dermatitis, diarrhea, and dementia.
/square6Dermatitis— it appears as erythema resembling
severe sunburn, symmetrically over the areas of thebody exposed to sunlight, particularly the dorsumof hands and feet, and neck are involved (Casal’snecklace). Skin lesions are dark, dry, and scaling.
/square6Diarrhea— it is often associated with glossitis, stoma-
titis and dysphagia, reflecting the presence of
inflammation throughout the gastrointestinal tract.
/square6Dementia— it begins with lethargy, insomnia and
irritability, and progresses to confusion, memoryloss, hallucinations, and psychosis.
Treatment
/square6Nicotinamide is given in a dose of 100 mg 8-hourlyby mouth or by the parenteral route for 5 days.
/square6Intake of diet rich in niacin such as meats, milk,peanuts, green leafy vegetables, whole or enrichedgrains, and brewers’ dry yeast.
Q.Vitamin B12 deficiency.
/square6Vitamin B12 deficiency causes megaloblastic anemia,
and neurological degeneration.
/square6Vitamin B12 is required for the integrity of myelin.
In severe deficiency there is demyelination. It maybe clinically manifest as peripheral neuropathy or

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
11580 spinal cord degeneration affecting both posterior
and lateral columns (subacute combined degenera-tion of the spinal cord). In addition, there may becerebral manifestations (resembling dementia) oroptic atrophy.
/square6Treatment is with parenteral hydroxocobalamin.
/square6Vit B12 is discussed in detail in hematology chapter.
Q.Vitamin C (ascorbic acid) deficiency; scurvy.
/square6Vitamin C is an essential vitamin for human beings.
Vitamin C plays a role in collagen, carnitine, hor-
mone, and amino acid formation. It is essential forwound healing and facilitates recovery from burns.Vitamin C is also an antioxidant, supports immunefunction, and facilitates the absorption of iron.
/square6It takes part in the hydroxylation of proline andlysine to hydroxyproline and hydroxylysine whichis present in collagen.
/square6Ascorbic acid is present in fresh fruit and vege-tables. It is easily destroyed by heat. Hence manytraditional cooking methods reduce or eliminate it.
Causes of Deficiency
• Lack of dietary fruit and vegetables >2 months
• Infants fed exclusively on boiled milk• Severely malnourished individuals• Drug and alcohol abusers• Extreme poverty• Smoking
/square6Defective formation of collagen impairs wound
healing, causes capillary hemorrhage and reducedplatelet adhesiveness (normal platelets are rich inascorbate).
Clinical Features
/square6Severe deficiency causes scurvy.
/square6Symptoms develop after weeks to months ofvitamin C depletion. Lassitude, weakness, irritability,weight loss, and vague myalgias and arthralgiasmay develop early.
/square6Gums become swollen, purple, spongy, friable andbleed easily. Eventually, teeth become loose andavulsed.
/square6Hemorrhagic manifestation include perifollicularhemorrhages, petechiae and purpura, splinterhemorrhages, hemarthroses, and subperiostealhemorrhages. Intracerebral hemorrhage can causedeath.
/square6Anemia.
/square6Impaired wound healing.
Diagnosis
/square6It is based on clinical features. Serum ascorbic acidlevels of <0.2 mg/dL indicates vitamin C deficiency,
but this test is not routinely done.Treatment
/square6Scurvy is treated with 300–1000 mg of ascorbic acid
orally per day.
/square6Eating raw fruits and vegetables especially citrusfruits.
Q.Fluorosis.
/square6Excess fluoride consumption (water fluoride
content >3 to 5 ppm) can cause fluorosis or hypo-mineralization of the dental enamel. The mechanismby which excessive fluoride causes fluorosis is not
fully understood.
/square6The earliest signs of fluorosis are chalky-white
patches on the surface of the enamel. These patchesbecome stained yellow or brown, producing a
characteristic mottled appearance. Severe toxicity
weakens the enamel, pitting its surface and teethbecome brittle and easily breakable.
/square6Other features are sclerosis of the bones, especially
of spine, pelvis and limbs. Ligament and tendon
calcification also can occur.
/square6Fluorosis is primarily a cosmetic concern, but it canmake the teeth more susceptible to wear and break-
age. Fluorosis can be prevented by avoiding excess
fluoride consumption (e.g. avoiding swallowing offluoridated toothpaste or mouth rinses).
Q.Vit D deficiency.
/square6Vit D is a fat soluble vitamin. There are two chemical
forms of Vit D; ergocalciferol (vitamin D2) and
cholecalciferol (vitamin D3). Ergocalciferol (Vit D2)
is present in food. Cholecalciferol (Vit D3) is
synthesized in the skin on exposure to sunlight from
7-dehydrocholesterol.
/square6Natural dietary sources of Vit D include egg yolk,liver, fatty fish, butter and milk.
/square6Vitamin D is hydroxylated in the liver to 25-hydroxyvitamin D (calcidiol), which is the majorcirculating form of vitamin D and is the best indexof vitamin D levels. Calcidiol is hydroxylated in
the kidney to 1, 25-dihydroxyvitamin D (calcitriol),
which is the most active form.
/square6Vit D deficiency is present when serum levels of25-hydroxyvitamin D is less than 20 ng/mL.
/square6Vitamin D deficiency produces defective mineraliza-tion of bone, leading to rickets in children andosteomalacia in adults.
/square6A minimum intake of 200 IU of vitamin D per dayis recommended for adults. For pregnant andlactating women, a minimum of 400 IU per day isrecommended.
Actions
/square6Vitamin D has a variety of actions on calcium,phosphate, and bone metabolism.

/square6Nutritional Disorders581
11/square6It increases serum calcium and phosphate concentra-
tion by increasing intestinal calcium and phosphateabsorption, increasing renal calcium reabsorption,and enhancing PTH-mediated bone resorption.
Causes of Vitamin D Deficiency
• Deficient intake
• Malabsorption• Inadequate sunlight exposure• Loss of vitamin D binding protein (nephrotic syndrome)• Defective 25-hydroxylation (e.g. cirrhosis of liver)• Defective 1-alpha 25-hydroxylation (e.g. renal failure)• Vitamin D-resistance
Clinical Features of Vit D Deficiency
/square6Vit D deficiency causes rickets in children and osteo-
malacia in adults. For details, see the following pages.
Investigations
/square625-hydroxyvitamin D level will be low. A level of
less than 20 ng/mL indicates vitamin D deficiency.
/square6Serum parathyroid hormone level will be elevated.But PTH measurement is not routinely required.
Treatment of Vitamin D Deficiency
/square6Initial treatment with 50,000 units of vitamin D2 or
D3 orally once per week for six to eight weeks, and
then 800 to 1000 IU of vitamin D3 daily thereafter.
Vitamin D3 is better than vitamin D2 for vitamin D
supplementation. Loading dose is not recommended
in pregnant women.
/square6All patients should maintain a daily calcium intakeof at least 1000 mg per day.
Q.Osteomalacia.
/square6Osteomalacia is characterized by defective bone
mineralization, bone pain, myopathy, increased
bone fragility and fractures.
/square6Osteomalacia has to be differentiated from osteo-porosis. Osteoporosis refers to decreased bone mass
due to imbalance between bone formation and boneresorption. In osteoporosis, the bones are porousand brittle, whereas in osteomalacia the bones aresoft. Osteopenia is a condition in which bonemineral density is lower than normal, but not severe
enough to call it as osteoporosis. Osteopenia is a
precursor to osteoporosis.
Etiology
Vitamin D deficiency
• Deficient intake• Malabsorption• Inadequate sunlight exposure• Loss of vitamin D binding protein (nephrotic syndrome)• Defective 25-hydroxylation (e.g. cirrhosis of liver)• Defective 1-alpha 25-hydroxylation (e.g. renal failure)• Vitamin D resistancePhosphate deficiency• Decreased intake• Antacids• Impaired renal reabsorption (e.g. Fanconi syndrome)
Clinical Features
/square6It can be asymptomatic and present radiologically
as osteopenia.
/square6It can also produce diffuse bone pain and tender-
ness and muscle weakness.
/square6Muscle weakness is characteristically proximal andmay be associated with muscle wasting, hypotonia,and discomfort with movement.
/square6Fractures may occur with little or no trauma.
/square6Bone deformities can occur in severe osteomalaciaof long duration.
Investigations
/square6Radiologic findings
– Reduced bone density with thinning of the cortex.
– Changes in vertebral bodies—loss of radiologic
distinctness of the vertebral body trabeculae,concavity of the vertebral bodies, the codfishvertebrae. The vertebral disks appear large andbiconvex. There may be spinal compressionfractures.
– Looser zones—these are pseudofractures, fissures,
or narrow radiolucent lines, and are charac-teristic radiologic finding in osteomalacia. Theyare usually found at the femoral neck, femoral
shaft, and the pubic and ischial rami. The term
“Milkman syndrome” refers to the combinationof multiple, bilateral and symmetric pseudo-fractures in a patient with osteomalacia.
/square6Low vitamin D level.
/square6Hypocalcemia or hypophosphatemia.
/square6High alkaline phosphatase (ALP) level.
/square6Low bone mineral density (BMD).
/square6Iliac crest bone biopsy is the gold standard forestablishing the diagnosis but should be done onlywhen the diagnosis is in doubt.
Treatment
/square6Underlying cause should be treated.
/square6Correction of hypophosphatemia, hypocalcemia,and vitamin D deficiency.
Q.Rickets.
/square6Rickets refers to the changes caused by deficient
mineralization at the growth plate. It occurs inchildren. Osteomalacia refers to impaired minerali-zation of the bone matrix and occurs in adults.
/square6Hypocalcemic rickets is due to calcium deficiency.
/square6Hypophosphatemic rickets is due to phosphate
deficiency.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
11582 Etiology
/square6Same as osteomalacia.
Clinical Manifestations
/square6Rickets manifests initially at sites of rapid bone
growth such as distal forearm, knee, andcostochondral junctions.
Skeletal Findings
/square6Delay in the closure of the fontanelles.
/square6Parietal and frontal bossing.
/square6Craniotabes (soft skull bones).
/square6Enlargement of the costochondral junction visibleas beading along the anterolateral aspects of thechest (the “rachitic rosary”).
/square6Development of Harrison sulcus caused by themuscular pull of the diaphragmatic attachments tothe lower ribs.
/square6Enlargement of the wrist and bowing of the distalradius and ulna.
/square6Progressive lateral bowing of the femur and tibia.
Extraskeletal Findings
/square6Decreased muscle tone, seizures, increased sweat-ing and hypoplasia of the dental enamel are seen
in hypocalcemic rickets.
/square6Abscesses of the teeth occur in hypophosphatemic
rickets.
Laboratory Findings
/square6Alkaline phosphatase is markedly increased.
/square6Low serum calcium and phosphorus.
/square6Parathyroid hormone level is elevated in hypo-calcemic rickets and normal in hypophosphatemic
rickets./square6Serum concentration of 25-hydroxyvitamin D is low
in vitamin D deficiency.
/square6Measurement of serum creatinine to exclude renalinsufficiency as the primary etiology.
/square6Measurement of liver enzymes to exclude liverdisease as the etiology of elevated alkalinephosphatase activity.
Radiographic Findings
/square6Widening of the epiphyseal plate and loss of defini-tion of the zone of provisional calcification at the
epiphyseal/metaphyseal interface
/square6Disorganization of the growth plate with cupping,
splaying, formation of cortical spurs, and stippling.
/square6Delayed appearance of epiphyseal bone centers.
/square6The shafts of the long bones are osteopenic, withthin cortex. Trabecular pattern is reduced and
becomes coarse. Bone deformities are usually
present and in severe rickets, pathological fracturesand Looser zones may be noted.
Treatment
/square6Rickets caused by vitamin D deficiency is treatedwith Vit D
2 or Vit D3 and calcium supplementation
daily. After 3–4 months, the dose of vitamin D isreduced to a maintenance level.
/square6Treatment of hypophosphataemic rickets is withphosphate supplements, combined with vitamin Dto promote intestinal calcium and phosphateabsorption.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of osteoporosis.
/square6Osteoporosis is characterized by a decrease in the
amount of bone, but the ratio of bone mineral tobone matrix is normal. In osteomalacia, the ratio ofbone mineral to bone matrix is low. Osteoporosismeans “porous bone.” The rate of bone formationis often normal, whereas the rate of bone resorption
is increased.
/square6Osteoporosis is associated with increased risk of
fractures especially the spine and hip. It is a leadingcause of morbidity and mortality in elderly people.
Etiology
Primary osteoporosis
• Most common cause and most cases occur in postmeno-
pausal women and older men.
Secondary osteoporosis
• Cancer (e.g. multiple myeloma, lymphoma, leukemia).• COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary disease) due to the
disorder and its treatment with glucocorticoids, tobacco use,
and decreased physical activity.
• Chronic kidney disease.• Drugs (e.g. glucocorticoids, phenytoin, heparin, alcohol,
proton pump inhibitors).
Figure 11.4 Clinical features of rickets


/square6Nutritional Disorders583
11• Endocrine disease (e.g. Cushing disease, hyperparathyroidism,
hyperthyroidism, hypogonadism, hyperprolactinemia,
diabetes mellitus)
• Hypercalciuria• Hypervitaminosis A• Hypophosphatemia• Vitamin D deficiency• Immobilization• Liver disease• Malabsorption syndromes• Prolonged weightlessness (as occurs in space flight)• Rheumatoid arthritis
Clinical Features
/square6Usually asymptomatic unless there is fracture.
/square6Backache or spontaneous fracture or collapse of
vertebra.
Investigations
/square6X-rays show osteopenia.
/square6Serum calcium and phosphate to rule out hypo-calcemia.
/square6ALP may be slightly elevated, following a fracture.
/square6Parathyroid hormone level to screen for primaryhyperparathyroidism.
/square6Serum vitamin D level.
/square6Thyroid function tests.
/square6Serum testosterone in men (hypogonadism).
/square6Tissue transglutaminase antibodies to screen forceliac disease.
/square6Serum and urine protein electrophoresis to rule outmultiple myeloma.
/square624-hour urinary free cortisol if features of Cushing’ssyndrome are present.
/square6Bone densitometry using dual energy X-rayabsorptiometry (DEXA).
Treatment
General Measures
/square6Good diet containing adequate protein, calories,calcium, and vitamin D.
/square6Physical activity increases bone density.
/square6Subjects who already have osteoporosis should takeprecautions to avoid falls (e.g. adequate lighting,handrails on stairs, handholds in bathrooms).
/square6Bedridden patients should be given active orpassive exercises.
/square6Alcohol and smoking should be avoided.
/square6If on steroids, dose should be reduced or disconti-nued, if possible.
Specific Measures
/square6Treatment is indicated for all patients with osteo-porosis and for those who have had fragility
fractures. Prophylactic treatment should also be
considered for patients with advanced osteopenia./square6Vitamin D and calcium supplementation —oral vitamin
D is given in doses of 800–1000 IU daily and calciumsupplementation in a dose of 1200 to 1500 mg/dayincluding dietary consumption.
/square6Bisphosphonates —these are the first line therapy to
treat osteoporosis. They inhibit osteoclast-inducedbone resorption and reduce the incidence of bothvertebral and nonvertebral fractures. Both oral and
parenteral bisphosphonates are available. Examples
are alendronate, risedronate, zoledronic acid andpamidronate. Osteonecrosis of the jaw has beenassociated with use of bisphosphonates; however,this condition is rare in patients taking oral bis-phosphonates.
/square6Hormone replacement therapy —low doses of estrogen
in postmenopausal women can prevent osteo-
porosis. However, it is associated increased risk of
thromboembolism, endometrial cancer and breastcancer.
/square6Selective estrogen receptor modulators —raloxifene,
60 mg/d orally, can be used by postmenopausalwomen instead of estrogen for the prevention ofosteoporosis. Unlike estrogen, raloxifene does notcause endometrial hyperplasia, uterine bleeding, or
cancer. The risk of breast cancer is also reduced.
However, since raloxifene is a potential teratogen,it is contraindicated in premenopausal women. Italso increases the risk of thromboembolism.
/square6Teriparatide —this is an analog of PTH. It stimulates
production of new bone matrix that must bemineralized. Patients should take sufficient vitaminD and calcium along with this drug. When given
to patients with osteoporosis daily subcutaneously
for 2 years, teriparatide dramatically improves bonedensity. Hypercalcemia is a risk with this medicine.Following a course of teriparitide, a course ofbisphosphonates should be considered to retain theimproved bone density.
/square6Denosumab  is a monoclonal antibody and reduces
bone resorption by osteoclasts.
/square6Teriparatide and denosumab are used in patients who
cannot tolerate other forms of therapies.
Q.Hypervitaminosis D.
/square6Vitamin D intoxication may occur in fad dieters who
consume “megadoses” of supplements or in patients
on vitamin D replacement therapy. Empiricaladministration of very high doses of intramuscularvitamin D injections at frequent intervals is one of
the most common causes of hypervitaminosis D.
Other causes are primary hyperparathyroidism,
MEN I and II syndrome, malignancies such as
Hodgkin’s lymphoma and non-Hodgkin’s lymp-homa, granulomatous diseases like sarcoidosis andtuberculosis.
/square6The upper limit of vitamin D intake is 2000 IU daily.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
11584 Clinical Features
/square6Vitamin D excess can result in hypercalcemia,
hypercalciuria, confusion, polyuria, polydipsia,anorexia, vomiting, muscle weakness, and bone
demineralization with pain.
/square6Widespread metastatic calcifications can occur in
the kidney, lung, gastric mucosa and blood vessels.Hypertension and renal failure may result.
Investigations
/square6Serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D level is >100 ng/ml.
serum calcium and urine calcium level is high.
Treatment
/square6Restriction of dietary calcium intake and appro-
priate attention to hydration.
/square6Discontinuation of vitamin D, usually leads toresolution of hypercalcemia.
/square6Prednisone may help reduce plasma calcium levelsby reducing intestinal calcium absorption.
/square6Bisphosphonate therapy can be usefully added tothe regime.
Q.Vitamin K.
/square6The name “K” comes from the German/Danish
word koagulations vitamin (clotting vitamin).Vitamin K plays an important role in coagulationby acting as a cofactor for the post-translationalcarboxylation of coagulation factors II, VII, IX, and
X. Without carboxylation, coagulation reactions
occur slowly and hemostasis is impaired./square6Vitamin K is primarily supplied by diet (greenvegetables like spinach and broccoli) and synthesisby intestinal bacteria.
/square6Vit K is a fat soluble vitamin. Pancreatic and biliary
function need to be intact for proper vitamin K
absorption. Dietary vitamin K is protein-bound andrequires pancreatic enzymes in the small intestinefor liberation. Bile salts then solubilize vitamin Kinto luminal micelles for absorption.
/square6Deficiency develops because of inadequate diet, useof broad spectrum antibiotics, liver and pancreaticdisorders. A patient not taking orally and is put onbroad spectrum antibiotics can develop Vit Kdeficiency in as little as 1 week.
Clinical Features
/square6There are no specific clinical features. Bleeding can
occur at any site. Vitamin K deficiency is common
in the newborn and can manifest as hemorrhagicdisease of the newborn. Hence, parenteral Vit K isgiven routinely to newborns.
Laboratory Findings
/square6In mild vitamin K deficiency only the PT is pro-longed.
/square6In severe Vit K deficiency both PT and aPTT areprolonged, but PT is more prolonged than aPTT.
Treatment
/square6Vitamin K should be replaced parenterally eithersubcutaneously or intravenously. A single dose of15 mg will completely correct laboratory abnorma-lities in 12–24 hours.

12
Q.Give the classification of psychiatric disorders.
/square6Psychiatric disorders are central nervous system
diseases characterized by disturbances in emotion,cognition, motivation, and socialization.
/square6All psychiatric disorders currently lack well-defined neuropathology and bona fide biologic
markers. Therefore, diagnosis continues to be madesolely from clinical features.
/square6The following classification of psychiatric disordersis from ‘The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual ofMental Disorders’, Fifth Edition (DSM-5).
• Neurodevelopmental disorders
• Schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders• Bipolar and related disorders
• Depressive disorders
• Anxiety disorders• Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders
• Trauma- and stressor-related disorders
• Dissociative disorders• Somatic symptom and related disorders
• Feeding and eating disorders
• Elimination disorders• Sleep-wake disorders
• Sexual dysfunctions
• Gender dysphoria• Disruptive, impulse—control, and conduct disorders
• Substance-related and addictive disorders
• Neurocognitive disorders• Personality disorders
• Paraphilic disorders
• Other mental disorders
Q.Psychosis.
Q.Brief psychotic disorder.
/square6Psychotic disorders are characterized by delusions,
hallucinations, disorganized thinking, motorPsychiatric Disorders
behavior abnormalities (including catatonia), andnegative symptoms.
/square6It includes schizophrenia and other psychoticdisorders.
/square6Brief psychotic disorder consists of delusions,hallucinations, or other psychotic symptoms for atleast 1 day but <1 month. It is typically caused bysevere stress in susceptible people. If psychoticsymptoms last more than 1 month, then it is called
schizophrenia.
Clinical Features
/square6Hallucinations —these are false sensory perceptions
occurring in any of the five sensory modalities.Auditory hallucinations are the most common,followed by visual, tactile, olfactory, and gustatory.
/square6Delusions —false beliefs that are firmly held despite
obvious evidence to the contrary, and not typicalof the patient’s culture, faith, or family, are classifiedas delusions. Examples are persecutory, grandiose,religious, somatic, and other delusions.
/square6Thought disorganization —disruption of the logical
process of thought may manifest as nonsensicalspeech, or bizarre behavior. Disorganized thinking
may prevent the patient from giving a coherent
history or meaningful consent to treatment.
/square6Agitation —agitation is an acute state of anxiety,
heightened emotional arousal, and increased motor
activity.
/square6Aggression —acts or threats of violence may occur
in patients with persecutory delusions, thought dis-
organization, and poor impulse control.
Disorders Associated with Psychotic Features
/square6Schizophrenia.
/square6Bipolar mania.
/square6Major depression with psychotic features.
585

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
12586 /square6Alzheimer’s disease.
/square6Delirium.
/square6Substance-induced psychotic disorder (e.g. alcohol,
illicit drugs, withdrawal of alcohol or sedative/hypnotic drugs).
/square6Psychosis secondary to a medical condition (CNSinfections, seizures, endocrine problems, hypoxia,hypercarbia, hypoglycemia, fluid or electrolyteabnormalities, hepatic and renal disorders).
Treatment
/square6Antipsychotic drugs are the mainstay of treatment.Examples of antipsychotic drugs are risperidone,
olanzapine, quetiapine, clozapine, etc.
/square6Psychological treatment.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features and manage-
ment of schizophrenia.
Q.Enumerate the positive symptoms (first rank
symptoms) of schizophrenia.
/square6Schizophrenia is a psychotic disorder characterized
by hallucinations (false perceptions), delusions(false beliefs), disorganized speech and behavior,flattened affect (restricted range of emotions),cognitive deficits (impaired reasoning and problemsolving), and occupational and social dysfunction.
/square6It is one of the most disabling and economicallycatastrophic disorders, because of lifelong course,debilitating symptoms, and lack of social accepta-bility.
/square6The term schizophreniform disorder describes patients
who meet the symptom requirements but not theduration requirements for schizophrenia, andschizoaffective disorder is used for those who manifest
symptoms of schizophrenia and independent
periods of mood disturbance.
Etiology
/square6Genetic factors —schizophrenia can be transmitted
genetically. There is 50 percent concordance ratebetween monozygotic twins and 10 percent con-currence rate for first-degree relatives.
/square6Environmental factors—advanced paternal age,first and second trimester insults to fetal develop-ment, including viral infection, starvation, and toxicexposure, perinatal insults such as anoxia and birthtrauma are associated with an increased risk of
schizophrenia.
/square6Exposure to psychoactive drugs in adolescence and
young adulthood.
/square6Psychological stresses —adverse life events and highly
emotional family environment may precipitateepisodes of schizophrenia.
/square6Hyperactivity of dopaminergic projections fromthe midbrain to the anterior cortex, decrease inprefrontal activity of dopaminergic pathways and
alterations in glutamate and GABA neurotrans-mission in the prefrontal cortex has been noted inschizophrenic patients.
/square6Structural abnormalities of the brain —schizophrenic
brains are smaller than normal brains, with enlargedventricles.
/square6Schizophrenia can be associated with temporal lobe
epilepsy, Huntington’s chorea, cerebral tumors and
demyelinating diseases. This is known as sympto-matic schizophrenia.
Clinical Features
Positive Symptoms (First-rank Symptoms)
/square6Positive symptoms are synonymous with psychosis.
“Positive” refers to the active quality of these
symptoms and are of the ‘first rank’ in importancewhen making the diagnosis of schizophrenia. Thesecan be remembered by the mnemonic ABCD.
/square6A: Auditory hallucinations:  These are commonly of
voices heard outside the head that talk to the personor talk about the person. Sometimes, the voicesrepeat the person’s thoughts. Hallucinations ofother sensory modalities also occur.
/square6B: Broadcasting, insertion/withdrawal of thoughts:Disturbances of the normal private boundary ofthinking manifests as belief that their thoughts are
being broadcast to others and others thoughts are
being ‘inserted’ into their mind.
/square6C: Control of feelings, impulses or acts by others.
/square6D: Delusions.
Negative Symptoms
/square6Flattened (blunted) affect —this is loss of capacity to
express feelings, resulting in a blank appearance,monotonous voice, and absence of meaningful
gestures.
/square6Apathy and loss of drive (avolition) —to involve in
constructive activity, social interaction, and recrea-
tion, etc.
/square6Social inattention —it includes a loss of interest in
interactions with family, friends, colleagues,neighbors, and others.
/square6Poverty of speech: Decreased speech and terse replies
to questions, creating the impression of inner empti-ness. The speech may be circumstantial (i.e. thepatient takes a long time and uses many words inanswering a question) or tangential (i.e. the patient
speaks at length but never actually answers the
question).
/square6Poor self-care.
Other Symptoms
Catatonia —this refers to ado ption of awkward postures
for prolonged periods.

/square6Psychiatric Disorders587
12Diagnostic Criteria
/square6Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
Fifth Edition  (DSM-5)  criteria for the diagnosis of
schizophrenia are as follows.
• Patient must have experienced at least 2 of the following
symptoms:
– Delusions– Hallucinations– Disorganized speech– Disorganized or catatonic behavior– Negative symptoms
• At least 1 of the symptoms must be the presence of delusions,
hallucinations, or disorganized speech.
• Continuous signs of the disturbance must persist for at least
6 months, during which the patient must experience at least
1 month of active symptoms (or less if successfully treated),with social or occupational deterioration problems occurring
over a significant amount of time. These problems must not
be attributable to another condition.
Management
Antipsychotic Agents
/square6Antipsychotics (also called neuroleptics) may be
divided into conventional (typical, or first-
generation) drugs such as chlorpromazine and
haloperidol, and newer (atypical, or second-generation) drugs such as clozapine, olanzapine,quetiapine and risperidone.
/square6These drugs work by blocking D2 dopamine
receptors in the brain. Newer drugs also block 5HT2receptors and are less likely to produce extra-pyramidal side-effects, but clozapine can causeagranulocytosis and requires regular monitoring ofWBC count.
/square6They take 2–3 weeks to be maximally effective.After symptoms are controlled, treatment is conti-nued for 1–2 years to prevent relapse. In patientswith multiple psychotic episodes, treatment may
be required for many years.
Psychological Treatment
/square6General support for the patient and his or her family
and family education.
/square6Cognitive behavioral therapy may help patients tocope with their symptoms and also to adhere to
treatment with antipsychotic drugs.
Social Treatment
/square6After symptoms of schizophrenia have been con-
trolled by drugs, social and occupationalrehabilitation is required to obtain employment andto re-establish a social network.
Q.Define anxiety. Discuss briefly the clinical features
and management of anxiety disorders.
Q.Generalized anxiety disorder./square6Everyone periodically experiences fear and anxiety.
/square6Fear  is an emotional, physical, and behavioral
response to an imminent threat (e.g. seeing a snake,
a vehicle coming towards us at high speed).
/square6Anxiety  is a distressing, unpleasant emotional state
of nervousness and uneasiness. Anxiety can be anti-
cipatory before a threat, persist after a threat has
passed, or occur without an identifiable threat.
/square6Anxiety is one of the most common psychiatric
disorders in the general population.
Classification of Anxiety Disorders as per DSM-5
/square6Anxiety disorders (panic disorder, generalized
anxiety disorder, phobia, etc.)
/square6Obsessive-compulsive and other related disorders
/square6Trauma- and stressor-related disorders (post-traumatic stress disorder, acute stress disorder,adjustment disorder, etc.)
Clinical Features
/square6Initial manifestations appear at the age of 20–35years, and it is more common in women.
/square6Symptoms include excessive anxiety and worryabout a number of events or activities, irritability,
difficulty in concentrating, and insomnia for at least
six months.
/square6Somatic manifestations include increased heart rate,palpitations; shortness of breath, rapid breathing;
chest pain or pressure; choking sensation; dizziness;
sweating; dyspepsia; trembling; tingling or numb-ness in arms and legs; faintness; and dry mouth.
/square6Anxiety disorders can be many types. These are:
–Generalized anxiety disorder: The key feature of this
disorder is persistent and excessive worry aboutvarious domains, including work and schoolperformance. This is the most common clinically
significant anxiety disorder.
–Separation anxiety : Pathological anxiety atypical
for his/her age due to separation from attach-ment figures.
–Specific phobia:  Individuals with specific phobias
are fearful or anxious about specific objects orsituations which they avoid or endure withintense fear or anxiety.
–Social anxiety:  This disorder is characterized by
marked or intense fear or anxiety of social situa-tions in which one could be the subject of scrutiny.
–Panic disorder: Panic attacks are abrupt surges of
intense fear or extreme discomfort that reach apeak within minutes, accompanied by physicaland cognitive symptoms such as palpitations,sweating, shortness of breath, fear of going crazy,
or fear of dying.
–Substance/medication-induced anxiety disorder :
Occurs due to substance intoxication or with-drawal or to medical treatment.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
12588 –Anxiety disorder due to medical conditions: Medical
conditions such as hyperthyroidism, hypogly-cemia, and pheochromocytoma can cause anxiety
disorder.
Treatment
/square6Antidepressants such as escitalopram and venla-faxine are effective in anxiety disorder. Other usefuldrugs are benzodiazepines and buspirone.
/square6Psychotherapy (cognitive-behavioral therapy),relaxation and biofeedback may be of some help.
Q.Phobic disorder.
/square6A phobia is an abnormal or excessive fear of an
object or situation, which leads to avoidance of it.
/square6Social phobia —it is marked and persistent fear of
social or performance situations such as attendingsocial functions, dating, participation in small
groups, etc. They often live alone and work at
solitary jobs.
/square6Agoraphobia —it is fear of open places. Agoraphobic
patients fear venturing into strange and distant
areas. They also fear being in crowds, standing in
line, or using public transport.
/square6Claustrophobia —this is opposite of agoraphobia, i.e.
fear of closed spaces, e.g. fear of MRI when head
goes into the MRI machine.
/square6There are several other types of specific phobias,
some of which are acrophobia (fear of heights),aviophobia (fear of flying), trypanophobia (fear ofinjections), zoophobia (fear of animals, usually
spiders, snakes, or mice), etc.
Treatment
/square6Exposure therapy:  Patients are encouraged to seek
out, confront, and remain in contact with what theyfear until their anxiety is gradually relieved througha process called habituation.
/square6Benzodiazepines (lorazepam) or beta-blockers(propranolol) are helpful to prevent phobia if takenbefore getting exposed to the object of fear.
Q.Panic attack and panic disorder.
/square6Panic attack  is the sudden onset of a brief period of
intense discomfort, anxiety, or fear accompaniedby somatic symptoms. Panic disorder  is occurrence
of repeated panic attacks accompanied by fears
about future attacks or changes in behavior to avoidsituations that might predispose to attacks.
/square6Somatic symptoms include chest pain, palpitations,
dizziness, nausea and carpopedal spasm. These
symptoms are in part due to involuntary over-breathing (hyperventilation). Patients often fearthey are suffering from a serious illness such as aheart attack or stroke, and may seek emergencymedical care./square6Panic attacks may occur in any anxiety disorder(such as phobias). For example, a person with aphobia of snakes may panic at seeing a snake.
Treatment
/square6Antidepressants such as sertraline, amitryptaline,etc. are effective. Benzodiazepines work morerapidly than antidepressants, but there is risk ofdependence if used for a long time.
/square6Psychotherapy in the form of exposure therapy andcognitive-behavioral therapy are used along withdrugs.
Q.Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD).
/square6Obsessions are persistent intrusive thoughts.
Compulsions are intrusive behaviors. In the
obsessive-compulsive reaction, an irrational idea orimpulse persistently intrudes into the mind, leadingto repetitive actions (such as washing the handsmany times). These actions are recognized by theindividual as absurd, but anxiety is alleviated only
by ritualistic performance of the action. Under
extreme stress, these patients may exhibit paranoidand delusional behaviors, which can mimic schizo-phrenia.
/square6These patients are usually predictable, orderly, andintelligent. Highest prevalence is in the young,divorced, separated, and unemployed. Males andfemales are equally affected.
/square6There is a high correlation between OCD and
depression; two-thirds of OCD patients will develop
major depression during their lifetime.
Treatment
/square6Exposure and ritual prevention therapy is ofteneffective; it involves gradually exposing patients tosituations or people that trigger obsessions and ritualswhile requiring them not to perform their rituals.
/square6Antidepressants such as SSRIs (selective serotoninreuptake inhibitors) and clomipramine are alsoeffective in OCD.
Q.Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
/square6PTSD is recurring, intrusive recollections of an over-
whelming traumatic event (e.g. rape, severe burns,accident, military combat). Recollections last>1 month and begin within 6 months of the event.
/square6Women are more affected than men.
Etiology and Pathophysiology
/square6It is hypothesized that in PTSD there is excessiverelease of norepinephrine from the locus coeruleusin response to stress and increased noradrenergicactivity at projection sites in the hippocampus andamygdala. These changes facilitate the encoding offear-based memories.

/square6Psychiatric Disorders589
12/square6Risk factors for the development of PTSD include
a past psychiatric history and personality charac-teristics of high neuroticism and extroversion. Twinstudies show a substantial genetic influence.
Clinical Features
/square6PTSD usually starts after a few days or months afterthe traumatic event. Generally, events likely toevoke PTSD are those that invoke feelings of fear,
helplessness, or horror.
/square6Typical symptoms are recurrent intrusive memories
(flashbacks) of the traumatic event, as well as sleepdisturbance, nightmares (usually of the traumatic
event) from which the patient awakes in a state of
anxiety, symptoms of autonomic arousal, andemotional blunting. Patients often actively avoidstimuli that precipitate recollections of the trauma.
/square6These patients are at risk of developing other dis-orders related to anxiety, mood, and substanceabuse.
Treatment
/square6Psychotherapy:  It involves exposure therapy. Here
the person is exposed to situations which he avoidsbecause they may trigger recollections of the trauma.Repeated exposure in fantasy to the traumatic
experience itself usually lessens distress after some
initial increase in discomfort.
/square6Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI) suchas sertraline are also effective in PTSD.
/square6Most patients recover within 2 years.
Q.What are mood disorders (affective disorders)?
Discuss the etiology, clinical features diagnosis, and
management of depression.
/square6Mood disorders are emotional disturbances consist-
ing of prolonged periods of excessive sadness,
excessive joyousness (mania), or both. They include
depression, bipolar disorder (combining episodesof both mania and depression) and dysthymia.
Depression
/square6Depression is characterized by persistent low moodand loss of interests/pleasure. Prolonged depressionis called dysthymia.
/square6Depression may be mild, moderate or severe, andepisodic, recurrent or chronic. It can be both acomplication of a medical condition or can be acause of medical condition.
Etiology
/square6Genetic predisposition.
/square6Adverse life events and emotional deprivation earlyin life.
/square6Decreased levels of serotonin and norepinephrine
in the brain./square6Abnormal hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis
(HPA) regulation, which results in elevated cortisollevels that do not suppress with dexamethasone.
/square6Medical conditions causing/predisposing depression:
Hypothyroidism, severe anemia, hyperpara-
thyroidism, Cushing’s disease, Addison’s disease,tuberculosis, HIV, dementia, post-traumatic braininjury syndromes, malignancy, SLE, etc.
/square6Drugs: Alcohol, beta-blockers, withdrawal from
cocaine and amphetamines.
Diagnosis
/square6For diagnosis, ≥5 of the following must have been
present nearly every day during the same 2-wkperiod, and one of them must be depressed moodor loss of interest or pleasure:
• Depressed mood most of the day.
• Markedly diminished interest or pleasure in all or almost all
activities for most of the day.
• Significant (>5%) weight gain or loss or decreased or
increased appetite.
• Insomnia (often sleep-maintenance insomnia) or hypersomnia.• Psychomotor agitation or retardation observed by others (not
self-reported).
• Fatigue or loss of energy.
• Feelings of worthlessness or excessive or inappropriate guilt.
• Diminished ability to think or concentrate or indecisiveness.• Recurrent thoughts of death or suicide, a suicide attempt, or
a specific plan for committing suicide.
Investigations
/square6Diagnosis is mainly based on clinical criteria.
However, investigations are useful to excludephysical conditions that can cause depression.
/square6Tests include CBC, TSH levels, and routine electro-
lyte, vitamin B12, and folate levels.
/square6Testing for illicit drug use if suspected.
Management
Antidepressants
/square6Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs):  They inhibit the re-
uptake of noradrenaline and 5-HT at synaptic clefts.Their main side effects are anticholinergic effects,postural hypotension and cardiotoxicity. Examplesare imipramine and amitryptaline.
/square6Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs):  These drugs
inhibit the metabolism of noradrenaline (norepine-phrine) and 5-HT. They are rarely used nowbecause of side effects like hypertensive crisis whengiven along with tyramine containing foods.
Examples are phenelzine and selegiline. Moclobe-
mide is a selective inhibitor of monoamine oxidasesubtype A, which is less likely to cause hypertensivecrisis.
/square6Selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors (SSRIs): They
have less anticholinergic effects, are less cardiotoxic,

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
12590 and cause less sedation. Examples are citalopram,
escitalopram, fluoxetine, sertraline and paroxetine.
/square6Serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs):These are venlafaxine, and duloxetine.
/square6Melatonergic antidepressant:  Agomelatine is a melato-
nergic (MT1/MT2) agonist and a 5-HT-2c receptor
antagonist. It is used for major depressive episodes.It has fewer adverse effects than most anti-
depressants and does not cause daytime sedation.
/square6Others:  For example, mirtazepine.
/square6Almost all the antidepressants are equally effective,
but newer agents have fewer side effects. Improve-ment may take 2–4 weeks.
Psychological treatments
/square6Both cognitive behavioural therapy and inter-
personal therapy are as effective as antidepressants
for mild to moderate depression.
ECT (electroconvulsive therapy)
/square6May be required for severe depression complicated
by psychosis, or suicidal risk.
Q.Discuss the clinical features and management of
mania.
Q.Bipolar disorder (manic depression).
/square6Bipolar disorders are characterized by episodes of
mania and depression, which may alternate,although many patients have a predominance ofone or the other.
Etiology
/square6Genetic factors —bipolar disorder is strongly heritable.
/square6There is also evidence of dysregulation of serotonin
and norepinephrine.
/square6Stressful life events and physical illness may trigger
the episodes.
/square6Drugs (e.g. cocaine, amphetamines), alcohol, andcertain antidepressants (e.g. tricyclics, MAOIs) mayplay a role in triggering episodes.
Clinical Features
Manic Episodes
/square6Abnormally and persistently elevated mood lastingfor at least one week.
/square6Inflated self-esteem or grandiosity.
/square6Decreased need for sleep.
/square6More talkative than usual.
/square6Racing thoughts or flight of ideas.
/square6Distractibility.
/square6Increase in goal-directed activity.
/square6Excessive involvement in pleasurable activities suchas spending money or sexual indiscretion.
/square6Hypomania refers to a briefer duration of manicsymptoms (at least four days), and is often used to
refer to a less severe level of symptoms.Depressive Episodes
/square6Depression is characterized by features described
under depression.
Investigations
/square6Are done to rule out hyperthyroidism and stimulantdrug abuse which can mimic bipolar disorder.
Management
/square6Drugs for bipolar disorder include mood stabilizers
and 2nd-generation antipsychotics.
/square6Mood stabilizers include lithium, sodium valproate,
and lamotrigine. Second-generation antipsychoticsinclude aripiprazole, lurasidone, olanzapine,
quetiapine, risperidone, and ziprasidone.
/square6Antidepressants (e.g. SSRIs) are sometimes added
for severe depression, but they are not recommen-ded as sole therapy for depressive episodes.
/square6Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is sometimes usedfor depression refractory to treatment and is alsoeffective for mania.
Q.Anorexia nervosa.
Definition
/square6Anorexia nervosa is an eating disorder charac-
terized by restriction of energy intake relative torequirements, leading to a significantly low bodyweight.
/square6Patients have intense fear of gaining weight anddistorted body image so that they regard them-selves as fat even when grossly underweight.
Clinical Features
/square6It is common in women.
/square6Patients usually avoid high calorie foods leadingto significant weight loss. Some patients may eatand use purging to control their weight (throughself induced vomiting, use of laxatives and diuretics).
/square6Associated anxiety and depressive symptoms arecommon. Downy hair (lanugo) may develop on theback, forearms and cheeks. Extreme starvation mayaffect multiple organ systems, especially heart andskeletal system. Amenorrhea is also common.
Etiology
/square6Exact etiology is unknown, but a combination ofpsychological, biological, family, genetic, environ-
mental, and social factors play a role.
/square6Social pressure on women to be thin also plays a
role.
Investigations
/square6Rule out other causes of weight loss such as mal-absorp tion syndromes (e.g. due to inflammatory
bowel disease or celiac disease), new-onset type 1

/square6Psychiatric Disorders591
12diabetes, adrenal insufficiency, and cancer.
Amphetamine abuse may cause similar symptoms.
Management
/square6All other causes of weight loss should be ruled out(e.g. malabsorption, cancer, etc.).
/square6The goals of treatment are: To ensure patient’s physical
well-being, to maintain normal body weight, and
to correct the psychological disturbances.
/square6Patients can be treated on outpatient basis.Admission is required if there is severe weight loss
or if there is a risk of death from medical complica-
tions or from suicide.
/square6Cognitive behavioral therapy helps the patientmanage the anxiety related to eating and poor body
image by developing more adaptive thoughts
and coping strategies. Family therapy encouragesfamily members to refeed patients at home withthe support of a family therapist.
/square6Psychotropic drugs are helpful if there is associateddepression.
Q.Bulimia nervosa.
/square6Bulimia nervosa is characterized by episodes of
binge eating, followed by compensatory behaviorof the purging type (self-induced vomiting, laxativeabuse, diuretic abuse) or non-purging type (excessiveexercise, fasting, or strict diets).
/square6Binge eating disorder is different from bulimianervosa. Binge eating disorder is characterized byrecurrent episodes of consuming large amounts offood without any compensatory behavior.
Clinical Features
/square6It is more common in women and the etiology issame as anorexia nervosa.
/square6Patients typically describe binge-purge behavior.Binges involve rapid consumption of large amountsof high calorie foods. Binge eating episodes can occurseveral times a day and triggered by psychological
stress. Binge eating is followed by compensatory
behaviors: Self-induced vomiting, use of laxativesor diuretics, excessive exercise, and/or fasting.
/square6There is dissatisfaction with body shape and weight
but weight is maintained within normal limits (note
that in anorexia nervosa there is significant weightloss).
/square6Physical signs of repeated self-induced vomiting
include pitted teeth (from gastric acid), calluses on
knuckles and parotid gland enlargement.
Management
/square6Cognitive behavioral therapy.
/square6Drugs:  Antidepressants like fluoxetine, amitriptyline
have been shown to reduce binge eating. Other
helpful drugs are topiramate and ondansetron.Q.What are somatic symptom disorders?
/square6Somatic symptom disorders (earlier called somato-
form disorders) are characterized by multiple
persistent physical complaints associated with
excessive and maladaptive thoughts, feelings, andbehaviors related to those symptoms.
/square6Somatic symptom disorders include the following:
• Somatic symptom disorder
• Conversion disorder
• Psychological factors affecting a medical condition
• Factitious disorder• Other specific and nonspecific somatic symptom dis-
orders
Etiology
/square6Exact cause is unknown.
/square6Contributory factors include depression or anxiety,
erroneous interpretation of somatic symptoms
as evidence of disease, and preoccupation with
physical illness.
/square6Family history or previous history of a particularcondition may provoke concerns about illness.
Clinical Features
/square6Physical complaints usually begin before age 30.Most patients have multiple somatic symptomssuch as pain, headache, etc. The somatic symptomsare not explained by a medical condition and arealso not part of depressive or anxiety disorder.Physical symptoms may involve one or more organ
systems and are not intentional. Symptoms persist
for a long time. The symptoms themselves orexcessive worry about them is distressing ordisrupts daily life. Some patients become overtlydepressed.
/square6When physical complaints accompany anothermedical disorder, patients over-respond to theimplications of the medical disorder; for example,
patients who have had an MI may constantly worry
about having another MI or think themselves asunfit. Such patients are very anxious about theirhealth problems and are difficult to reassure.
/square6Whatever the manifestations, the essence of somaticsymptom disorder is the patient’s excessive ormaladaptive thoughts, feelings, or behaviors inresponse to the symptoms.
Treatment
/square6Cognitive-behavioral therapy.
/square6Treatment of concurrent mental disorders (e.g.depression).
/square6Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) andserotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors
(SNRIs) have shown benefit.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
12592 Q.Conversion disorder (hysteria; dissociative disorder).
/square6Conversion disorder consists of neurologic symp-
toms or deficits that develop unconsciously and
nonvolitionally without a definable organic cause.
/square6“Conversion” is characterized by conversion of
psychic conflict into physical symptoms. The coping
mechanisms used in this condition are repression
(a barring from consciousness) and isolation (a
splitting of the affect from the idea).
Clinical Features
/square6It is more common in young and uneducated
women from lower socioeconomic class.
/square6Symptoms often develop abruptly, and onset can
often be linked to a stressful event. Patients maypresent with impaired coordination or balance,
weakness, paralysis of an arm or a leg, loss of
sensation in a body part, seizures, unresponsive-ness, blindness, double vision, deafness, aphonia,difficulty swallowing, sensation of a lump in thethroat, or urinary retention. The manifestations arenot in the conscious control of the patient.
/square6There is apparent unconcern (La belle indifference)even in the face of gross physical disability.
/square6Clues pointing towards conversion disorder are:History of similar episode in the past, presence ofa serious precipitating emotional event, presenceof associated depression, etc. temporal correlationbetween the precipitating event and the symptom,and a temporary “solving of the problem” by theconversion.
/square6A complete physical and neurological examinationis important to rule out physical causes.
Treatment
/square6Reassurance.
/square6Explanation of the cause of symptoms. It is helpfulto explain the physiological mechanism for the
symptom that emphasizes the link with psycho-
logical factors such as stress.
/square6Advice on how to cope with stress and relaxationtechniques.
/square6Antidepressant drugs are helpful even if the patientis not depressed.
/square6Cognitive behavioral therapy and other psycho-logical treatments are helpful.
Q.Factitious disorder imposed on self (Munchausen
syndrome).
/square6Factitious disorder imposed on self is a psychiatric
disorder in which patients deliberately produce or
falsify symptoms and/or signs of illness for thepurpose of assuming the sick role. It is also knownas Munchausen syndrome named after GermanBaron Freiherr von Munchausen, who told fancifultales only to entertain others./square6Patients with factitious disorders differ frommalingerers because, there are no obvious externalincentives (e.g. economic gain) for their behavior.It is unclear what they gain beyond medical atten-tion for their suffering.
Clinical Features
/square6Approximately two-thirds of patients withMunchausen syndrome are males. They are usually
older with a solitary lifestyle.
/square6They present frequently with dramatic symptoms.
Examination may show previous multiple surgicalscars. They often present at night when junior
doctors and residents are on duty. The history can
be convincing enough to persuade doctors to under-take investigations or initiate treatment, includingexploratory surgery.
Management
/square6Management is by gentle but firm confrontationwith clear evidence of the fabrication of illness,together with an offer of psychological support.
Any underlying psychological disorders (anxiety,
depression) should be treated.
Q.Substance abuse.
/square6Substance abuse refers to excess or harmful use of
a substance despite social, health and occupationalproblems.
/square6Substance dependence (addiction) refers to substanceuse associated with psychological dependence(craving), physiologic dependence (withdrawalsymptoms on stopping the drug) and tolerance.
/square6Substance abuse and dependence are majorproblems worldwide. They affect all races, and allsocioeconomic strata. They are more common inmen than in women although the gap is narrowing.
Etiology
/square6Cultural pressures, particularly within a peer group.
/square6Easy availability of a drug.
/square6Medical over-prescribing.
/square6Psychiatric problems such as depression.
Diagnosis
/square6History.
/square6Physical examination —needle marks in IV drug
users; evidence of localized or systemic infections;staining of teeth, respiratory problems in inhalation
drug abuse.
/square6Drug screening of samples of urine or blood.
Management
/square6Psychological counseling.
/square6Harm minimization—for example, advice to useclean needles.

/square6Psychiatric Disorders593
12/square6Substitute prescribing (example methadone in
opiate dependence).
/square6Identifying and treating problems associated withthe drug misuse.
/square6Treatment of complications of drug misuse.
Q.Alcohol use disorder (alcohol abuse and alcohol
dependence).
Q.Complications of chronic alcohol misuse.
Definitions
Alcohol Abuse
/square6Refers to a maladaptive pattern of episodic drinking
that results in failure to fulfill obligations, drinkingin physically hazardous situations (e.g. driving,boating), legal problems, or social and interpersonalproblems without evidence of dependence.
Alcohol Dependence (Alcoholism)
/square6Refers to frequent consumption of large amountsof alcohol with ≥3 of the following:• Tolerance to the effects of alcohol.
• Withdrawal symptoms.
• Drinking larger amounts or over a longer period than
intended.
• Persistent desire or unsuccessful efforts to reduce use without
success.
• Spending significant time obtaining, using, or recovering
from the alcohol.
• Important social, occupational, or recreational activities are
given up or reduced because of drinking.
• Continued use despite physical or psychologic problems.
Etiology of Alcohol Dependence
/square6Availability of alcohol and social patterns of use.
/square6Genetic factors.
/square6As a measure to relieve anxiety or depression.
/square6Many who abuse alcohol have certain personality traits:
Feelings of isolation, loneliness, shyness, depression,
dependency, hostile and self-destructive impulsivity,
and sexual immaturity.
/square6Social problems:  Broken home, disturbed relation-
ship with their family.TABLE 12.1: Commonly abused drugs
Sedatives • These agents lead to physical dependence.
Benzodiazepines • Acute overdose leads to slurred speech, incoordination, unsteady gait, impaired attention
Opiates (morphine, heroin) or memory, stupor or coma. Psychiatric manifestations include inappropriate behavior,
Barbiturates labile mood, impaired judgment and social functioning. Physical signs include nystagmus
and decreased reflexes. Death may occur due to respiratory depression.
• Intravenous drug abusers may develop infections such as hepatitis B, hepatitis C and HIV
through needle contamination.
• Withdrawal from opiates causes intense craving, rhinorrhoea, lacrimation, shivering,
piloerection, vomiting, diarrhea, tachycardia, hypertension, pupilary dilatation and
seizures.
• Withdrawal from benzodiazepines causes anxiety, hyperactivity, hallucinations, seizures,
ataxia and paranoid delusions.
Stimulants • They can cause cardiac and cerebrovascular complications through vasopressor effects.
Amphetamines Psychiatric disturbances are seen with prolonged use. They do not cause physical
Cocaine dependence.
• Withdrawal causes a rebound lowering in mood and can cause intense craving.• Chronic amphetamine abuse can cause a syndrome identical to paranoid schizophrenia.• Cocaine intoxication can cause toxic psychosis and tactile hallucinations.
Hallucinogens • They cause changes in mood and prominent sensory experiences. Confusion and psychotic
Cannabis (ganja) episodes are common after heavy consumption.
Ecstasy (methylenedioxy- • Prolonged heavy use increases the risk of developing schizophrenia.
methamphetamine: MDMA) • Flashback experiences where previous hallucinogen experiences are re-experienced
Lysergic acid diethylamide unexpectedly can occur after prolonged use of hallucinogens.
(LSD, also called acid)
Psilocybin (magic mushrooms)
Organic solvents • Solvent inhalation (glue sniffing) is popular in some adolescent groups.
Glue • Solvents produce acute intoxication characterized by euphoria, excitement, dizziness
Paint thinners and a floating sensation. Further inhalation leads to loss of consciousness.
• The most severe consequence is hypoxia or anoxia which can cause death.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
12594 Complications of Alcohol Misuse
Acute intoxication
• Emotional and behavioral disturbance, hypoglycemia,
aspiration, respiratory depression and even death.
Nervous system
•Peripheral neuropathy, cerebellar degeneration, cerebral
hemorrhage, Wernicke’s encephalopathy, dementia.
Liver•Alcoholic liver disease (hepatitis, fatty liver and cirrhosis),
liver cancer.
GIT
•Esophagitis, gastritis, pancreatitis, esophageal cancer,
Mallory-Weiss syndrome.
RS
•Pulmonary TB, pneumonia.
CVS
•Cardiomyopathy, hypertension.
Skin•Spider naevi, palmar erythema, Dupuytren’s contractures,
telangiectasiae.
Musculoskeletal
•Myopathy, fractures.
Endocrine and metabolic•Pseudo-Cushing’s syndrome, hypoglycemia, gout.
Reproductive
•Hypogonadism, fetal alcohol syndrome, infertility.
Psychiatric problems
•Depression, anxiety, alcohol withdrawal, alcoholic
hallucinosis, alcoholic ‘blackouts’.
Management
/square6Advice about the harmful effects of alcohol and safe
levels of consumption.
/square6Supportive psychotherapy.
/square6Pharmacotherapy:  Naltrexone, disulfiram and acam-
prosate are helpful to treat alcohol dependence.
/square6Naltrexone (opiate antagonist) can be started while
the patient is still drinking. It lessens the pleasurable
effects of alcohol. It also reduces craving for alcohol.
/square6Disulfiram should be used by abstinent patients tomaintain abstinence.
/square6Acamprosate should be used once abstinence isachieved. It reduces craving and helps maintenanceof abstinence.
Q.Alcohol withdrawal syndrome (delirium tremens).
/square6Alcohol is a CNS depressant, hence, withdrawal
symptoms are caused by its rapid withdrawal dueto unmasking of compensatory over-activity ofcertain parts of the nervous system, includingsympathetic autonomic outflow.
Pathophysiology
/square6Alcohol withdrawal causes a functional decreasein the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA. This leadsto increased activity of excitatory neurotransmitterssuch as norepinephrine, glutamate, and dopamine.
/square6Alcohol also acts as an NMDA receptor antagonist.Withdrawal leads to increased activity of theseexcitatory neuroreceptors, resulting in tremors,agitation, hallucinations, seizures, tachycardia,
hyperthermia, and hypertension.
Clinical Features
/square6Symptoms usually occur within eight hours of
stopping alcohol, reach a peak on the 2nd or 3rd
day, and diminish by the 4th or 5th day.
/square6Symptoms include anxiety, tremor, insomnia,decreased cognition, irritability, headache, diaphoresis,palpitations, and in severe cases delirium tremens.
/square6Delirium tremens (DTs) is the most severe form of
alcohol withdrawal manifested by altered mental
status (global confusion) and sympathetic hyper-activity, which can progress to cardiovascularcollapse. It is characterized by mental confusion,visual hallucinations (often of snakes, bugs, etc.),agitation, tremor, tachycardia, diaphoresis, de-
hydration, and seizures.
Investigations
/square6Rule out hepatic encephalopathy, gastrointestinal
bleeding, cardiac arrhythmia, infection, and glucose
or electrolyte imbalance by appropriate tests.
/square6CT or MRI of brain may be required to rule out
intracranial pathology.
Treatment
/square6Benzodiazepines—diazepam or chlordiazepoxide—are commonly used, but other agents can also be used.Benzodiazepines exert their effect via stimulation ofgamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors, causing
a decrease in neuronal activity and relative sedation.They alleviate most symptoms of withdrawal. The
average patient requires 25–50 mg of chlordia-
zepoxide or 10 mg of diazepam given PO every 4–6 hon the first day and then tapered off over a period of3–5 days. Oral therapy is enough in most cases, butparenteral therapy may be required in severe casesassociated with delirium tremens and seizures.
/square6Thiamine supplementation should be give to allpatients.
Q.Complications of smoking.
Q.Management of smoking cessation (nicotine
addiction).
/square6Cigarette smoking is a major preventable cause of
disease worldwide.
/square6Cigarette smoke contains more than 4000 substances.
The main active ingredient is nicotine. Other impor-
tant substances include carbon monoxide, tar,aromatic hydrocarbons, benzopyrine, nitrosamine,vinyl chloride, trace metals, phenol, cresol andcatechol. Most of these are carcinogens.
Passive Smoking
/square6Passive smoking (secondhand smoke) refers toinvoluntary exposure of nonsmokers to tobacco

/square6Psychiatric Disorders595
12smoke from the smoking of others. Passive smoking
is a mixture of sidestream smoke given off by theburning cigarette and of mainstream smoke that isexhaled by the smoker. Sidestream smoke, genera-ted under the lower temperature conditions in thesmoldering cigarette, has higher concentrations of
many of the toxic compounds than the mainstream
smoke.
/square6Passive smoking is also associated with all thecomplications of active smoking.
Effects of Nicotine
/square6Nicotine is a sympathomimetic. It causes increase
in both systolic and diastolic blood pressures,
tachycardia, peripheral vasoconstriction, andincreases myocardial oxygen demand. CNS effectsare mediated through central nicotinic cholinergicreceptors and include increased arousal andalertness. Nicotine releases beta-endorphin in the
CNS and has other endocrinological effects. Acute
intoxication causes nausea, salivation, pallor,weakness, abdominal pain, vomiting or diarrhea,dizziness, headache, confusion, various sensorydisturbances, tachycardia and hypertension.
/square6Acute withdrawal of nicotine causes dysphoricmood, insomnia, irritability, anxiety, restlessness,increased appetite, difficulty to concentrating andcraving for nicotine.
Complications of Chronic Smoking
CVS
• Increased risk of angina and MI• Hypertension• Aortic aneurysm• Peripheral vascular disease
RS
• Increased incidence of respiratory tract infections• COPD• Laryngeal cancer• Lung cancer
GIT
• Periodontitis• Discoloration of teeth, reduced taste and smell• Acid peptic disease• Increased risk of cancers of oral cavity, esophagus, stomach,
colon and pancreas
Nervous system
• Irritability• Increased risk of stroke
Genitourinary system
• Impotence• Infertility• IUGR• Increased risk of spontaneous abortion, fetal death and
sudden infant death
• Cancer of urinary bladder
Blood
• PolycythemiaManagement of Smoking Cessation
Behavioral Therapy
/square6These include individual and group counseling
regarding the bad effects of smoking, ways to quitsmoking, etc. Abrupt cessation, particularly on adefined “quit day”, is the preferred strategy insteadof gradual tapering.
Nicotine Replacement Therapy
/square6Nicotine replacement therapy ameliorates with-drawal symptoms of smoking cessation. However,
many smokers can quit smoking even without
nicotine replacement.
/square6Nicotine is available for use in many forms: Chewing
gum or lozenge, transdermal patch, nasal spray,
and inhaler. All are equally effective. Patient takes
one of these preparations whenever there is urgeto smoke. Gradually replacement therapy is alsowithdrawn.
Bupropion
/square6This is an antidepressant and doubles the chancesof smoking cessation. Exact mechanism of action isnot known. It can be given at a dose of 150 mg up
to 1 year.
Varenicline
/square6Varenicline is a partial agonist of nicotinic acetyl-
choline receptors. It has shown good results forsmoking cessation.
Q.What are the sleep disorders?
Q.Discuss the causes and management of insomnia.
/square6Sleep consists of two phases: (1) REM (rapid eye
movement) sleep, also called dream sleep, and(2) NREM (non-REM) sleep. NREM sleep is divided
into stages 1, 2, 3, and 4 which can be recognized
by different EEG patterns. Stages 3 and 4 are “delta”or deep sleep. Dreaming occurs mostly in REM sleep.
/square6Sleep is a cyclic phenomenon, with REM and NREMsleep alternating throughout the night. Stage 3 and4 sleep decreases as the age advances.
Sleep disorders can be divided into 2 broad categories:
/square6Parasomnias:  These are unusual experiences or
behaviors that occur during sleep; they are sleepterror, sleepwalking and nightmare disorder.
/square6Dyssomnias:  These are characterized by abnorma-
lities in the amount, quality, or timing of sleep; theyare insomnia and hypersomnia, narcolepsy, andcircadian rhythm sleep disorder.
Insomnia
/square6Insomnia is characterized by an inadequate quantity
or quality of sleep.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
12596 /square6Affected patients complain of difficulty initiating
or maintaining sleep, resulting in non-restorativesleep and impairment of daytime functioning.
Causes
Transient insomnia
• Change of sleeping environment• Jet lag• Changes in work shift• Physical discomfort (excessive noise, unpleasant room
temperature)
• Stressful life events (e.g. loss of a loved one, divorce, loss of
employment, preparing to take an examination)
• Acute medical or surgical illnesses• Stimulant medications (theophylline, quinolones, caffeine)
Chronic insomnia
• Depression• Mania• Abuse of alcohol• Heavy smoking• Neurological disorders (fatal familial insomnia, Alzheimer’s
disease, Parkinson’s disease, cerebral hemispheric and brain-stem strokes, brain tumors)
• Chronic medical disorders (COPD, CCF, AIDS)• Primary sleep disorders (restless legs syndrome, sleep apnea)
Evaluation
History
/square6Duration of symptoms and history of any events
(e.g. work change, new drug, new medical disorder)that coincided with onset.
/square6Determine the quality and quantity of sleep by asking:Time of going to bed, latency of sleep (time frombedtime to falling asleep), number and time ofawakenings, final morning awakening and arisingtimes, frequency and duration of naps.
/square6Ask about bedtime events (e.g. food or alcoholconsumption, physical or mental activity).
/square6History of snoring, interrupted breathing patterns,and other nocturnal respiratory disturbancessuggests sleep apnea syndromes.
/square6History of depression, anxiety, mania, and hypo-
mania suggests mental sleep disorders.
/square6Ask about any medical  disorders that can interfere
with sleep, including COPD, asthma, heart failure,hyperthyroidism, gastroesophageal reflux, neuro-
logic disorders (particularly movement and
degenerative disorders), and painful disorders (e.g.rheumatoid arthritis).
/square6Ask about any drug intake that could interfere with
sleep (e.g. SSRIs, phenytoin, amphetamines, amino-
phyline).
Physical Examination
/square6Look for any upper respiratory tract abnormalitiesthat can cause obstructive sleep apnea and snoring./square6Look for evidence of diseases that could interferewith sleep.
Investigations
/square6Appropriate tests to rule out any medical disorderthat can cause insomnia.
Management
/square6Good sleep hygiene —go to bed only when sleepy, get
up early, discontinue caffeine and nicotine, dailyexercise, avoid alcohol, and practice relaxationtechniques.
/square6Pharmacologic measures —hypnotic medications such
as lorazepam (0.5 mg at night), zolpidem (5–10 mgat bedtime), and zaleplon (5–10 mg at bedtime). Ingeneral, medications should be used for short
courses of 1–2 weeks. Melatonin (a hormone
secreted by pineal gland) is effective for delayedsleep onset. Suvorexant  is a new treatment for
insomnia that acts by blocking brain orexin recep-tors, thereby blocking orexin-induced wakefulnesssignals and enabling sleep initiation.  Tasimelteon,
a melatonin receptor agonist, can increase nighttime
sleep duration and decrease daytime sleep duration.
/square6Treatment of underlying cause —such as COPD, CCF,
etc.
Q.Narcolepsy.
/square6Narcolepsy is characterized by chronic excessive
daytime sleepiness, often with sudden loss ofmuscle tone (cataplexy).
Etiology
/square6In narcolepsy there is dysregulation of the timing
and control of REM sleep. Therefore, REM sleep
intrudes into wakefulness and into the transitionfrom wakefulness to sleep.
/square6Genetic factors: Narcolepsy is strongly associated
with specific HLA haplotypes, and children of
patients with narcolepsy have increased risk.
/square6Deficiency of neuropeptide hypocretin-1 is foundin CSF of narcoleptic animals and human patients.
Clinical Features
/square6The disease typically begins in the teens and early
twenties, affects both sexes equally, and usually
levels off in severity at about 30 years of age.
/square6Narcolepsy is characterized by the following features.
– Daytime sleepiness—sudden and brief attacks of
sleep during any type of activity.
– Cataplexy—sudden loss of muscle tone which
may cause the person to slump to the floor or
unable to move.
– Sleep paralysis—it is a complete inability to move
for one or two minutes immediately after
awakening.

/square6Psychiatric Disorders597
12– Hypnagogic hallucinations—visual or auditory,
occur just as the patient is falling asleep or uponawakening.
/square6Diagnosis can be confirmed by polysomnography
and multiple sleep latency testing.
Treatment
/square6Modafinil, a non-amphetamine wakefulness pro-
moting agent has become a first line agent becauseof less abuse potential.
/square6CNS stimulant drugs such as methylphenidate or
amphetamine derivatives are used instead of or with
modafinil if patients do not respond to modafinil.
/square6Tricyclic antidepressants (clomipramine) and SSRIsmay be useful for cataplexy, sleep paralysis, and
hypnagogic and hypnopompic hallucinations.
Q.Sleep terror.
Q.Nightmares.
/square6Sleep terror is an abrupt, terrifying arousal from
sleep. It occurs in stage 3 or stage 4 sleep.
/square6It usually occurs in preadolescent boys although itmay occur in adults as well.
/square6Symptoms are fear, sweating, tachycardia, andconfusion for several minutes, and the event is not
remembered on awakening.
/square6Treatment is with benzodiazepines (e.g. diazepam,
5–10 mg at bedtime), since it will suppress stage 3and stage 4 sleep.
/square6Nightmares occur during REM sleep and cause fullarousal, with intact memory for the unpleasantepisode.
Q.Sleepwalking (somnambulism).
/square6Sleepwalking also known as somnambulism involves
getting up and walking around or performing acomplex motor activity while in a state of sleep.
/square6It generally occurs in deep non-rapid eye movement(NREM) (stages 3 and 4) sleep.
Causes
/square6Somnambulism may be precipitated by a varietyof conditions such as insufficient sleep resulting froman irregular sleep schedule, staying up late, givingup a daily nap or waking early in the morning.
/square6In elderly, it may be a feature of dementia.
/square6Drugs (phenothiazines, chloral hydrate, lithium),marijuana, alcohol and medical conditions (e.g.
complex partial seizures) can also cause sleepwalking.
/square6It may be familial.
Clinical Features
/square6It affects mostly children aged 6–12 years. Patients
with this disorder carry out automatic motor activi-ties during sleep that range from simple to complex.There is no memory of the event. Individuals may
walk, urinate inappropriately, eat, or exit from the
house while remaining only partially aware. Attemptto awaken them may rarely lead to agitation or even
violence.
Treatment
/square6Reassurance is the mainstay of treatment. Patients
and parents should be told that sleepwalking is
benign and eventually disappears.
/square6Auditory, tactile, and visual stimuli should be
avoided early in the sleep cycle as these may induce
sleepwalking.
/square6Parents should be instructed to lock windows and
doors, remove obstacles and sharp objects from the
room to avoid injuries.
/square6Low-dose benzodiazepine is the drug of choice ifthe episodes are very frequent. Tricyclic anti-
depressants and trazodone are also beneficial.
Q.Electroconvulsive therapy.
/square6Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) involves the
administration of high-voltage, brief direct current
impulses to the head while the patient is anaes-
thetized and paralyzed by muscle relaxants.
/square6ECT causes a generalized central nervous systemseizure (peripheral convulsion is not necessary) by
means of electric current. Electrical current insuffi-
cient to cause a seizure produces no therapeutic
benefit.
/square6The mechanism of action is not known, but it is
thought to involve major neurotransmitter
responses at the cell membrane.
Indications for ECT
/square6Major depression refractory to antidepressants,with psychotic features or suicidal risk.
/square6Bipolar mood disorder.
/square6Schizophrenia.
/square6Organic delusional disorder.
/square6Obsessive-compulsive disorder.
/square6Catatonia secondary to medical conditions.
Contraindications
/square6Increased intracranial pressure.
/square6Space-occupying intracranial lesion.
/square6Recent cerebral hemorrhage or stroke.
/square6Venous thrombosis.
/square6Unstable or severe cardiovascular disease.
/square6Bleeding or otherwise unstable vascular aneurysm.
/square6Severe pulmonary condition.
Side Effects
/square6Memory disturbance.
/square6Headache.
/square6Aspiration of gastric contents.

13
598Q.Write briefly about the normal distribution of water
and electrolytes in the body.
Normal Distribution of Water in the Body
/square6In a typical adult male, the total body water (TBW)
is approximately 60% of the body weight (i.e. 40 liters
in a 70 kg male). Out of this, two-thirds (25 liters) isintracellular fluid (ICF), and one-third (15 liters) isextracellular fluid (ECF). ECF is further divided intointerstitial fluid (12 liters) and plasma (3 liters).
/square6The main difference between the plasma and inter-stitial fluid is the presence of high concentration ofprotein in the plasma.Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders
muscle. High concentration of protein in the plasmafavors fluid retention within the capillaries, thus
maintaining an adequate circulating plasma
volume.
Q.Fluid volume depletion (dehydration).
/square6Volume depletion occurs when fluid is lost from
the extracellular fluid at a rate exceeding net intake.
Etiology
/square6Gastrointestinal losses : Vomiting, diarrhea, bleeding,
and external drainage.
/square6Renal losses : Diuretics, osmotic diuresis, salt wasting
nephropathies, hypoaldosteronism.
/square6Skin or respiratory losses : Insensible losses, sweating,
and burns.
/square6Third-space sequestration : Intestinal obstruction,
crush injury, major bone fracture, peritonitis, andacute pancreatitis.
Clinical Features
/square6Symptoms are easy fatigability, thirst, muscle
cramps, postural dizziness, and decreased urine
output.
/square6Examination reveals tachycardia, reduced or absenttears, reduced skin turgor, dry mucous membranes,
altered mental status, hypotension and shock.Figure 13.1 Distribution of fluid in the body
Normal Distribution of Electrolytes in the Body
/square6The major electrolytes in the body are sodium (Na),
potassium (K), chloride (Cl) and bicarbonate(HCO
3). Other important electrolytes are calcium,
phosphorus and magnesium.
/square6Most of the sodium, chloride and bicarbonate arepresent in the ECF. Most of the potassium andphosphates are present in ICF. The major forcemaintaining the differences in the distribution ofNa and K is sodium-potassium pump which is
present in all cell membranes. This difference is
important for many cell processes, including theexcitability of conducting tissues such as nerve andElectrolytes Normal plasma values
Na+135–145 mEq/L
K+3.5–5 mEq/L
Cl–98–107 mEq/L
HCO3–22–28 mEq/L
Mg 1.6–3 mg/dL
Serum osmolality 285–295 mOsm/kg waterBlood pH 7.36–7.44

/square6Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders599
13Laboratory Abnormalities
/square6Serum sodium concentration may be high when
more water is lost and may be low in combinedsalt and water loss.
/square6Blood urea and creatinine may be elevated.
/square6Urine sodium concentration is less than 25 mEq/L
in extrarenal causes of volume depletion, because
of sodium retention by the kidneys whereas in renalcauses of volume depletion it is more than this.
/square6Urine osmolality often exceeds 450 mOsmol/kg in
volume depletion except in osmotic diuresis,
administration of diuretics, and diabetes insipidus.
/square6Hematocrit may be high except when there is bloodloss.
Treatment
/square6Mild to moderate cases can be corrected by oral
supplementation of fluids in the form of oral re-
hydration salt.
/square6Severe volume depletion requires intravenoushydration using ringer lactate or normal saline.
Q.Generalized edema.
/square6Edema is defined as a palpable swelling produced
by expansion of the interstitial fluid volume.
/square6Edema becomes clinically apparent when theinterstitial volume has increased by 2.5 to 3 L, anamount that is almost equal to the plasma volume.
Causes
• Heart failure
• Renal failure• Cirrhosis of liver• Hypoalbuminemia (nephrotic syndrome, protein-losing
enteropathy, malnutrition)
• Hypothyroidism• Pregnancy and premenstrual edema• Refeeding edema• Inflammation or sepsis• Allergic reactions, including certain forms of angioedema• Drugs: Minoxidil, diazoxide, thiazolidinediones, calcium
channel blockers, NSAIDs, fludrocortisone, estrogens
Pathophysiology
For generalized edema to occur, two factors must be
present:
1. An alteration in capillary hemodynamics that
favors the movement of fluid from the vascularspace into the interstitium. Such movement requiresa change in one or more components of Starling’slaw: Increased capillary hydrostatic pressure,
decreased capillary oncotic pressure, and increased
capillary permeability.
2. Retention of sodium and water by the kidneys. The
retention of sodium and water can either be a
primary event, as in renal failure, or a secondaryevent due to reduction in cardiac output (e.g. heart
failure) or systemic vascular resistance (e.g.cirrhosis).
Clinical Manifestations
/square6Peripheral edema manifests as pitting on pressurein dependent areas, i.e. lower limbs in ambulatorypatients and sacrum in patients at bedrest. Non-pitting edema is seen in lymphatic obstruction orthyroid disease. Patients with the nephrotic synd-rome may also have prominent periorbital edema
due to the low tissue pressure in this area.
/square6Abdominal distension due to ascites. In cirrhosis,
ascites is seen first followed by peripheral edema.In cardiac failure, peripheral edema is seen first
followed by ascites.
/square6Dyspnea, orthopnea and bilateral basal lung crepita-
tions due to pulmonary edema. Pleural effusionmay be present
/square6JVP is raised.
/square6There may be signs of underlying disease.
Investigations
/square6Hematocrit may be low due to hemodilution.
/square6Hyponatremia may be present (dilutional hypo-natremia) except in cases of primary renal sodiumretention.
/square6Thyroid function tests.
/square6Serum albumin and liver function tests.
/square6Renal function tests.
/square6Urine analysis to look for proteinuria.
/square6ECG, echocardiogram to rule out cardiac failure.
Management
/square6Dietary sodium and water restriction (to minimize
fluid retention).
/square6Diuretic therapy—pulmonary edema is life-
threatening and requires immediate treatment. Inall other conditions, removal of the excess fluid can
proceed more slowly. Diuretics like furosemide or
torsemide can be given IV in emergencies, other-wise oral therapy is sufficient.
/square6Treatment of the underlying disorder.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations
and management of hyponatremia.
/square6Hyponatremia is defined as a serum sodium
concentration <135 mEq/L. Normal serum sodiumlevel is between approximately 135 and 145 mEq/liter.
/square6It is the most common electrolyte disorder encoun-tered in clinical practice.
/square6Hyponatremia is classified into 3 types based onthe ECF volume status: Euvolemic, hypovolemic,
and hypervolemic.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
13600 /square6Euvolemic hyponatremia : Total body water (TBW)
increases while total sodium remains normal. Thereis minimal increase in ECF volume without thepresence of edema.
/square6Hypovolemic hyponatremia : Both TBW and sodium
decrease, but sodium decreases to a greater extent.The extracellular fluid (ECF) volume is decreased.
/square6Hypervolemic hyponatremia : Both TBW and total
body sodium increase, but TBW increases to a
greater extent (leading to hyponatremia). The ECFis increased markedly with the presence of edema.
Causes of Hyponatremia
Euvolemic hyponatremia
• SIADH (syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone
secretion)
• Glucocorticoid deficiency• Hypothyroidism• Stress
• Drugs (barbiturates, carbamazepine, clofibrate, opioids,
vincristine, NSAIDs)
Hypovolemic hyponatremia
• Integumentary loss: Sweating, burns• Gastrointestinal loss: Vomiting, diarrhea
• Renal loss: Diuretics, osmotic diuresis, salt-wasting
nephropathy, mineralocorticoid deficiency
• Third space loss: Pancreatitis, intestinal obstruction, peritonitis• Cerebral salt wasting syndrome
Hypervolemic hyponatremia
• Congestive heart failure
• Renal failure• Cirrhosis• Iatrogenic
Other Causes of Hyponatremia
/square6Redistributive hyponatremia:  Here water shifts from
the intracellular to the extracellular compartment,
causing dilutional hyponatremia. The TBW and total
body sodium are unchanged. It occurs with hyper-glycemia or administration of mannitol.
/square6Pseudohyponatremia:  Occurs as a result of decrease
in aqueous portion of plasma due to  excessive
proteins or lipids. The TBW and total body sodiumare unchanged. This condition is seen with hyper-triglyceridemia and multiple myeloma.
Pathophysiology of Hyponatremia
/square6Most causes of hyponatremia are associated with
low serum osmolality. In general, hypotonic hypo-
natremia is due either to a primary water gain (andsecondary Na
+ loss) or a primary Na+ loss (and
secondary water gain).
/square6Isotonic (or slightly hypotonic) hyponatremia maycomplicate transurethral resection of the prostatebecause large volumes of iso-osmotic (mannitol) orhypo-osmotic (sorbitol or glycine) bladder irrigationsolution can be absorbed and result in a dilutionalhyponatremia./square6Hypertonic hyponatremia is usually due to hyper-glycemia or, occasionally, intravenous administra-tion of mannitol. Glucose is an effective osmoleand draws water from muscle cells, resulting inhyponatremia. Plasma Na
+ concentration falls by
1.4 mmol/L for every 100 mg/dL rise in the plasma
glucose concentration.
/square6Diuretic-induced hyponatremia is almost always
due to thiazide diuretics, because loop diureticsdecrease the tonicity of the medullary interstitium
and impairs maximal urinary concentrating
capacity. This limits the ability of ADH to promotewater retention.
Effects of Hyponatremia on Brain
/square6The fall in serum osmolality due to hyponatremiacreates an osmolar gradient that favors watermovement into the cells, leading to brain edema.
/square6Hyponatremia-induced cerebral edema occursprimarily with rapidly (over one to three days)developing hyponatremia. In slowly developinghyponatremia, there is time for adaptation ofneuronal cells and hence, this can be clinically
asymptomatic.
Clinical Manifestations
/square6Acute hyponatremia (<48 hours) is more sympto-
matic than chronic hyponatremia (>48 hours).
/square6Mild hyponatremia (plasma sodium level >120mEq/L) is usually asymptomatic. Nausea andmalaise are the earliest findings seen with mildhyponatremia.
/square6Headache, lethargy, obtundation, seizures, coma,and respiratory arrest may be seen at sodium levelbelow 115 mEq/L.
/square6Chronic hyponatremia may be asymptomatic orassociated with nonspecific features such as fatigue,nausea, dizziness, gait disturbances, forgetfulness,confusion, lethargy, and muscle cramps.
Approach to a Case of Hyponatremia
Elicit Appropriate Clinical History and
Perform Clinical Examination
/square6Ask about symptoms and their duration.
/square6Enquire about drug intake (especially diuretics,antiepileptics).
/square6Elicit diet history.
/square6Enquire about history of volume loss, i.e. diarrhea,vomiting, etc.
/square6Determine volume status, i.e. look for dehydration,edema, and ascites. Hypervolemia is suggested bythe presence of peripheral edema, raised JVP, ascites
and pleural effusion. Hypovolemia (dehydration)is suggested by orthostatic hypotension, tachy-
cardia, dry mucus membranes, and decreased skin
turgor.

/square6Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders601
13/square6Look for signs of hypothyroidism or adrenal
insufficiency.
/square6Look for any signs of CNS or lung disease.
Determine Serum Osmolality
/square6Either by lab estimation or calculation using theformula, serum osmolality (in mOsm/kg) = (2 × Na)
+ (glucose/18) + (BUN/2.8).
/square6True hyponatremia is associated with low serum
osmolality.
Determine Volume Status
/square6To further narrow down the causes of true hypo-
natremia, determine the volume status of the patientby clinical examination. Based on the volume status,true hyponatremia can be divided into hypovolemic,euvolemic, and hypervolemic hyponatremia.
Determine Urinary Sodium Excretion
/square6Based on urinary sodium excretion (>20 or <20)causes of hyponatremia can be further narrowed
down.
Investigations
/square6Serum sodium level is less than 135 mEq/L.
/square6Serum osmolality.
/square6Urine sodium and urine osmolality is inappro-
priately increased in SIADH.
/square6Appropriate tests to rule out cardiac, renal, or liverdisease.
/square6Thyroid function tests and cortisol levels.Management
/square6Treatment of hyponatremia depends on the degreeand rapidity of development of hyponatremia.
/square6Mild hyponatremia (Na >120) may not rapiddevelopment of hyponatremia (over hours todays) has high morbidity due to cerebral edema,
and may be associated with altered sensorium or
seizures. It is generally safe to correct this relativelyrapidly using hypertonic saline infusions (1.6 or 3%saline).
/square6On the other hand, rapid correction of hypo-natremia which has developed slowly (over weeksto months) can be hazardous to the brain. In thesesituations, an abrupt increase in extracellularosmolality can lead to neuronal dehydration and
detachment from their myelin sheaths (central
pontine myelinolysis—CPM)). CPM presents asquadriparesis, dysarthria, dysphagia and alteredsensorium and is generally fatal. Hence, in chronichyponatremia, correction should be slow and notexceed 10 mEq/L/day.
/square6Underlying cause of hyponatremia should becorrected always. For hypovolemic patients, this
will require intravenous saline infusion. SIADH
requires fluid restriction and treatment withdemeclocycline to enhance water excretion, byinterfering with collecting duct responsiveness toADH. Conivaptan or tolvaptan which are ADHreceptor antagonists are also useful in SIADH.Hypervolemic patients (due to CCF) are treated
with a combination of diuretics and fluid restric-
tion.
Figure 13.2 Approach to a case of hyponatremia


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
13602 Q.Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone
secretion (SIADH).
/square6In SIADH, increased (inappropriate) ADH release
occurs without any physiologic stimulation. Hypo-
volemia and hyperosmolality are physiologicalstimulations for ADH secretion, so the diagnosisof SIADH is made only if these are absent. Inappro-priate ADH secretion leads to water retentionleading to hyponatremia.
/square6Normal regulation of ADH release occurs from bothCNS and chest via baroreceptors and neural input.Hence disorders affecting CNS and lungs commonlyproduce SIADH.
Causes
•CNS disorders: Head trauma, stroke, subarachnoid hemorr-
hage, brain tumor, encephalitis, meningitis.
•Lung diseases: Tuberculosis, pneumonia, bronchiectasis,
neoplasms.
•Malignancies: Bronchogenic carcinoma, malignant
lymphoma, leukemia.
•Drugs: Carbamazepine, phenytoin, haloperidol, cyclo-
phosphamide, chlorpropamide.
•Others: Postoperative state, sustained pain, stress, nausea,
AIDS, idiopathic.
Clinical Features of SIADH
/square6These are same as those given under hyponatremia.
Clinical features of underlying disease may also bepresent.
Diagnosis of SIADH
/square6Hyponatremia.
/square6Low plasma osmolality <270 mmol/kg.
/square6Urine osmolality >150 mmol/kg. Normally urineshould be maximally dilute in the presence of lowserum osmolality, but is typically >150 in SIADH,
i.e. inappropriately concentrated due to ADH
action.
/square6Urine sodium concentration >20 mEq/L.
/square6Normal renal function tests, uric acid.
/square6Exclusion of other causes of hyponatremia.
/square6Appropriate clinical context.
Treatment
/square6Severe symptomatic hyponatremia should becorrected using hypertonic saline.
/square6Fluid restriction to 600–1000 ml/day.
/square6Treatment of the cause of SIADH (e.g. withdrawalof a drug causing SIADH).
/square6Demeclocycline (600–900 mg/day) may enhancewater excretion, by interfering with collecting ductresponsiveness to ADH.
/square6Oral urea therapy (30–45 g/day) can provide a
solute load to promote water excretion./square6ADH receptor antagonists are the new drugs
available to treat SIADH. These are conivaptan andtolvaptan. They promote the excretion of free water(aquaretics). Tolvaptan is hepatotoxic and shouldnot be given to patients with liver disease.
Q.Hypernatremia.
/square6Serum sodium level of >145 mEq/L is called hyper-
natremia.
/square6Hypernatremia is either due to excess water loss
from the body or due to excess sodium intake. Mostof the cases are due to excess free water loss from
the body.
/square6An intact thirst mechanism usually prevents hyper-
natremia. Hence, whatever may be the underlyingcause, hypernatremia occurs only if adequate water
intake is not possible, as with unconscious patients.
Causes
/square6Excessive diuretic therapy due to relatively more
water loss than sodium loss.
/square6Primary water loss due to diarrhea or excessivesweating.
/square6Diabetes insipidus (central or nephrogenic).
/square6Excess sodium intake (IV or oral salt administration).
Clinical Features
/square6Hyperthermia, delirium, and coma may be seenwith severe hypernatremia.
Treatment
/square6Correction of underlying cause.
/square6Fluids without sodium, such as 5% dextrose shouldbe administered to correct hypernatremia. Fluidsshould be administered over a 48-hour period, aiming
for a decrease in serum sodium of 1 mEq/L/h.
Q.Discuss briefly about the normal handling of
potassium by the body.
/square6Potassium is abundant in meat, fruits (especially
bananas), and coconut water. The usual dietary intakeof potassium is between 80 and 160 mEq per day.Serum concentration is between 3.5 and 5 mEq/L.
/square6Most of the body’s potassium is intracellular.Hence, massive destruction of cells (e.g. hemolysis,rhabdomyolysis) can release large amount ofpotassium into the circulation.
/square6An excess potassium load is handled by: Uptakeinto cells, renal excretion and extrarenal losses (e.g.gastrointestinal).
/square6Uptake of potassium into cells is governed by theactivity of the Na
+/K+-ATPase in the cell membrane
and by hydrogen ion concentration. Uptake isstimulated by insulin, beta-adrenergic stimulationand alkalosis. Uptake is decreased by alpha

/square6Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders603
13adrenergic stimulation and acidosis (K+ exchanged
for H+ across cell membrane).
/square6Kidneys are responsible for the excretion of 90% ofthe potassium taken in diet. Renal excretion of
potassium is increased by aldosterone, which
stimulates K
+ and H+ secretion in exchange for Na+
in the collecting duct. Because H+ and K+ are
interchangeable in the exchange mechanism,acidosis decreases and alkalosis increases thesecretion of K
+. Aldosterone secretion is stimulated
by hyperkalemia and inhibited by hypokalemia.
Many drugs affect K+ homeostasis by affecting
aldosterone release (e.g. heparin, NSAID, ACEinhibitors) or by directly affecting renal potassiumhandling (e.g. diuretics). In the presence ofdecreased potassium intake, reduction of renal
excretion of potassium may take 1–2 weeks. During
this time hypokalemia may develop.
/square6About 10% of daily potassium intake is excreted inthe gastrointestinal tract. Excessive vomiting,
diarrhea, and colorectal villous adenomas can lead
to hypokalemia.
Q.Enumerate the causes of hypokalemia. Discuss
briefly the clinical features, ECG manifestations and
management of hypokalemia.
/square6Hypokalemia is defined as plasma K+ concentration
of <3.5 mEq/L.
Etiology
•Reduced intake: Diet containing less K+, starvation,
potassium free IV fluids.
•Urinary loss:  Diuretics, polyuria, primary mineralocorticoid
excess, metabolic acidosis, hypomagnesemia, amphotericin-B,
salt-wasting nephropathies including Bartter’s or Gitelman’s
syndrome.
•Gastrointestinal loss: Vomiting, diarrhea, tube aspiration of
gastric contents, laxative abuse, villous adenoma.
•Increased entry into cells: Alkalosis, increased availability
of insulin, beta-2 agonists, hypokalemic periodic paralysis.
Clinical Features
/square6Muscular weakness and paralysis. Respiratory
muscle weakness can lead to respiratory failure anddeath. Gastrointestinal muscle weakness leads to
paralytic ileus.
/square6Cardiac arrhythmias include ectopic beats, sinus
bradycardia, paroxysmal atrial or junctional tachy-cardia, atrioventricular block, and ventricular
tachycardia or fibrillation.
/square6Muscle cramps leading to rhabdomyolysis and
myoglobinuria.
Investigations
/square6Serum electrolytes, bicarbonate, calcium and
magnesium./square6Urine potassium excretion—it is increased in hypo-
kalemia due to renal loss and decreased in extra-renal loss.
/square6Plasma renin activity and aldosterone levels will
identify patients with primary hyperaldosteronism.
/square6ECG changes—depression of ST segment, flattening
or inversion of T wave, and presence of U waves atthe end of the T wave. U waves are often seen in
leads V4 to V6.
Management
/square6Treatment of the underlying cause.
/square6Potassium replacement—this can be done by oral
(as syrup) or IV potassium chloride supplementa-tion. For mild hypokalemia (K
+ >3 mEq/L), about
20 to 80 mEq per day of oral potassium chloride is
given in 3 to 4 divided doses. In moderate hypo-kalemia (K
+ <3.0 mEq/L), about 120 mEq oral
potassium chloride is given in 3 to 4 divided doses.For severe or symptomatic hypokalemia, intra-venous potassium chloride is given. IV potassium
is administered along with IV fluids at a concen-
tration of 20 to 40 mEq per liter of fluid.
/square6Potassium sparing diuretics—such as spirono-lactone or amiloride can be used along with other
measures to correct hypokalemia.
Q.Enumerate the causes of hyperkalemia. Discuss
briefly the clinical features, ECG manifestations and
management of hyperkalemia.
/square6Hyperkalemia is defined as a plasma K+ concentra-
tion of >5.5 mEq/L.
Causes
•Excess intake:  K+ rich foods, intravenous fluid containing K+.
•Impaired excretion:  Acute and chronic renal failure, Addison
disease, hypoaldosteronism, drugs (K+ sparing diuretics, ACE
inhibitors, NSAIDs).
•Release of intracellular K+: Hemolysis, rhabdomyolysis,
crush injury, burns, tumour lysis syndrome.
•Shift of K+ out of cell:  Metabolic acidosis, hyperosmolality,
insulin deficiency, hyperkalemic periodic paralysis, succinyl-
choline, digitalis.
•Pseudohyperkalemia:  Hemolysed blood sample, repeated
fist clenching during phlebotomy, with release of K+ from
forearm muscles, specimen drawn from arm with K+ infusion.
Clinical Features
/square6Symptoms generally do not occur until the plasma
potassium concentration exceeds 7 mEq/L, unless therise in potassium concentration has been very rapid.
/square6Hyperkalemia interferes with normal neuromus-cular function and causes muscle weakness and,rarely, flaccid paralysis. This happens repeatedlyin hyperkalemic periodic paralysis.
/square6Paralytic ileus and abdominal distention may occur.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
13604 /square6Hyperkalemia causes depolarization, leading to
decreased cardiac excitability, hypotension, andbradycardia. Ventricular fibrillation and cardiacarrest are terminal events.
/square6ECG changes:  Tall peaked T waves with shortened
QT interval are the first changes seen on the ECG.This is followed by progressive lengthening of thePR interval and QRS duration. The P wave may dis-appear, and QRS widens giving rise to “sine wave”pattern. A variety of other conduction disturbances,
including right bundle branch block, left bundle
branch block, bifascicular block, and advancedatrioventricular block may also be seen.
Treatment
/square6Discontinue exogenous K+ intake by eliminating K+
rich foods such as fruits, coconut water, etc.
/square6Calcium gluconate decreases membrane excitabilityand prevents cardiac arrhythmias. The usual dose is
10 mL of a 10% solution intravenously over 2–3 min.
/square6Insulin plus dextrose infusion shifts K+ into the cells
and temporarily lowers the plasma K+ concentra-
tion. 50 ml of 50% dextrose plus 10 units of regular
insulin is given every 6 to 8th hourly.
/square6Sodium bicarbonate increases blood pH and results
in a shift of K+ into cells. 1–2 ampoules can be given
intravenously.
/square6B-2 adrenergic agonists such as salbutamol promotecellular uptake of K
+. They can be given parenterally
or in nebulized form every 4 to 6th hourly.
/square6K+ excretion can be enhanced by diuretics (fruse-
mide, thiazides) and cation-exchange resin. Sodiumpolystyrene sulfonate (e.g. K-BIND) is a cation-exchange resin that binds to K
+ in the gastro-
intestinal tract which is then excreted in the stools.
/square6Hemodialysis is the most rapid way of removingthe K
+ from the body. It is indicated in patients with
renal failure and those with severe hyperkalemiaunresponsive to other measures. Peritoneal dialysis
also removes K
+ but is less effective.
/square6Underlying cause of hyperkalemia should be identi-
fied and corrected.Q.Hypomagnesemia.
/square6Normal magnesium level in the plasma is 1.4 to
2 mg/dL. A value less than this is called hypo-
magnesemia.
Causes
•Decreased intake or absorption:  Malnutrition, alcoholism,
malabsorption, chronic diarrhea, laxative abuse, gastro-intestinal suction, total parenteral nutrition.
•Increased renal loss:  Diuretics, hyperaldosteronism,
hyperparathyroidism, hyperthyroidism, hypercalcemia,
tubulointerstitial diseases.
•Others:  Diabetes mellitus, post-parathyroidectomy (hungry
bone syndrome), respiratory alkalosis, pregnancy.
Clinical Features
/square6Anorexia, nausea, vomiting, lethargy, weakness,
and personality change.
/square6Tetany (e.g. positive Trousseau or Chvostek sign
or spontaneous carpopedal spasm, hyperreflexia),
and tremor and muscle fasciculations.
/square6Severe hypomagnesemia may cause generalizedtonic-clonic seizures, especially in children.
Investigations
/square6Urinary excretion of magnesium—more than
10–30 mg/d indicates renal magnesium loss.
/square6Hypocalcemia and hypokalemia may be present.
/square6ECG shows prolonged QT interval.
Treatment
/square6In mild, asymptomatic cases, oral magnesium
gluconate (500 to 1000 mg two to three times daily
is given for 3 to 4 days.
/square6In symptomatic cases, IV infusion of 1–2 g of magne-
sium sulfate, followed by an infusion of 6 g magne-
sium sulfate in at least 1 L of fluids over 24 hours,
repeated for up to 7 days to replete magnesium stores.
Magnesium sulfate may also be given intramuscularly.
Q.Hypermagnesemia.
/square6Hypermagnesemia is a serum Mg concentration
>2.1 mEq/L.
/square6It occurs most commonly in patients with renal
failure after ingestion of Mg-containing drugs, such
as antacids or purgatives. Other causes are adminis-
tration of magnesium sulfate intravenously (as a
treatment for eclampsia and aluminium phosphide
poisoning).
/square6Symptoms and signs include hyporeflexia, hypo-tension, respiratory depression, and cardiac arrest.
/square6Treatment of severe Mg toxicity consists of intra-
venous calcium gluconate. IV furosemide can
increase Mg excretion when renal function is ade-
quate. Hemodialysis may be considered in severe
hypermagnesemia. Figure 13.3 ECG changes in hyperkalemia


/square6Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders605
13Q.Discuss the normal physiology of acid–base balance.
Or
Q.Discuss how the body maintains normal pH.
/square6The concentration of hydrogen ions in both extra-
cellular and intracellular compartments is tightlycontrolled. The pH of ECF including blood ismaintained between 7.36 and 7.44 (average 7.40).Maintenance of pH within this range is important;otherwise, all the metabolic functions of the body
get affected leading ultimately to death.
/square6A decrease in extracellular fluid pH is called acidosis
which is equivalent to raising the hydrogen ionconcentration. An increase in extracellular fluid pHis called alkalosis which is equivalent to loweringthe hydrogen ion concentration.
/square6Acidosis is two types; metabolic acidosis and respi-ratory acidosis. Metabolic acidosis is associated
with a low pH and low bicarbonate concentration.
Respiratory acidosis is associated with a low pHand high PCO
2.
/square6Alkalosis is also of two types; metabolic alkalosisand respiratory alkalosis. Metabolic alkalosis isassociated with a high pH and high bicarbonateconcentration. Respiratory alkalosis is associated
with a high pH and low PCO
2.
/square6Body maintains the pH within normal limits by a
variety of physiological mechanisms.
Maintenance of Normal pH by the Body
/square6There are many buffer systems in the body which
prevent wide swings in the pH of the ECF.
Carbonic acid/bicarbonate buffer system
/square6Most important because it immediately corrects the
swing in pH. Any acid load in the form of H+ ions
combine with bicarbonate to form carbonic acid,
which, then dissociates to form CO2 and water. CO2
thus produced is excreted by the lungs.
/square6This system is a major buffer in the plasma, withinthe cells including RBCs and bone.
/square6Hemoglobin is the most important buffer withinRBCs and can buffer large amount of H
+ ions.
/square6Bone contains large amount of bicarbonate whichcan buffer acid load.
Pulmonary mechanisms
/square6Respiratory compensation for acid–base distur-
bances can occur quickly, due to alterations inventilatory drive mediated through pH changes inthe brainstem.
/square6In acid accumulation, ventilation is increased, thuswashing out CO
2 which is equivalent to carbonic
acid thus increasing the pH. Conversely, alkalosisleads to inhibition of ventilation and accumulation
of CO
2 leading to decrease in pH.Renal mechanisms
/square6Kidneys provide third line of defense against acid–
base disturbances. When acid accumulates, kidneysincrease urinary excretion of acid, and conserve
bicarbonate.
Q.Discuss the causes, clinical features, investigations
and management of metabolic acidosis.
/square6Metabolic acidosis is defined as a disorder associated
with a low pH and low bicarbonate concentration.
/square6It can be produced by three major mechanisms:
– Increased acid production (e.g. ketoacidosis and
lactic acidosis).
– Loss of bicarbonate (e.g. diarrhea or type 2 renal
tubular acidosis).
– Decreased renal acid excretion (e.g. renal failure
or type 1 renal tubular acidosis).
/square6The pH fall is compensated by hyperventilation,
resulting in a reduced PCO2. Kidneys try to compen-
sate by increasing the excretion of acid load and
conserving bicarbonate. Respiratory compensation is
immediate, but renal compensation takes many days.
/square6Based on the nature of accumulating acid, two typesof metabolic acidosis can be defined; normal anion
gap acidosis and high anion gap acidosis.
/square6In normal anion gap acidosis, a mineral acid (HCl)
accumulates, or there is a primary loss of bicarbo-nate buffer from the ECF. Here, there is no additionof new acidic anion to the plasma. Hence, the anion
gap (Na
+ + K+) – (Cl– + HCO3–), remains normal
(15 mmol/L) since the plasma chloride increasesto replace the depleted bicarbonate levels. Normalanion gap is due to anions such as phosphate,sulphate and multiple negative charges on plasmaprotein molecules. Examples of normal anion gap
metabolic acidosis are diarrhea and type 2 renal
tubular acidosis.
/square6In high anion gap acidosis, an accumulating acid isaccompanied by its corresponding anion, which
adds to the unmeasured anion gap, while the
chloride concentration remains normal. Examplesare ketoacidosis and lactic acidosis.
Causes
Increased acid production
• Lactic acidosis• Ketoacidosis (diabetes, starvation, alcohol-associated)
• Ingestions (methanol, ethylene glycol, aspirin)
Loss of bicarbonate
• Diarrhea• Ureterosigmoidostomy• Proximal renal tubular acidosis
Decreased renal acid excretion
• Renal failure
• Distal renal tubular acidosis

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
13606 Clinical Features
/square6Kussmaul breathing—deep sighing respiration.
/square6Abdominal pain and vomiting.
/square6Neurologic abnormalities—irritability, lethargy,
seizures and coma.
Investigations
/square6Arterial blood gas analysis—pH, PCO2, and the
bicarbonate concentration can be known by this.
Low serum bicarbonate and low pH confirms the
diagnosis of metabolic acidosis. PCO2 is decreased
due to respiratory compensation.
/square6Renal function tests.
/square6LFT.
/square6Serum electrolytes such as sodium and potassium.
/square6Blood sugar and urinary ketones (to rule out diabetic
ketoacidosis).
/square6Lactic acid levels.
/square6Serum levels of methanol, ethanol, paracetamol,salicylates and ethylene glycol if indicated.
Management
/square6Identify and correct the underlying cause.
/square6Use of sodium bicarbonate infusion is indicatedwhen the underlying disorder cannot be readilycorrected or when the acidosis is severe (pH <7).
/square6Sodium bicarbonate and potassium supplementsare needed to achieve normal plasma bicarbonateand potassium levels in proximal and distal renaltubular acidosis.
Q.Anion gap.
/square6The anion gap is the difference in the measured cations
(positively charged ions) and the measured anions(negatively charged ions) in serum, plasma, or urine.
/square6It is calculated by subtracting the serum concentra-tions of chloride and bicarbonate (anions) from theconcentrations of sodium and potassium (cations):
Anion gap = ([Na
+] + [K+]) – ([Cl–] + [HCO3–])
/square6Normal value for the serum anion gap is 8–16 mEq/L.
Anion gap can be high, normal or low.
/square6Anion gap is useful in knowing the cause ofmetabolic acidosis, because the causes of high andnormal anion gap acidosis are different.
Causes of high anion gap acidosis
Remember the pnemonic 
CATMUDPILES
/square6Carbon monoxide poisoning
/square6Alcoholic ketoacidosis
/square6Toluene
/square6Metformin, Methanol
/square6Uremia
/square6DKA
/square6Pyroglutamic acidosis, paracetamol, phenformin,
propylene glycol, paraldehyde/square6Iron, isoniazid
/square6Lactic acidosis
/square6Ethylene glycol
/square6Salicylates, starvation
Causes of normal anion gap acidosis
/square6Diarrhea, renal tubular acidosis.
Low anion gap
/square6Decrease in unmeasured anions (albumin, dilution).
/square6Increase in unmeasured cations (multiple myeloma,
hypercalcemia, hypermagnesemia, lithium, poly-mixin B).
Q.Metabolic alkalosis.
/square6Metabolic alkalosis is characterized by an increase
in plasma pH and bicarbonate concentration. Thereis a compensatory rise in PCO
2 due to hypoventila-
tion.
Causes
/square6GI loss of hydrogen ion, e.g. vomiting or aspiration
of gastric contents.
/square6Renal loss of hydrogen, e.g. primary and secondaryhyperaldosteronism, diuretic use, Bartter syndrome,
Gitelman syndrome.
/square6Intracellular shift of hydrogen—due to hypo-
kalemia.
/square6Alkali administration.
Clinical Features
/square6Tetany (carpopedal spasm) due to increased neuro-muscular irritability as the plasma ionized calciumfalls.
/square6Alkalosis also lowers threshold for anginal symp-
toms and arrhythmias.
/square6Manifestations of underlying cause.
Management
/square6Treat the underlying cause.
/square6Replacement of potassium in hypokalemia induced
alkalosis.
Q.Respiratory acidosis.
/square6Respiratory acidosis occurs when there is accumula-
tion of CO2 due to reduced alveolar ventilation.
Renal retention of bicarbonate partially compen-sates for acidosis; hence, there is rise in plasma
bicarbonate concentration.
/square6Respiratory acidosis can be acute or chronic.
Causes
/square6Conditions that impair CNS respiratory drive:
Encephalitis, brainstem disease, drugs (opioids,benzodiazepines, barbiturates).

/square6Fluid and Electrolyte Disorders607
13/square6Respiratory muscle weakness:  For example, myesthenia
gravis, Guillain-Barré syndrome, muscular dys-trophy, cervical cord lesions.
/square6Lung diseases:  COPD, acute exacerbation of asthma,
interstitial lung disease, pneumothorax.
/square6Chest wall disorders: Severe kyphoscoliosis, flail
chest.
/square6Obesity-hypoventilation syndrome, obstructive
sleep apnea (OSA).
Clinical Features
/square6Features of underlying disease.
/square6Bounding pulse, drowsiness or coma due to CO2
accumulation.
Management
/square6Correct the underlying cause.
/square6Ventilatory support if required.
/square6Bicarbonate is almost always contraindicated,
because HCO3– can be converted to PCO2 in serum.Q.Respiratory alkalosis.
/square6Respiratory alkalosis develops when there is reduc-
tion of PCO2 due to hyperventilation resulting in
increase in plasma pH. If hyperventilation is
prolonged, renal compensation occurs so that acidsecretion is reduced and bicarbonate excretion isincreased.
/square6Causes of hyperventilation include anxiety states,over-vigorous assisted ventilation, pregnancy,pulmonary embolism, chronic liver disease, andsalicylate poisoning.
/square6Clinical features include those of underlying cause.Reduction in ionized calcium due to alkalosisproduces agitation, perioral and digital tingling,carpopedal spasm, Trousseau’s sign and Chvosteksign. Seizures may develop in severe cases.
/square6Management involves correction of the underlyingcause. In acute hyperventilation due to anxiety,rebreathing into a paper bag will increase the PCO
2.
Sedation may be needed if anxiety and hyper-ventilation persists.

14
608Q.What is cancer? Discuss briefly about the etiology
of cancer.
/square6Cancer refers to unregulated cell growth with tissue
invasion/metastasis. Unregulated cell growthwithout invasion is called benign neoplasms , or
new growths. Cancer is a synonym for malignant
neoplasm .
/square6Cancers of epithelial tissues are called carcinomas ;
cancers of nonepithelial (mesenchymal) tissues arecalled sarcomas;  cancers arising from hematopoietic
or lymphoid cells are called leukemias  or lymphomas .
Etiology
/square6The cause of most cancers remains unknown.
However, the following factors have been identified
to cause cancer.
Genetic Factors
/square6This is the most important cause of cancer develop-
ment.
/square6Most tumors exhibit chromosomal abnormalities
such as deletions, inversions, translocations, orduplications. This leads to activation of proto-
oncogenes to oncogenes or deletion of tumor
suppressor genes—or both. Both these changescause abnormal cellular proliferation and cancerformation.
Viruses
/square6The role of viruses in carcinogenesis is well known.
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is associated with Burkitt’s
lymphoma and nasopharyngeal cancer. HepatitisB and C virus can lead to hepatocellular carcinoma.Helicobacter pylori infection is associated with non-
Hodgkin’s lymphoma and stomach Ca. Human T-lymphotrophic virus type I (HTLV-I) is associated
with adult acute T cell leukemia. Kaposi’s sarcomaOncology
is seen in HIV infection. Human papilloma viruses
(HPV) can cause cervical cancer in women.
Aging
/square6Age is most significant factor for cancer develop-ment. Two-thirds of all cancers occur above the ageof 65 years. This is due to alteration of host cells, longerexposure to carcinogens, and decreased immunity.
Ionizing Radiation
/square6Natural sources (cosmic rays, soil) or man-madeionizing radiation (diagnostic, therapeutic, atomicbomb explosion) can lead to skin cancer andleukaemia.
UV (Ultraviolet) Radiation
/square6UV rays from the sun, particularly (UV-B spectrum
240–230 nm) can cause skin cancer or melanoma.
Tobacco
/square6Smoking and chewing tobacco has been identified
as a major cause of lung and oral cancer. Cancersof esophagus, stomach, bladder, kidney, liver andlarynx are also related to tobacco carcinogens whichare primarily polycyclic hydrocarbons and cyclicN-nitrosamine.
Occupational Hazards
/square6Chimney sweepers had a high incidence of scrotal
cancer which was attributed to soot. Bladder cancer
has been noted in aniline dye workers. Asbestosexposure is associated with mesothelioma and lungcancer.
Environmental Pollution
/square6Air pollution caused by industries and exhaust fromvehicles contains polycyclic hydrocarbons; thesehydrocarbons cause lung cancer.

/square6Oncology609
14Drugs and Toxins
/square6Cancer chemotherapeutic drugs can cause leukaemia.
Aflatoxin increases the chance of hepatocellular Ca.
Diet and Alcohol
/square6Meat and fat increase the risk of colon cancer. Saltintake and salted fish in diet increase the risk of
stomach cancer and nasopharyngeal cancer,
respectively.
Q.Describe the epidemiology of cancer.
/square6Cancers are among the leading causes of morbidity
and mortality worldwide and the incidence ofcancer is increasing every year.
/square6More than 60 percent of the world’s new cancercases occur in Africa, Asia, and Central and SouthAmerica. 70 percent of the world’s cancer deathsalso occur in these regions.
/square6Tobacco is the most important identified cause of
cancer followed by dietary practices, inadequate
physical activity, alcohol consumption, infectionsdue to viruses and sexual behavior.
/square6In general cancer incidence is more in old agecompared to younger age group.
/square6In general cancer is more common in men thanwomen except breast, thyroid, and gallbladdercancers. In females, breast cancer is the leading siteof cancer followed by cancer cervix.
/square6Lung cancer is the most common cancer in males.
The highest rates are among men in eastern Europe,
North America, and the rest of Europe, whereasthe lowest rates are observed in Africa, excludingSouth Africa lung cancer is more strongly associatedwith cigarette smoking than any other cancer.
/square6Cancers that are strongly related to infectiousetiologies, for example, stomach, liver, and uterinecervix are, in general, decreasing globally. Cancersthat were common only in wealthy countries are nowincreasing in middle- and low-income countriesalso (these are cancers of the lung, breast, prostate,
and colon/rectum).
/square6Deaths due to cancers are more in developing coun-
tries because of late diagnosis and inadequatetreatment.
Q.Discuss briefly about the genetic factors in the
causation of cancer.
Q.Genetic basis of transformation of a normal cell
into a malignant cell.
Q.Protooncogene, oncogene and tumor supression
genes.
/square6Most tumors exhibit genetic abnormalities such as
deletions, inversions, translocations, or duplications.
/square6Most genetic abnormalities lead to activation ofproto-oncogenes to oncogenes or deletion of tumorsuppressor genes—or both. Both these changes
cause abnormal cellular proliferation and cancerformation.
Proto-oncogenes and Oncogenes
/square6Oncogenes were initially discovered in the genomeof retroviruses capable of causing cancers inchickens, mice, and rats. Proto-oncogenes in thenormal state stimulate the normal growth of cells.Activated proto-oncogenes are called oncogenesand are responsible for the development of cancers.
Activation of proto-oncogenes to oncogenes can
occur due to point mutation, DNA amplification,chromosomal rearrangement and viral infections.
/square6Point mutation:  Is a common mechanism of oncogene
activation. Point mutations occur due to ionizing
radiation, ultraviolet rays, and carcinogens.
/square6DNA amplification:  DNA sequence amplification is
another mechanism of proto-oncogene activation
and leads to overexpression of the gene product.
Numerous genes have been reported to be ampli-fied in cancer. Because the region amplified oftenextends to hundreds of thousands of base pairs,more than one oncogene may be amplified in somecancers. Demonstration of amplification of a
cellular gene is often a predictor of poor prognosis.
For example, ERBB2 /HER2  and NMYC  are often
amplified in aggressive breast cancers and neuro-blastoma, respectively.
/square6Chromosomal rearrangement:  In Burkitt’s lymphoma,
the c- myc oncogene is activated by translocation of
genetic material from chromosome 8 to chromo-some 14. CML is caused by reciprocal translocationof the long arms of chromosomes 9 and 22, resultingin the generation of a fusion protein (BCR-ABL)
with tyrosine kinase activity. Amplification of the
HER-2/ neu oncogene in breast cancer has been
associated with more aggressive tumors.
/square6Viruses:  Viral DNA may integrate within a proto-
oncogene and may activate it. Viral DNA may also
contain proto-oncogene which may be transferredto the host after infection. Viruses may also activategrowth-promoting pathways and inhibit tumor-suppressor products in the infected cells.
Tumor Suppressor Genes
/square6The p53 gene triggers programmed cell death
(apoptosis). Mutations in the p53 gene lead to
abnormal cell proliferation and cancer formation. RB
gene is a tumor suppressor gene, and its inactiva-
tion leads to development of retinoblastoma. Many
soft tissue sarcomas are produced due to inactiva-tion of tumor suppressor genes.
Q.Cancer screening.
/square6Early detection of cancer offers a chance of cure.
When patients are diagnosed with a cancer on the

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
14610
basis of symptoms, the cancer may have already
spread in a significant proportion, so that curative
treatment (usually surgical) is not possible. Early
detection of cancer in an asymptomatic populationcan identify people with cancer which may becurable.
Requirements of a Screening Programme
/square6Acceptable to the population.
/square6Capable of detecting high percentage of earlycancers.
/square6Low false-positive rate (reducing unnecessaryinterventions).
/square6Cost effective.
/square6Availability of an effective intervention.
Q.Tumor markers.
/square6A tumor marker is a biomarker found in the blood,
urine, or body tissues that can be elevated in cancer.
Most of the tumor markers are proteins secretedby the tumor into the circulation.
Examples of Tumor Markers
•Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA):  Cancers of gastrointestinal
tract, lung, breast.
•CA-19:  Colon and pancreas.
•CA-125:  Ovary.
•Alpha-fetoprotein (AFP):  Hepatocellular carcinoma and
malignant teratoma.
•Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH):  Most cancers, reflecting
tumor burden or necrosis.
•Prostate-specific antigen (PSA):  Prostate cancer.
•βββββ2-microglobulin:  Elevated in multiple myeloma.
•Human chorionic gonadotrophin (HCG):  Germ cell tumors
of testes and ovaries, choriocarcinoma.
•Calcitonin:  Medullary carcinoma thyroid.
•Thyroglobulin:  Postoperative marker for thyroid cancer (but
not for medullary cancer).
•Chromogranin-A:  Neuroendocrine tumor.
Uses of Tumor Markers
/square6To detect the presence of cancer.
/square6Levels may reflect the extent (stage) of the
cancer.
/square6To follow response to therapy.
/square6To screen for recurrence of cancer.Q.Enumerate oncologic emergencies.
•Due to local effect: Spinal cord compression, superior vena
cava syndrome, malignant effusions.
•Systemic effects:  Tumor lysis syndrome, hypercalcemia,
opportunistic infections, hyperuricemia, SIADH.
•Hematologic:  Hypercoagulability, thrombocytopenia, febrile
neutropenia, DIC.
Q.Tumor lysis syndrome.
/square6Tumor lysis syndrome refers to a group of meta-
bolic complications due to sudden destruction oftumor cells. It usually occurs after the treatment of
neoplastic disorders.
/square6It is commonly seen in lymphomas, leukemias and
multiple myeloma.
Pathophysiology
/square6Lysis of large number of tumor cells releases intra-
cellular potassium and phosphate causing hyper-
kalemia and hyperphosphatemia. Sudden destructionof tumor cells also leads to hyperuricemia. Uric acidcrystals may get deposited in renal tubules leadingto renal failure.
/square6Hypocalcemia is a consequence of acute hyper-phosphatemia with subsequent precipitation ofcalcium phosphate in soft tissues.
/square6Acute renal failure and the liberation of largeamounts of endogenous intracellular acids fromcellular catabolism result in metabolic acidosis.
Clinical Features
/square6Dysuria, oliguria, hematuria may be present dueto uric acid deposition in kidneys and consequent
AKI. Uremia due to AKI may produce fatigue,
weakness, nausea, vomiting and anorexia.
/square6Hyperkalemia may produce muscle weakness andcardiac arrhythmias.
/square6Hypocalcemia may produce tetany, and seizures.
Investigations
/square6Serum uric acid, phosphate and potassium areelevated. Serum calcium decreased (hypocalcemia).
/square6Urea and creatinine are elevated due to renal failure.
/square6ABG shows metabolic acidosis.
/square6ECG.
/square6Other routine investigations.TABLE 14.1: Cancers with potential for screening
Malignancy Method of screening Population to be screened
• Breast cancer Mammography, breast self examination Females 40 and above, every year
• Cervical cancer Cervical smear cytology (pap smear) Females: 18–65, every 1–3 years• Prostate cancer Serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) level Males of 50 years of age and above, every year
• Colorectal cancer Single flexible sigmoidoscopy, fecal occult 50 years of age and above, every 5 to 10 years
blood test

/square6Oncology611
14Treatment
/square6Hydration:  Volume depletion is a major risk factor
for tumor lysis syndrome and must be correctedvigorously. Intravenous fluids along with loopdiuretics are given to maintain high urine outputso that uric acid crystals are easily washed out in
the urine thus preventing uric acid nephropathy.
/square6Hyperuricemia is treated with allopurinol and
rasburicase . Allopurinol blocks conversion of hypo-
xanthine and xanthine to uric acid. Rasburicase is
a recombinant urate oxidase which converts uric
acid into an inactive and soluble metabolite(allantoin) which is easily excreted by the kidneys.Febuxostat  is a new xanthine oxidase inhibitor which
is long acting and does not require dose modifica-tion in renal failure. Febuxostat can be used instead
of allopurinol.
/square6Hyperkalemia is treated with antihyperkalemia
measures such as beta-2 agonists, insulin plusdextrose infusions and potassium binding resins.
/square6Hypocalcemia is treated with intravenous infusionof calcium gluconate.
/square6Hyperphosphatemia is managed with oral phosphatebinders and the same solution insulin plus dextrosesolution used for the control of hyperkalemia.
/square6Urinary alkalinization will convert uric acid to more
soluble urate salt, thus preventing deposition of uric
acid crystals in the renal tubules and consequentrenal failure. Sodium bicarbonate is given intra-venously for this purpose.
/square6Hemodialysis should be considered in severecases.Q.Spinal cord compression due to tumor.
/square6Tumor can directly compress the spinal cord or
damage it indirectly by interfering with bloodsupply.
Clinical Features
/square6Back pain at the level of the spinal cord lesion.
/square6Progressive weakness and sensory loss below thelevel of compression.
/square6Radiculopathy due to nerve root compression.
/square6Bowel and bladder dysfunction.
Investigations
/square6Plain X-rays may show bony destruction.
/square6MRI is essential to demonstrate tumor detail andspinal cord compression.
/square6Biopsy of the lesion may be required to confirm the
diagnosis of malignancy.
Treatment
/square6Immediate diagnosis and treatment is essential to
prevent permanent neurological deficits.
/square6Inj dexamethasone 100 mg is given IV stat followedby 25 mg IV 6-hourly.
/square6Urgent radiotherapy.
/square6Surgery is indicated if neurologic deficits worsen
despite nonsurgical treatment, a biopsy is needed,
spine is unstable or tumor recurs after radiationtherapy.Figure 14.1 Pathogenesis of tumor lysis syndrome


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
14612 Q.Paraneoplastic syndromes.
/square6Paraneoplastic syndromes are disorders due to
the remote effects of malignancy that cannot be
attributed either to direct invasion or metastatic
lesions.
/square6They may affect up to 15% of patients with cancer.The most common cancer associated with paraneo-
plastic syndromes is small cell cancer of the lung.
/square6These syndromes may be the first sign of a malig-
nancy and provide an early clue to the presence ofcertain types of cancer. Treatment of the cancer
leads to resolution of the syndrome, and, con-
versely, recurrence of the cancer may be heraldedby the return of the syndromes.
Mechanism of Paraneoplastic Syndromes
/square6Paraneoplastic syndromes result from the produc-tion and release of physiologically active substancesby the tumor. Tumors may produce hormones,hormone precursors, a variety of enzymes, or
cytokines. Paraneoplastic syndromes associated
with ectopic hormone production are the best-characterized entities. Examples are hypercalcemiadue to production of parathyroid hormone (PTH)or PTH-related peptide by squamous cell ca of lungand SIADH (syndrome of inappropriate secretion
of antidiuretic hormone) due to ADH secretion by
small cell ca.
/square6Antibodies produced against tumor cells may crossreact and destroy normal tissues producing para-neoplastic manifestations. Many neurologic para-
neoplastic syndromes have been found to be caused
by the production of antineuronal antibodies.
/square6In some cases the pathophysiology of paraneo-plastic syndromes is unknown.
Manifestations of Paraneoplastic Syndromes
Systemic
• Anorexia
• Cachexia
• Weight loss
• Fever
• Suppressed immunity
Endocrine
• Cushing’s syndrome
• SIADH
• Hypercalcemia
• Hypoglycemia
• Carcinoid syndrome
Neuromuscular
• Peripheral neuropathy (most common neurologic para-
neoplastic syndrome)
• Subacute cerebellar degeneration
• Eaton-Lambert syndrome
• Stiff man syndromeHematologic• Erythrocytosis
• Pure red cell aplasia
• Eosinophilia
• Thrombocytosis
• Coagulopathy
Rheumatologic
• Arthropathies
• Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy
• Dermatomyositis/polymyositis
Cutaneous
• Itching
• Dermatomyositis
• Acanthosis nigricans
• Sweet’s syndrome
Others
• Amyloidosis
• Hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy
Management
/square6Treatment of underlying cancer leads to resolution
of paraneoplastic syndromes. Life threateningparaneoplastic emergencies such as hypercalcemiashould be treated appropriately.
/square6Immunosuppression (steroids), intravenousimmunoglobulins, or plasma exchange can be used
in patients with autoantibodies causing paraneo-
plastic manifestations.
Q.Targeted therapy in the treatment of cancer.
/square6Conventional cancer therapy (radiotherapy and
chemotherapy) does not adequately discriminatebetween rapidly dividing normal cells and cancercells. Hence normal dividing cells also get killedleading to many side effects such as bone marrow
suppression, alopecia, mucositis, etc.
/square6Targeted therapy uses specific molecular targets
present exclusively on cancer cells (and not onnormal cells) thus avoiding the side effects ofconventional chemotherapy. These targets may bereceptors or enzymes in the tumor cells. To beeffective, molecular targets should have a role in
cancer cell division and growth.
/square6Targeted therapy is often used with chemotherapy
and radiotherapy for additive or synergisticeffect.
Examples of targeted therapies
/square6Hormone therapies.
/square6Signal transduction inhibitors.
/square6Gene expression modulators.
/square6Apoptosis inducers.
/square6Angiogenesis inhibitors.
/square6Immunotherapies.

/square6Oncology613
14Hormone Therapies
/square6Hormone therapies block a certain hormone required
by the tumor to grow. Hormone therapies are usedin the treatment of breast and prostate cancer.
Signal Transduction Inhibitors
/square6Block the activities of molecules that stimulate celldivision.
/square6Examples are imatinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor
used in the treatment of CML. Gefitinib and erlotinib
inhibit tyrosine kinase in the epidermal growth factorreceptors (EGFR). They have been tried in advancednon-small cell lung cancer.
Gene Expression Modulators
/square6Oncogene expression can be inhibited by triplex
forming oligonucleotides, as well as peptide nucleic
acids. Research is going on this.
Apoptosis Inducers
/square6They induce the cancer cells to undergo apoptosis(spontaneous cell death). Examples include proteasome
inhibitors , such as bortezomib and carfilzomib.
Proteosome-ubiquitin pathway is an essential intra-cellular system that degrades many labile proteinsregulating cell cycle, apoptosis, and transcription.These drugs are used in refractory multiple myeloma.
Angiogenesis Inhibitors
/square6They block the growth of blood vessels supplyingthe tumor. Lack of blood supply interferes withtumor growth. Many of these drugs work by block-ing vascular endothelial growth factor  (VEGF) proteins
or the VEGF receptors.
/square6Examples of angiogenesis inhibitors include
bevacizumab and ramucirumab.
Immunotherapies
/square6They trigger the immune system to destroy cancercells.
/square6Examples are monoclonal antibodies that recognize
specific molecules on the surface of cancer cells.
Binding of the monoclonal antibody to the targetmolecule results in the immune destruction of cellsthat express that target molecule. Rituximab is a
monoclonal antibody against the B lymphocyteantigen CD20. It is used in the treatment of resistant
or relapsed lymphomas.
/square6Trastuzumab  is a recombinant monoclonal antibody
directed against the HER-2/ neu gene product (a
cells surface receptor) and is effective in the
treatment of HER-2/ neu expressing breast cancer.
/square6Monoclonal antibodies can also be used to deliver
toxic molecules to cancer cells specifically(immunotoxin therapy). Once the antibody has
bound to its target cell, the toxic molecule that islinked to the antibody—such as a radioactive sub-
stance or a toxin is taken up by the cell, ultimatelykilling that cell. Immunotoxin therapy is used inHodgkin lymphoma since the Reed-Sternberg cellsexpress a large number of antigens that occur inonly a small fraction of normal cells.
Q.Enumerate the various modes of treatment of
cancer.
Various modes of cancer treatment are as follows.
Surgery
/square6Surgery has a pivotal role in the management of
cancer.
/square6It can be either curative or palliative. Surgery can
be curative for most solid tumors if detected early.
Palliative surgeries relieve the symptoms withoutcuring the cancer. Examples of palliative surgeriesare debulking the tumor to relieve pressure symp-toms, colostomy in colon cancer, and fixation ofpathological fractures.
Chemotherapy
/square6Chemotherapy makes use of various cytotoxic
drugs with different modes of action. Examples are
melphalan, methotrexate, cyclophosphamide, etc.
Radiotherapy
/square6Radiotherapy makes use of ionizing radiation forthe treatment of cancer.
Hormonal Treatments
/square6Makes use of hormones/hormone modifiers for thetreatment of cancer.
/square6Examples:  Reducing estrogen levels can reduce the
proliferation of breast cancer cells and increase their
loss through apoptosis. Anti-androgen therapy canhelp in prostate cancer.
Biological Treatments
/square6Rituximab is a monoclonal antibody against theB cell antigen CD20. It increases response rates andsurvival in non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
/square6Trastuzumab is another monoclonal antibodywhich improves survival in patients with advancedbreast cancer.
Targeted Therapies
/square6These therapies target a particular pathway incancer cells with minimal or no effect on normalcells. This creates the potential to target cancer cells
more selectively, with reduced toxicity to normal
tissues.
/square6Example is imatinib which inhibits the BCR-ABL
gene product tyrosine kinase that is responsible for
chronic myeloid leukemia.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
14614 Q.Write briefly about cancer chemotherapy.
Q.Classification of anticancer drugs.
Q.Complications of cancer chemotherapy.
/square6Nitrogen mustard was the first anticancer drug to
be found, followed by discovery of other agents.Anticancer drugs (cytotoxic agents) have a broaderrange of intracellular effects than radiotherapy.
/square6Cancer chemotherapeutic drugs can be classifiedby their mode of action.
•Alkylating agents: Melphalan, carmustine, chlorambucil,
cyclophosphamide, cisplatin, busulphan, ifosfamide.
•Antitumour antibiotics:  Bleomycin, mitomycin, etoposide,
doxorubicin and daunorubicin, mitoxantrone.
•Antimetabolites:  Methotrexate, 5-fluorouracil, cytarabine
(cytidine).
•Plant alkaloids:  Vincristine, vinblastine, docetaxel, paclitaxel.
•Hormones/hormone modifiers:  Steroids, antiandrogens
(flutamide), antiestrogens (tamoxifene), aromatase inhibitors(letrozole).
•Biologic response modifiers:  Monoclonal antibodies
(rituximab, trastuzumab), tyrosine kinase inhibitors (imatinib).
Combination Chemotherapy
/square6It overcomes drug resistance and limits the side-
effects of different drugs.
/square6Combinations usually include drugs from different
classes, each of which may be independently activeand the combination of which should not haveadditive toxic effects.
/square6Each tumor has specific regimens that are used atvarious stages of the disease.
Administration
/square6Drugs are conventionally given by intravenousinjection every 3 to 4 weeks, allowing enough timefor the patient to recover from short-term toxic
effects such as bone marrow suppression.
/square6Between four and eight such cycles of treatment
are usually given in total.
Complications of Cancer Chemotherapy
/square6Most cytotoxics have a narrow therapeutic index.They cannot specifically target malignant cells.They have various effects on normal cells (especiallyrapidly dividing cells) which is responsible for their
side effects.
/square6Skin and tissue necrosis:  It is common if extravasation
of the drug occurs during intravenous administra-tion.
/square6Nausea and vomiting:  This is the most common side
effect of chemotherapy. This can be preventedand treated by various antiemetic drugs such asondansetron, domperidone, prochlorperazine;
etc./square6Bone marrow suppression:  Almost all the agents cause
bone marrow suppression which manifests ascytopenias. Marrow is susceptible because of highnumber of rapidly dividing cells. Leucopenia leadsto various infections, thrombocytopenia leads tobleeding manifestations, and anemia leads to easy
fatigability.
/square6Diarrhea:  This is common with fluorouracil infusions.
It responds to antimotility agents such as “high-dose” loperamide.
/square6Mucositis:  Irritation and inflammation of the mucous
membranes may affect oral, anal mucosa, and alsorest of the gastrointestinal tract. Mucositis is dueto damage to the proliferating cells at the base of
the mucosal squamous epithelia or in the intestinal
crypts.
/square6Alopecia:  Most chemotherapeutic agents cause
alopecia. Psychological support and the use of wigscan be encouraged.
/square6Gonadal dysfunction:  Cessation of ovulation and
azoospermia occurs with most chemotherapeuticagnets leading to infertility. Sperm banking before
treatment may be considered to support patients
likely to be sterilized by treatment.
/square6Development of secondary malignancies:  Especially
leukemias can happen with alkylating agents.
/square6Other side effects:  These include hemorrhagic cystitis
with cyclophosphamide, peripheral edema withdocetaxel, peripheral neuropathy with vincaalkaloids and cisplatin, etc.
Q.Write briefly about radiotherapy of cancer.
/square6Radiotherapy means the treatment of cancer with
ionizing radiation. It can be curative or palliative.For localized cancers it may be curative. Source ofionizing radiation can be from the decay of a radio-active isotope (gamma rays) or produced by linearaccelerators (X-rays).
Mechanism of Action
/square6Radiation is a physical form of treatment that
damages any tissue in its path. Radiation causes
breaks in DNA and generates free radicals from cellwater that may damage cell membranes, proteinsand organelles. Its selectivity for cancer cells is dueto defects in a cancer cell’s ability to repair sublethalDNA and other damage.
/square6Radiation damage is dependent on oxygen; hypoxiccells are more resistant.
Modes of Delivery of Radiation
/square6Total required dose of radiation is given in 20–30fractions given daily, 5 days a week over 4–6 weeks.This allows normal cells to recover from radiation
damage, but recovery is less in cancer cells.

/square6Oncology615
14/square6Radiation can be delivered by three methods:
–Teletherapy— radiation is delivered from a
distance by a linear accelerator.
–Brachytherapy— involves placing a source of
radiation into or adjacent to the tumor. Thisallows the delivery of a very high localized doseof radiation. It is used in the management oflocalized cancers of the head and neck and cancer
of the cervix and endometrium.
–Intravenous injection of a radioisotope —iodine-131
is used to treat thyroid cancer and strontium 89is used to treat bone metastases.
Indications for Palliative Radiotherapy
Radiotherapy can be extremely useful for the allevia-tion of symptoms which are as follows.
/square6Bone pain
/square6Hemoptysis
/square6Spinal cord compression
/square6Superior vena caval obstruction
/square6Brain metastases.
Side Effects of Radiotherapy
Acute
/square6Mucositis.
/square6Skin erythema (ulceration in severe cases).
/square6Bone marrow toxicity.
Late
/square6Hypothyroidism, cataracts and retinal damage afterradiation to head and neck area.
/square6Brachial plexopathy, chronic constrictive pericarditis,and lung fibrosis after radiation to thoracic area.
/square6Shrinkage and fibrosis of the bladder after treat-ment for bladder cancer.
/square6Risk of secondary cancer induction.
Q.Relation between infection and cancers.
/square6Many infectious agents including bacteria and
viruses can cause cancers by various mechanisms.
Viruses are the most common infectious agents
causing cancers.
/square6Mechanisms of virus causing cancer:  Viral DNA may
integrate within a proto-oncogene and may activate
it. Viral DNA may also contain proto-oncogene
which may be transferred to the host after infection.Viruses may also activate growth-promoting path-ways and inhibit tumor-suppressor products in theinfected cells.
Viruses Associated with Human Cancers
•Epstein-Barr virus (EBV):  Burkitt lymphoma, Hodgkin
lymphoma, nasopharyngeal carcinoma
•Hepatitis B virus (HBV) : Hepatocellular carcinoma
•Hepatitis C virus (HCV) : Hepatocellular carcinoma•Human papillomavirus:  Genital tumors, oropharyngeal
cancer
•Human immunodeficiency virus : AIDS-related malignancies
•Human T-cell lymphotropic virus 1 (HTLV1):  Adult T-cell
leukemia
•Kaposi sarcoma herpesvirus/human herpesvirus : Kaposi
sarcoma
•Markel cell virus : Markel cell carcinoma
Other Infectious Agents Causing Cancers
/square6Helicobacter pylori:  Gastric cancer.
/square6Chlamydia trachomatis:  Ca cervix.
/square6Streptococcus bovis:  Colorectal cancer.
/square6Liver flukes:  Cholangiocarcinoma.
/square6Schistosomes:  Bladder cancer.
Q.Breast cancer.
/square6Breast cancer is the most common cancer diagnosed
in women.
/square6Breast cancer always evolves silently. Most of the
patients discover their disease during their routine
screening. Others may present with an accidentallydiscovered breast lump, change of breast shape orsize, or nipple discharge.
/square6The survival rate improves with early diagnosis.
Etiology
Risk factors for breast cancer are as follows.
/square6Age:  Incidence of breast cancer increases with
advancing age. The median age of women at thetime of breast cancer diagnosis is 61 years.
/square6Personal history of breast cancer:  A history of cancer
in one breast increases the chance of cancer in theother breast also.
/square6Family history of breast cancer and genetic risk factors:First-degree relatives of patients with breast cancerhave a 2 to 3-fold risk of developing the disease.Five to 10% of all breast cancer cases are due togenetic factors. BRCA1 and BRCA2 are the 2 mostimportant genes responsible for increased breast
cancer susceptibility.
/square6Reproductive risk factors:  Reproductive milestones
that increase a woman’s lifetime estrogen exposureare thought to increase the breast cancer risk. These
include the onset of menarche before 12 years of
age, first live childbirth after age 30 years, nulli-parity, and menopause after age 55 years.
/square6Exogenous hormone use:  Therapeutic or supplemental
estrogen and progesterone increase the risk of breast
cancer.
Pathology
/square6Breast cancer develops due to DNA damage andgenetic mutations that can be influenced by exposureto estrogen. Sometimes there will be an inheritanceof DNA defects or pro-cancerous genes like BRCA1

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
14616 and BRCA2. Thus the family history of ovarian or
breast cancer increases the risk for breast cancerdevelopment. In a normal individual, the immunesystem attacks cells with abnormal DNA orabnormal growth. This fails in those with breastcancer disease leading to tumor growth and spread.
Breast cancer can be invasive or non-invasive
according to its relation to the basement membrane.The tumor tends to spread lymphatically andhematologically, leading to distant metastasis andpoor prognosis.
Clinical Features
/square6Most early breast cancers are asymptomatic and are
discovered during screening mammography.
/square6With increasing size, the patient may discover
cancer as a lump that is felt accidentally, mostlyduring combing or showering. Breast pain is rare.
/square6Locally advanced cancer may be present as peaud’orange, ulceration, or fixation to the chest wall.
Investigations
/square6Mammography is the most commonly used moda-lity for the diagnosis of breast cancer. Most of the
asymptomatic cases are diagnosed during screening
mammography. Breast cancer is seen as calcifica-tion, dense lump, with or without architecturedistortion in mammography. Mammography is notsensitive in young women because dense breastsand for them breast ultrasonography is more useful.
/square6Ultrasonography of breast:  More useful in young
women. It is useful in assessing the consistencyand size of breast lumps. It is also useful for guidedneedle biopsy.
/square6MRI:  It is indicated if there are occult lesions, or
suspicion of multifocal or bilateral malignancy,and in the assessment of response to neoadjuvantchemotherapy, or when planning for breast conserva-
tion surgery and screening in the high-risk patient.
/square6Biopsy:  Tissue biopsy is an important step in the
evaluation of a breast cancer patient. There aredifferent ways to take a tissue specimen, and include
fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC), core biopsy
(Tru-Cut), and incisional or excisional biopsy.
Treatment/Management
/square6Surgery with or without radiotherapy achieves localcontrol of cancer. Modified radical mastectomy iscommonly used no a days. Simple mastectomy(breast-only removal without axillary dissection)can be used in small tumors with negative sentinel
lymph nodes.
/square6When there is a risk for metastatic relapse, systemic
therapy is indicated in the form of hormonaltherapy, chemotherapy, targeted therapy, or any
combination of these. Anthracyclines (doxorubicin
or epirubicin) and the newer agents such as thetaxanes are modern regimens used for breast cancer.
Use of adjuvant tamoxifen along with chemo-therapy further reduces the risk of breast cancerrecurrence and mortality in hormone receptorpositive breast cancer. Other newer therapies whichimprove outcome are aromatase inhibitors such as
anastrozole (useful in hormone receptor positive
breast cancer) and trastuzumab, a monoclonalantibody.
/square6In locally advanced disease, systemic therapy is
used as a palliative therapy with a small or no role
for surgery.
Staging
/square6Breast cancer staging is done by clinical examina-tion and imaging studies before treatment, and aftersurgery pathological findings can be used to deter-
mine the stage.
/square6Breast cancer is classified with the TNM classifica-
tion system, which uses primary tumor size (T), theregional lymph nodes status (N), and if there is any
distant metastasis (M).
Prognosis
/square6Prognosis for early breast cancer is (stage 0 and
stage 1) excellent. When there are distant meta-stases, prognosis is poor.
Q.Mammography.
/square6Breast cancer is the most common cancer diagnosed
in women.
/square6Early diagnosis leads to excellent prognosis andhigh chances of cure. Mammography is currentlythe gold standard screening tool for breast cancerand has been shown to decrease breast cancer
mortality and reduce treatment morbidity
/square6Patients with equivocal or suggestive mammo-
graphic screening results require further imagingwith a diagnostic mammogram, ultrasound, breast
MRI, biopsy, or combination thereof.
Technique
/square6Mammography utilizes X-rays to image the breast.
The essential mammography components includean X-ray generator, an image detector, and a breast
compression paddle.
/square6Mammography can be used to evaluate the breast
based on the differential attenuation characteristicsof the tissues. Fat attenuates fewer X-rays than
fibroglandular tissue and stromal elements and
appears gray on mammography. Dense mineraldeposits such as skin calcifications or calcificationswithin a neoplastic lesion appear bright white.Superimposition poses a challenge in mammo-graphy, as tissue structures that overlie or overlap
one another may obscure a small mass. Hence,

/square6Oncology617
14screening mammograms are performed in at least
two standard views, which include the craniocaudal
view (CC) and the mediolateral oblique (MLO). Bycomparing these two different viewpoints, struc-tures that are superimposed upon one another inone view may be separated in the other. In cases of
uncertainty, additional diagnostic views may be
obtained.
/square6Dense breast tissue attenuates a higher proportionof X-rays and appears whiter on a mammogram
and may pose a diagnostic challenge when trying
to detect breast cancer due to the masking effect.If extremely dense breast tissue limits screeningmammography, additional evaluation with breastultrasound or MRI needs to be considered.
/square6Recently, digital breast tomosynthesis (DBT, alsoknown as “3D mammography”) has gainedpopularity. This technique can construct 1 mm thickimages after obtaining multiple mammographicprojections per view. This helps in minimizing super-
imposition issues and increase cancer detection and
decrease false-positive rates.
Indications for Mammography
/square6Annual mammography is recommended for all
women from the age of 40 onwards.
/square6High risk patients should undergo mammogram
starting at an earlier age. Such high risk patientsinclude patients with atypical ductal hyperplasia
or lobular neoplasia on a prior breast biopsy,
women with specific gene mutations, includingBRCA 1 and 2, those with a strong family historyof breast cancer, and patients who have receivedradiation therapy of the chest between 10 to 30 yearsof age.
/square6It is recommended that women undergo a riskassessment by age 30 to determine the appropriatescreening timeline.
Q.Differences between curative and palliative care of
cancers.
/square6Curative and palliative care have long been asso-
ciated with life or death, but palliative care today
is focused on relieving pain and stress. In fact, bothcurative care and palliative care can be usedsimultaneously to enhance a patient’s life. Bothtypes of care are used concurrently with surgery,radiation therapy and chemotherapy.
Curative Therapy
/square6The purpose of curative care is to cure a disease
or promote recovery from an illness, injury or
impairment. It can be provided in a hospital or athome.
/square6Curative therapy is mainly done at hospitals but
can also continue at home./square6Team includes various specialist doctors, nurses,
and therapies include surgery, medications, andradiotherapy.
/square6Examples are chemotherapy and radiotherapy for
cancer.
Palliative Care
/square6Palliative care is study and management of patients
with active, progressive, far-advanced disease for
whom the prognosis is limited and the focus of care
is quality of life. The purpose of palliative care is tobring comfort and relief.
/square6Starting palliative care does not mean patients are
going to die soon. Nowadays palliative care is
started early in the course of illness along withcurative treatment and many patients live for yearsafter starting palliative care.
/square6Palliative care is patient and family-centered careand addresses physical, intellectual, emotional,social, and spiritual needs.
/square6It can be provided at home and in long-term care
facilities and hospitals.
/square6A palliative care team is comprised of many pro-
fessionals and includes palliative physician, nurse,social worker, chaplain, and pharmacist.
/square6A personalized care plan might include, forexample, pain relief medication, care coordinationservices and assistance with preparation of anadvance directive form.
Q.Discuss the mechanisms of pain and its implications
in patient with cancer.
Q.Assessment of severity of pain in cancer patients
using pain scale.
/square6Pain is an unpleasant sensory and emotional
experience associated with actual or potential tissuedamage.
/square6It is the most fearful and the most distressfulsymptom in cancer patients. 75% of advancedcancer patients experience pain.
/square6Inadequate pain control leads to profound altera-tion in nearly all aspect of wellness (activity, mood,rest, nutrition, etc.). Optimal pain control increasesquality of life in all aspects.
Mechanisms of Cancer Pain
/square6Due to tumor infiltration/metastases:  Metastatic bone
pain, retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy pain, livercapsule pain, headache, cranial neuralgias.
/square6Nerve compression or infiltration.
/square6Spinal cord compression.
/square6Thalamic tumor (causes thalamic pain).
/square6Treatment related:  Surgical incision pain, phantom
limb pain, peripheral neuropathy, radiation fibrosisof brachial plexus, lumbosacral plexus, radiation
myelopathy.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
14618 Pain Assessment
/square6Detailed history of pain should be asked:  Type and
quality of pain, onset, duration, course, intensity(i.e. pain experienced at rest; with movement;
interference with activities); location, radiation of
pain; aggravating and relieving factors, prior paintherapies; family and other support.
/square6Diagnose the etiology and pathophysiology
(somatic, visceral, or neuropathic) of the pain.
/square6Assessment of pain severity. There are many
ways of assessing pain. Two methods are givenbelow.
/square6Verbal descriptor scale: Five word scaling of pain (mild,
discomforting, distressing horrible, excruciating).Disadvantage is there is limited selection of paindescriptors.
/square6Verbal numeric rating scale:  Uses a numeric scale
from 0 to 10. Zero = no pain, 10 = worst pain imagin-able. Advantages are simplicity, reproducibility,easy comprehensibility, and sensitivity to small
changes in pain.Non-drug Methods
/square6Massage, heat pads, psychological-relaxation,
cognitive behavioral therapy.
Interruption of Pain Pathways
/square6Local anesthesia, neurolysis (by using alcohol,phenol, cryotherapy, thermocoagulation), neuro-
surgery (e.g. cervical cordotomy).
Modification of Way of Life and Environment
/square6Avoid precipitating activity, immobilization of
painful part (e.g. cervical collar, slings), walking aid.
Q.End of life care.
Q.Ethical and the medico-legal issues involved in
end-of-life care.
/square6End-of-life care is about never stopping to care,
even when we cannot cure. “Never say ‘I cannot
do any thing more’, Always say ‘I can do some thing
more’” Because there is always something more thatwe can do.
Dying person has the following rights:
/square6Have a sense of purpose.
/square6Participate in decisions about care.
/square6Expect continuing medical and nursing attention
even though “cure” goals must be changed to“comfort” goals.
/square6Retain individuality and not be judged for decisionsthat may be contrary to beliefs of others.
/square6Be cared for by caring, sensitive, knowledgeablepeople who will try to understand patient and help
him to face death.
/square6Die in peace and dignity.
Principles of End of Life Care
/square6Strives to help patients and families address physical,
psychological, social, spiritual and practical issues,and their associated expectations, needs, hopes and
fears.
/square6Prepares the patient and others for managing self-
determined life closure and the dying process.
/square6Aims to relieve patient suffering and improve thequality of living and dying.
/square6Learn/understand/implement the patient/family’s
wishes for end-of-life care.
Providing Comfort for the Terminally Ill Patient
/square6Symptom control:  Comfort for a dying patient
requires management of symptoms of disease and
therapies.
/square6Prevent abandonment and isolation:  Many terminally
ill patients are fearful of dying alone. It is veryimportant to inquire about the client’s concerns, and
be available to answer questions./square6Visual analog scale:  Similar to verbal numerical scale
except that the patient marks on a measured line,one end of which is labeled No Pain and other endWorst Imaginable Pain.
Management
/square6Treatment of underlying pathology (cancer).
/square6Analgesics.
/square6Non-drug methods.
/square6Interruption of pain pathways.
/square6Modification of way of life and environment.
Treatment of Underlying Pathology (Cancer)
By surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, etc.
Analgesics
/square6Non-opioid analgesics: paracetamol, NSAIDs.
/square6Opioid analgesics:  Morphine, methadone, codeine,
tramadol.Figure 14.2 Verbal numeric pain scale
Figure 14.3 Visual numeric pain scale


/square6Oncology619
14/square6Provide comfortable and peaceful environment: Providing
a comfortable and peaceful environment is part ofholistic healing. a comfortable, pleasant environ-ment helps patients to relax, which promotes theirability to sleep and minimizes severity of symptoms
/square6Address fears of dying and death:  People are afraid of
dying and death for many different reasons: Theprocess of dying, with its associated pain and lossof dignity; not knowing what will happen afterdeath; and dying before fulfilling dreams and goals.
/square6Involve the family in patient care:  The family can be
the primary caregiver for the patient if preferred.During final moments family can visit frequently,allow home-cooked meals, which may be preferred
by patient and gives the family a chance to
participate in care. The family can perform simplecare activities such as feeding the patient, washingthe face, combing hair. Teach and demonstrate tofamily feeding techniques, bathing, mouth care, andhygiene measures.
Physical Changes Nearing Death
/square6Mottling:  Skin of hands and feet to become blotchy
and purplish due to decreasing circulation.
Mottling may slowly ascend to involve upper areas
of the body./square6Rigor mortis:  The stiffening of the body prior to
death; as end of life approaches and undergoesmetabolic changes, process of rigor mortis includesparalysis of jaw, loss of facial tone, reduction ofgastrointestinal motility and peristalsis, cessationof bowel movement and decrease of urinary
function.
/square6Abnormal pattern of breathing:  There may be Cheyne-
Stokes breathing and slowing of respiratory rate.As death approaches, breathing may becomelabored with the person gasping for air.
Care of Body after Death
/square6Nurses provide postmortem care when a patientdies. Dignity and sensitivity to the recently deceasedindividual should be maintained, and all post-mortem care must be consistent with the client’s
religious or cultural background. It is important
that care is provided as soon as possible to preventtissue damage or disfigurement of body parts.
/square6Make arrangements for staff, spiritual advisor, orothers to stay with the family while the body isprepared for viewing.
/square6Encourage family to say goodbye through bothtouch and talk.

15
620Q.What is genetics? Define the terms ‘gene’ and
‘chromosome’.
/square6The word  genetics comes from ancient Greek word
‘genetikos’  meaning “genitive” and from ‘ genesis’
meaning “origin”. Genetics deals with the molecular
structure and function of genes, and gene behaviorin context of a cell or organism, patterns of inheri-tance from parent to offspring, and gene distribu-tion, variation and change in populations.
/square6Gene is the name given to some stretches of DNAand RNA that code for a polypeptide or for an RNAchain that has a function in the organism. Livingbeings depend on genes, as they specify all proteinsand functional RNA chains.
/square6Chromosomes:  A chromosome consists of a single,
very long DNA helix on which thousands of genesare encoded.
Q.Mutation.
/square6Mutation is defined as any change in the primary
nucleotide sequence of DNA. Mutations may belethal or of no functional consequence. Mutations
can occur in the germline (sperm or oocytes) which
can be transmitted to progeny or in somatic tissueafter conception. Some somatic mutations are asso-ciated with neoplasia because they confer a growthadvantage to cells.
/square6Acquired mutations in somatic cells are fairly
common, but most mutations are rectified by repair
mechanisms. Causes of increased mutation rateinclude: Ionizing and non-ionizing radiation, chemical
mutagens . Loss of DNA repair enzymes increases
mutation rate and susceptibility to cancer. Example
is xeroderma pigmentosum (XP).
Types of Mutations
Point Mutations
/square6Mutations involving single nucleotides are referredto as point mutations . The change of one nucleotideGenetic Disorders
for another, also called a substitution, is the most
common type of mutation. Examples of diseasescaused by point mutations are familial adenomatous
polyposis and autosomal dominant polycystic
kidney disease.
Insertions and Deletions
/square6Here one or more nucleotides are inserted or deletedin a DNA strand. This may result in abnormal splicingor alteration of the reading frame (frameshift muta-tion). Example is mutation in the cystic fibrosis gene.
Duplications
/square6Here, a region of DNA is duplicated. If an entire gene
is duplicated, then the increased amount of geneproduct may have a deleterious effect. Example ishereditary motor and sensory neuropathy (HMSNtype 1).
Triplet Repeat Mutations
/square6Here, the same triplet of nucleotides is repeated ina variable length of DNA. This type of mutationseen in many neurological diseases. Examples are
spinocerebellar ataxia and myotonic dystrophy.
Q.PCR (polymerase chain reaction).
/square6Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) can amplify any
gene sequence for analysis by gel electrophoresisor by automated DNA sequencing.
/square6PCR can be used to amplify DNA from very small
samples, including single cells. Blood samples,
biopsies, surgical or autopsy specimens, or cellsfrom hair or saliva can be analyzed by PCR. PCRcan also be used to study mRNA. In this case, theenzyme reverse transcriptase (RT) is first used toconvert the RNA to DNA, which can then be
amplified by PCR.

/square6Genetic Disorders621
15Uses of PCR
/square6PCR is a key component of molecular diagnostics.
/square6It can be used to search for mutations.
/square6It is used in genetic linkage or association studies.
/square6PCR is increasingly used to diagnose various micro-
bial pathogens.
Q.Human genome project.
/square6Human genome consists of 46 chromosomes (22
pairs of autosomal chromosomes and 1 pair of sexchromosomes). The human genome is estimated tocontain 30,000–40,000 genes.
/square6Human genome project (HGP) was an internationalproject to decode all the DNA base pairs
/square6This project began in 1990 and was completed in
2003. It has produced a reference database of
sequence of human genome which is used world-wide in biomedical sciences. It is available to anyoneon the  internet.
/square6This database has been compiled by studying DNA
obtained from many individuals. It has been foundthat only 1.5% of the total length of human genomeencodes proteins and rest of the genome is junk DNA.
Benefits of Human Genome Project
/square6Knowledge of the effects of variation of DNA among
individuals can revolutionize the ways to diagnose,treat and even prevent a number of diseases thataffects the human beings.
/square6Many questions about the similarities and diffe-rences between humans and our closest relatives(the primates, and other mammals) are expected tobe illuminated by the data from this project.
/square6Improved diagnosis of diseases.
/square6Gene therapy.
/square6Earlier detection of genetic predisposition to disease.
/square6Pharmacogenomics—customized drug therapy
to target specific genetic composition to get better
response with minimal side effects.
Q.Prenatal diagnosis.
Q.Prevention of genetic diseases.
/square6It is possible to diagnose in utero , many genetic
disorders and congenital malformations before themiddle of the second trimester. This is called pre-
natal diagnosis. If any abnormality is found genetic
counseling and termination of pregnancy may beoffered to parents.
Techniques used in Prenatal Diagnosis
/square6Ultrasound.
/square6Fetal blood sampling.
/square6Fetoscopy.
/square6Chorionic villus biopsy./square6Amniocentesis.
/square6Analysis of maternal serum.
Indications for Prenatal Diagnosis
/square6Advanced maternal age and a high-risk serumscreening result.
/square6A previous child with a chromosome abnormalityor a parent with a chromosome abnormality.
/square6A parent or child with a genetic disease for which
testing is available.
/square6Abnormal antenatal scan.
Q.Genetic counseling.
/square6Genetic counseling refers to the process of commu-
nicating information about genetic risks.
/square6It is an essential part of the management of indivi-duals and families with genetic disease.
/square6Genetic counseling can be provided by a medicalgeneticist, a specialist nurse counselor or obstetri-cian or pediatrician. The key requirement forgenetic counseling is the provision of adequate timein a quiet place free of disturbance.
/square6An accurate clinical and molecular diagnosis isrequired for providing information to a familyabout the risk of developing and transmittingdisease and methods for screening, diagnosis andprevention.
/square6Calculation of risk in a genetic disease is based onmultiple factors and can be complicated. An empiricrisk is based on observational data obtained from apopulation comparable to the one the patient isfrom (e.g. the empiric sibling recurrence risk for
congenital heart disease is 2–3%).
/square6Strict patient confidentiality should be observed at
all times and information from medical recordsobtained only with prior consent.
Aims of Genetic Counseling
/square6Establishing a diagnosis of genetic disease.
/square6Estimation of the risks to the individual and otherfamily members.
/square6Provision of information and support.
Indications for Genetic Counseling
/square6A known or suspected hereditary disease in thepatient or a family member.
/square6Maternal age of 35 years or older during a pregnancy.
/square6Teratogen exposure during pregnancy.
/square6Ethnic background associated with an increasedprevalence of a heritable disorder.
/square6Presence of birth defects, chromosomal abnorma-lity, or mental retardation in a parent, a child, orthe child of a family member.
/square6Identification of one or more significant abnorma-
lities during an antenatal ultrasound.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
15622
Figure 15.1 Monogenic disorders/square6Abnormal results on first or second trimester
screening (e.g. Down syndrome, neural tubedefects, trisomy 18).
Q.Proteome.
Q.Proteomics.
/square6The word proteome is blend of the words “protein”
and “genome” and refers to all the proteins producedby an organism just like genome refers to all the genes.
/square6Proteomics refers to study of protein expression intissues, serum, and other biologic samples. Humanbody may contain more than 2 million proteins eachhaving different functions. Compared to the studyof DNA or RNA expression patterns, proteomicsmay provide a more accurate understanding ofhuman diseases.
/square6Proteomics research will enhance our understandingof tumor biology, particularly the aberrant cellularsignaling that characterizes malignant disease.
/square6Understanding the structure and function of eachprotein and the complexities of protein-proteininteractions will be critical for developing the mosteffective diagnostic techniques.
/square6Proteomics will facilitate identification of potentialnovel biomarkers.
/square6Proteomics will play an important role in develop-ing new drugs.  For example, if a certain protein is
implicated in a disease, its 3D structure providesthe information to design drugs to interfere withthe action of the protein.
Q.Epigenetics.
/square6The term epigenetics ( epi =  over; above genetics)
refers to changes in phenotype (appearance) or geneexpression caused by mechanisms other than
changes in the underlying DNA sequence.
/square6There are many non-genetic factors which causethe organism’s genes to behave (or “express
themselves”) differently. An example of epigenetics
is, a single fertilized ovum changing into many celltypes including neurons, muscle cells, epithelium,blood vessels as it continues to divide.
/square6The molecular basis of epigenetics involves modifi-cation, inhibition and activation of certain genes,but not the basic structure of DNA. Additionally,the chromatin proteins associated with DNA maybe activated or silenced.
Q.Classify genetic disorders with examples.
Genetic disorders can be broadly divided into following
categories:
/square6Monogenic (Mendelian) disorders:   These are due to
single gene defect.
/square6Polygenic (multifactorial):  These are due to interaction
of multiple genetic factors and environment.
/square6Chromosomal disorders:  These are due to abnormal
number or structure of chromosomes.
Monogenic (Mendelian) Disorders
/square6Genetic disorders caused by a single gene abnor-
mality are easiest to analyze and the most wellunderstood. If expression of a trait requires onlyone copy of a gene (one allele), that trait is calleddominant. If expression of a trait requires 2 copiesof a gene (2 alleles), that trait is called recessive.
/square6However, X-linked disorders can be expressed inmales even if the trait is recessive, because males

/square6Genetic Disorders623
15have only one X chromosome and hence, there is
no paired allele to offset the effects of abnormalallele on the X chromosome.
Autosomal Dominant Disorders
/square6Autosomal dominant disorders occur when thereis mutation in even one allele of a gene. The affectedperson who has one normal and one abnormal alleleis called heterozygous. If both alleles are affected
then the person is said to be homozygous.
/square6Males and females are equally affected.
/square6Autosomal dominant disorders may result from
mutations that cause an increase or decrease infunction.
/square6There is a 50 percent risk that the child of an affected
parent will be affected.
/square6Some persons who carry an abnormal gene may
not have signs of the disease. This is due to reducedpenetrance of the disease. Penetrance is all or none:either the person has the disease or does not. abnormal, then all the children will be carriers
because each child will inherit one normal allelefrom the unaffected parent and one abnormal allelefrom the affected parent.
/square6Usually only one generation is affected.
X-linked Dominant Diseases
/square6Mutant gene is present on X chromosome.
/square6Disease will manifest even if single X chromosomehas abnormal gene, hence no carriers.
/square6Affected father cannot transfer the disease to sonas the son’s X chromosome is from mother. Butaffected father can transfer the disease to all
daughters as the daughters get an abnormal X from
the father.
/square6If mother is affected and father is normal, 50% ofboth sons and daughters are affected.
/square6In general males are more severely affected thanfemales.
X-linked Recessive Diseases
/square6Mutant gene is present X chromosome.
/square6Affected father cannot transfer the disease to sonas the son’s X chromosome is from mother.
/square6It manifests only in males as they have only one Xchromosome. It does not manifest in femalesbecause they have two X chromosomes one ofwhich is normal. However, rarely females can also
be affected, if they have only one X chromosome
(Turner’s syndrome) or one X chromosome isinactivated (lyonization).
Y-linked Disorders
/square6Only males are affected.
/square6Affected father transfers the disorder to all his sonsbut not to daughters.Figure 15.2 Autosomal dominant disorder
Autosomal Recessive Disorders
/square6Autosomal recessive disorders are conditions thatresult from the presence of mutations in both alleles(homozygous) of a gene on an autosome. Thosewho have one normal and one abnormal alleles(heterozygous) are carriers and do not suffer from
the disease.
/square6Males and females are affected equally.
/square6Each offspring of two carriers has a 25% chance of
being affected, a 50% chance of being a carrier, anda 25% chance of inheriting neither mutant allele.Thus, two-thirds of all clinically unaffected offspring
are carriers.
/square6However, if one of the parents is affected with an
autosomal recessive disease because both alleles areFigure 15.3 Autosomal recessive disorder


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
15624
Chromosomal Abnormalities and Disorders
/square6This term refers to major rearrangements in DNA
structure which affect many genes. Chromosomalrearrangements are often visible when examininga karyotype under the microscope. Chromosomaldisorders are very common and may affect morethan half of all conceptions. However, most affected
offspring spontaneously miscarry.
/square6Chromosomal abnormalities can be autosomal or
sex-linked abnormalities.
/square6Both autosomal and sex-linked abnormalities canbe of following two broad types:
– Numerical abnormalities.
– Structural abnormalities.
Numerical Abnormalities of Autosomal Chromosomes
/square6Polyploidy—here, there is gain of one or more
complete chromosome sets. This is not compatiblewith life. An example is the triploid chromosomalnumber (e.g. 69, XXY) in a partial hydatiform mole.
/square6Aneuploidy—here, there is selective gain or loss ofan individual chromosome.
– Monosomy—loss of an autosome. This is lethal
in males.
– Trisomy—gain of one additional autosomal
chromosome. For example, Down’s syndrome
(trisomy 21; 47, XX/XY, +21), Patau’s syndrome
(trisomy 13; 47XY, +13), Edwards syndrome(trisomy 18; 47XY, +18).
Numerical Abnormalities of Sex Chromosomes
/square6Klinefelter’s syndrome (47, XXY), Turner’s syndrome
(45, X0).
Structural Abnormalities of Chromosomes
/square6In structural abnormality, there is an alteration in
the structure of one or more chromosomes due totranslocations, deletions, duplications or inversions.Example is translocation between 9 and 22 chromo-somes resulting in Philadelphia (Ph) chromosomecausing CML.Q.Down syndrome (mongolism).
/square6Most common chromosome abnormality among
liveborn infants.
/square6Incidence—one in 1000 live births. Incidenceincreases with increasing maternal age.
/square6It is due to three copies of chromosome 21 (trisomy21) or a chromosome rearrangement that results inthree copies of a region of the long arm of chromo-some 21. This extra chromosome 21 is almost always
maternally derived.
Clinical Features
/square6Down syndrome affects multiple systems andcauses both structural and functional defects.
General
• Short stature• Obesity• Single palmar crease (simian crease, in 50% of cases)• Increased risk of sleep apnea
Head and neck
• Brachycephalic small skull• Short neck• Small soft ears• Hearing loss• Short flat nose
Eyes
• Upslanting palpebral fissures with epicanthic fold at inner
canthus (Mongolian eyes)
• Brushfield spots on the iris (small, white or gray spots on the
periphery of the iris)
• Refractory errors• Congenital cataract, glaucoma
CNS
• Mental retardation• Autistic behavior
GIT
• Duodenal atresia• Intestinal defects
CVS
• Congenital heart disease (especially VSD and atrioventricular
canal defects)
• Increased risk of mitral valve prolapse and aortic regurgitation
Hematology
• Increased risk of leukemia• Thrombocytopenia
Endocrine
• Diabetes mellitus• Hypothyroidism
Investigations
/square6Prenatal diagnosis:  Prenatal chorionic villus sampl-
ing and/or amniocentesis with karyotype analysis;free fetal DNA analysis of maternal blood sample;measuring maternal serum alpha-fetoprotein andby detecting increased nuchal thickness on fetal
ultrasound.Polygenic (Multifactorial) Disorders
Figure 15.4 Polygenic (multifactorial) disorders


/square6Genetic Disorders625
15/square6Karyotype analysis of the child will show
trisomy 21.
/square6IQ testing.
/square6Echocardiogram to identify congenital heart
disease.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen to identify duodenal atresia.
/square6Thyroid function tests to identify hypothyroidism.
/square6Hearing evaluation to identify deafness.
/square6Ophthalmology evaluation.
/square6Growth monitoring—height, weight, and head
circumference plotted at each health visit using a
Down syndrome growth chart.
/square6Other routine blood tests.
Treatment
/square6There is no treatment for the underlying disorder.
/square6If prenatal diagnosis suggests Down syndrome,
genetic counseling and medical termination of
pregnancy may be offered.
/square6Surgical treatment for duodenal atresia and
congenital heart disease.
/square6Hypothyroidism is treated with thyroid hormone
replacement.
/square6Other problems are treated as per standard guide-
lines.
/square6Provide social and educational support.
/square6No medical treatment has been proven to affect the
intellectual capacity.
Q.Klinefelter syndrome.
/square6Klinefelter’s syndrome is the clinical manifestation
of a male who has an extra X chromosome./square6The most common genotype is 47 XXY. Other geno-
types are 48 XXXY and 46 XY/46 XXY mosaicism.
/square6Incidence—1 in 1000 live male births.
Pathophysiology
/square6The 47,XXY karyotype of Klinefelter syndrome
spontaneously arises when paired X chromosomes
fail to separate (nondisjunction in stage I or II of
meiosis, during oogenesis or spermatogenesis).
/square6The X chromosome carries genes that play roles in
testis function, brain development, and growth.
Extra X chromosome results in many physical and
mental abnormalities. Phenotypic abnormalities are
directly related to the number of supernumerary X
chromosomes. Higher the number of supernumery
X chromosome, more severe are the manifestations.
/square6Klinefelter syndrome is a form of primary testicular
failure, with low serum testosterone levels, and ele-
vated gonadotropin levels due to lack of feedback
inhibition of the pituitary gland. Low testosterone
level causes poor development of male genitalia
and male secondary sexual characters.
Clinical Features
/square6Patients are actually males who develop some
feminine features due to extra X chromosome.
/square6Affected males are normal in appearance before
puberty.
/square6After puberty, they develop disproportionately
long legs and arms, and failure of growth of external
genitalia. Penis and testes remain small.
Figure 15.5 Down syndrome
Figure 15.6 Klinefelter syndrome


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
15626 /square6Testosterone deficiency causes sparse or absent
facial, axillary, and pubic hair; decreased musclemass and strength; gynecomastia; small testesand penis; diminished libido; decreased physicalendurance; and osteoporosis.
/square6Infertility due to azoospermia.
/square6Increased incidence of mental retardation andbehavioral abnormalities.
Differential Diagnosis
/square6Klinefelter syndrome has to be differentiated from
other causes of male hypogonadism such as
Kallmann syndrome, Noonan syndrome, Prader-
Willi syndrome, cryptorchidism, panhypopitui-
tarism, and other diseases causing testicular failure.
Investigations
/square6Low serum testosterone and elevated FSH and LHafter puberty.
/square6Cytogenetic analysis will show 47,XXY. Diagnosiscan also be made prenatally based on cytogeneticstudies of fetus.
Treatment
/square6Testosterone should be given after puberty. Itpromotes normal growth of body and developmentof secondary sexual characteristics but will not
restore fertility.
Q.Turner’s syndrome (monosomy X; gonadal dys-
genesis).
/square6Turner syndrome is due to loss of an X chromosome
(45, X0).
/square6Most common sex chromosome abnormality in
female conceptions.
/square6Incidence—1:2000 to 1:4000 in liveborn females.
Clinical Features
/square6Short stature.
/square6Primary amenorrhea, infertility.
/square6Poorly developed breast and other secondary
sexual characters.
/square6Webbed neck.
/square6Broad shield like chest.
/square6Renal anomalies (horseshoe kidney).
/square6Coarctation of aorta.
/square6Cubitus valgus.
/square6High arched palate.
/square6Short 4th metacarpal or metatarsal.
/square6Peripheral lymphedema.
/square6Increased incidence of mental retardation.
/square6Increased risk of malignancy.
Investigations
/square6Cytogenetic analysis.Treatment
/square6Prenatal diagnosis and offering of genetic counsel-ing and termination of pregnancy.
/square6Surgical correction of cardiovascular anomalies.
/square6Estrogen therapy to induce and maintain sexualdevelopment and cyclic uterine bleeding.
/square6Growth hormone/oxandrolone therapy for shortstature.
Q.Gene therapy.
/square6Gene therapy is the insertion of a functioning gene
(recombinant DNA) into the cells of a patient tocorrect a disease.
/square6Gene therapy is one of the most powerful conceptsin modern medicine and has the potential toaddress a host of diseases for which there arecurrently no cures. However, gene therapy is still
in the stage of clinical trials and not yet come into
clinical practice.
/square6Germline gene therapy is the permanent introduc-tion of DNA into germ cells, allowing passage into
offspring that could result in new or altered traits
in the population. It is banned globally as unethical.
/square6Somatic gene therapy refers to genetic modificationof different somatic cells. This is potentially possible
in all accessible somatic cells (e.g. blood, skin,
muscle, endothelial cells, etc.).
Procedure of Gene Therapy
/square6Gene transfer involves three elements: (1) A vector,
(2) a gene to be delivered, and (3) a target cell toFigure 15.7 Turner syndrome


/square6Genetic Disorders627
15which the gene is delivered. The series of steps in
which the donated gene enters the cell and beginsexpression is referred to as transduction.
/square6Since genes (DNA or RNA) cannot be directly trans-
ferred into a cell, it is done by using a vector, or
gene delivery vehicle.
/square6Gene delivery can be done by using viruses, lipo-somes or plasmids to carry the therapeutic gene to
target cells.
/square6Viral vehicles are most popular way of delivering
the genes to target cells. They are prepared by delet-ing some or all of the viral genome and replacing it
with the therapeutic gene of interest. Many viruses
such as retroviruses, lentiviruses, adenovirus, adeno-associated virus (AAV), herpes simplex virus, andsarcoma virus have been found to be useful asvectors. Recombinant AAV (adeno-associated virus)
has especially emerged as attractive gene delivery
vehicle. Engineered from a small replication-
defective DNA virus, they are devoid of viral coding
genes and do not cause any illness in experimentalanimals.
/square6Gene therapy can be in vivo , in which the vector is
directly injected into the patient or, ex vivo  in which
target cells are removed from the patient and returnedto the patient after gene transfer in the laboratory.
Diseases with Potential for Gene Therapy
Genetic Disorders
/square6Here the missing or defective gene is replaced.
Examples are hemophilia A, sickle cell disease,
Duchenne muscular dystrophy, X-linked severecombined immunodeficiency disease (SCID),Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome and cystic fibrosis.
Cancer
Many strategies are used in cancer gene therapy whichare as follows:
/square6Intratumoral injection of an adenoviral vectorexpressing the thymidine kinase (TK) gene. Cellswhich take up and express the TK gene are killedafter the administration of gancyclovir, which isphosphorylated to a toxic nucleoside by TK.
/square6Use of adenoviral-mediated expression of the tumorsuppressor gene p53.
/square6Use of oncolytic viruses that selectively replicate intumor cells and destroy them but not in normal cells.
/square6Promotion of recognition of tumor cells by theimmune system by transduction of tumor cells withimmune-enhancing genes.
/square6Inhibition of tumor angiogenesis by enhancing the
expression of angiogenesis inhibitors such as angio-
statin and endostatin.
/square6Protection of normal cells from the toxicities of
chemotherapy by transduction of cells with genes
encoding resistance to chemotherapeutic agents.Cardiovascular Disease
/square6Strategies include induction of angiogenesis inlimbs (in limb ischemia) or cardiac muscle (inangina/myocardial ischemia). The major transgene
used has been VEGF (vascular endothelial growth
factor), because of its specificity for endothelial cells.The design of most of the trials involved direct IM(or myocardial) injection of either a plasmid or anadenoviral vector expressing the transgene.
Neurodegenerative Disorders
/square6In Parkinson’s disease, AAV vectors expressingenzymes required for enhanced synthesis of
dopamine have been introduced into affected areas
of the brain (striatum, subthalamic nucleus) bystereotactic neurosurgery.
/square6In Alzheimer’s disease, autologous fibroblasts are
transduced with a retroviral vector expressing
nerve growth factor, and then reimplanted into thebasal forebrain.
Problems with Gene Therapy
/square6Immune response against viral vectors makingthem ineffective.
/square6Short term expression of the gene by cells or limitedtransduction of cells by vectors.
/square6Potential for producing disease by recombiningwith other viruses or getting activated by host genes.
/square6Activation of proto-oncogenes leading to secondarycancers such as leukemia.
Q.Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) system.
/square6The human leukocyte antigen (HLA) system is
synonymous with the human major histocompati-
bility complex (MHC).
/square6These terms describe a group of genes on short armof chromosome 6 that encode a variety of cell
surface markers, antigen-presenting molecules, and
other proteins involved in immune function.
/square6MHC antigens are integral to the normal functioningof the immune response. Essential role of HLA anti-
gens lies in the control of self-recognition and thus
defence against micro-organisms and surveillance.
/square6The HLA region has been subdivided into threeregions—class I, class II, and class III.
/square6Class I: A,B,C is the most important region for
transplantation (other loci, e.g. E, F, G, H, etc. arenot so important in transplantation). Class I antigensare expressed on most nucleated cells, have soluble
form in plasma and are adsorbed onto platelets
(some antigens more readily than others). Class Imolecules are assembled within the cell andultimately sit on the cell surface with a sectioninserted into the lipid bilayer of the cell membraneand a short cytoplasmic tail where they present anti-
gen in the form of peptide to cytotoxic T (CD8+) cells.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
15628 /square6HLA class II region is further divided into five loci:  DR,
DQ, DP, DM and DO. Out of these HLA DR, DQ,DP region is most significant. HLA class II antigensare expressed on B lymphocytes, activated Tlymphocytes, macrophages, and endothelial cells(i.e. immune competent cells). HLA class II mole-
cules present antigen in the cleft to helper T (CD4+)
cells. Thus, class II presentation involves the helperfunction of setting up a general immune reactioninvolving cytokine, cellular and humoral defence.The role of class II in initiating a general immuneresponse is why they only need to be present on
immunologically active cells.
/square6Class III region:  The region in between class I and
class II is known as the class III region. Althoughthis region does not contain any of the HLA genes,
it does contain many genes of importance in the
immune response. They encode for many moleculessuch as complement (C2, C4, and factor B), tumornecrosis factor and heat shock protein.
HLA Typing Methods
/square6Serology used to be the ‘gold’ standard. Now beingsuperseded by molecular techniques.
/square6Cellular methods rarely used now. Originally usedfor class II typing.
/square6Molecular methods are now becoming the method
of choice.
Functions of HLA System
In Infectious Disease
/square6When a foreign pathogen enters the body, antigen-
presenting cells (APCs) phagocytize the pathogen.Proteins from the pathogen are digested into small
pieces (peptides) and loaded onto HLA antigens
(to be specific, MHC class II). They are then displayedby the antigen-presenting cells to T cells, which thenproduce a variety of effects to eliminate the pathogen.
/square6Through a similar process, proteins (both nativeand foreign, such as the proteins of virus) producedinside most cells are displayed on HLAs (to bespecific, MHC class I) on the cell surface. Infectedcells can be recognized and destroyed by CD8+T cells.
In Graft Rejection
/square6Any cell displaying some other HLA type is “non-self” and is seen as an invader by the body’simmune system, resulting in the rejection of the
tissue bearing those cells.
In Autoimmunity
/square6People with certain HLA antigens are more likely
to develop certain autoimmune diseases, such astype I diabetes, ankylosing spondylitis, celiac disease,SLE (systemic lupus erythematosus), myastheniagravis, inclusion body myositis and Sjögren syndrome.In Cancer
/square6Some HLA-mediated diseases are directly involved
in the promotion of cancer. For example, gluten-sensitive enteropathy is associated with increased pre-
valence of enteropathy-associated T-cell lymphoma.
Q.Immune deficiency disorders.
/square6There are two general types of immune deficiency.
Primary
/square6Result from some genetic or developmental defect.
Manifestations are seen in infants and young children.
Acquired
/square6Develop as a direct consequence of some other
recognized cause. For example, HIV infection.
Classification of Primary Immunodeficiency Disorders
Humoral (antibody) defects: Quantitative or qualitative defects
in antibody production. Account for more than 50% of defects.
• Selective IgA deficiency (SIgAd)• Most common humoral deficiency• Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID)• X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA)• Selective IgG subclass deficiency (SIgGsd)• Hyper-IgM syndrome (HIgM)• Transient hypogammaglobulinemia of infancy (THI)• Functional antibody deficiency
Cellular defects:  Usually combined with humoral; account for
20–30%.
• Combined immunodeficiency (CID)• Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID)• Ataxia-telangiectasia syndrome (AT)• Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS)• DiGeorge syndrome• Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis (CMCC)
Combined humoral and cellular immunity defects.Phagocytic disorders:  Defects in migration, or killing; account
for ~18%.
• Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD)• Leukocyte adhesion defect (LAD)• Chédiak-Higashi syndrome (CHS)• Shwachman syndrome (Swh.S)• Hyper-IgE syndrome (Job syndrome)
Complement deficiencies:  Account for ~2%.
• Isolated deficiencies of complement components or
inhibitors and may be hereditary or acquired.
Q.How do you approach a case of suspected immune
deficiency disorder?
When to suspect immune deficiency?
/square6Immunodeficiency should be suspected when
recurrent infections occur with following charac-teristics:
– Severe– Complicated
– In multiple locations

/square6Genetic Disorders629
15– Resistant to treatment
– Caused by unusual organisms
– Affect many family members
– Unusual host response to usual organism.
/square6Most of the infections involve upper respiratory
(sinusitis, otitis media), lower respiratory tract(bronchitis, pneumonia) and GIT (gastroenteritis).
/square6Age when recurrent infections began can give clue
about underlying immune defect.
/square6Onset before age 6 months suggests a T-cell defect
because maternal antibodies are usually protectivefor the first 6 to 9 months.
/square6Onset between the age of 6 and 12 months maysuggest combined B- and T-cell defects or a B-celldefect, which becomes evident when maternal anti-bodies are disappearing (at about age 6 months).
/square6Onset after 12 months of age suggests a B-cell defector secondary immunodeficiency.
Physical Examination
/square6Patients may appear normal or there may be growthretardation due to recurrent infections.
/square6Gingivitis, dental erosions, signs of sinusitis.
/square6Cervical lymph nodes, adenoid and tonsillar tissueare typically very small or absent in X-linked
agammaglobulinemia, X-linked hyper-IgM syn-
drome, and severe combined immunodeficiency(SCID).
/square6Ataxia-telangiectasia and neuro deficits are seen in
ataxia-telangiectasia.
/square6Eczema and petechiae (Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome).
/square6Oculocutaneous albinism (Chédiak-Higashi).
/square6Dermatomyositis-like rash (XLA).
/square6Chronic dermatitis (hyper-IgE).
/square6Generalized molluscum, extensive warts, candi-
diasis (T-cell defects).
Laboratory Evaluation
/square6CBC with differential count.
/square6Total WBC, ANC, ALC, AEC (age-appropriatevalues).
/square6Lymphopenia = <3,000 in infants, <1500 in children
and adults.
Tests for Humoral Immunity
/square6Quantification of IgG, IgA, IgM level. Order IgE
only if severe atopy, or chronic dermatitis.
/square6Isohemagglutinin titers (antibodies to blood groupantigens).
/square6Antibody response to vaccine antigens (e.g.Haemophilus influenzae  type b, tetanus, diphtheria,
pneumococcal, and meningococcal antigens). If lowtiters, give booster, then repeat titers 4 weeks later.
Tests for T-Cell Function
/square6Absolute lymphocyte count./square6Delayed hypersensitivity skin tests (e.g. usingCandida ): Should produce redness and induration
of >5 mm by 48–72 hours.
/square6HIV testing.
Tests for Phagocytic Function
/square6Adhesion antigens by flow cytometry (CD11/CD18)—checks for adhesion defects.
/square6Chemiluminescence—checks phagocytic killingpower.
Tests for Complement Function
/square6C3 level, C4 level, CH50 activity (for total activityof the classical pathway) and AH50 activity (for totalactivity of the alternate complement pathways).
/square6C1 inhibitor level and function.
Treatment
General
/square6Avoid infections.
/square6Prompt recognition of infection and aggressive
treatment.
/square6Obtain cultures, and initiate early empiric antibiotictherapy for suspected pathogens.
/square6Prophylactic antibiotics for patients with significantT-cell defects (example, trimethoprim-sulfa-
methoxazole daily to prevent pneumocystis jiroveciinfection).
/square6Do not give live vaccines to children with T-celldefects.
/square6Only irradiated, leukocyte reduced, virus-freeblood products should be given.
/square6Monitor growth and weight gain diligently.
Definitive Treatment for Primary Immune Deficiencies
/square6Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
/square6Immunoglobulin replacement.
/square6Gene therapy in cases of specific gene defect.
Q.Antioxidants.
/square6Oxygen is an element indispensable for life. When
cells use oxygen to generate energy, free radicals
are created as a consequence of ATP production bythe mitochondria. These by-products are generallyreactive oxygen species (ROS) as well as reactivenitrogen species (RNS). These species can be eitherharmful or helpful to the body. ROS and RNS are
generated from either endogenous or exogenous
sources. Some internal sources of these species are:Mitochondria, xanthine oxidase, Fenton reaction,phagocytes, inflammation, ischemia, etc. Manyexternal sources of free radicals and oxidantsinclude: Pollutants, cigarette smoke, radiation,
medication, etc.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
15630 /square6At low or moderate levels, free radicals and oxi-
dants exert beneficial effects on cellular responsesand immune function. At high concentrations theygenerate oxidative stress, a deleterious processthat can damage cell structures, including lipids,proteins, and DNA.
/square6Oxidative stress plays a major part in the develop-ment of chronic and degenerative ailments such ascancer, autoimmune disorders, rheumatoid arthritis,cataract, aging, cardiovascular and neurodegenera-
tive diseases, etc.
Antioxidants
/square6The body has several mechanisms to counteract
oxidative stress by producing antioxidants, eithernaturally generated in situ  (endogenous anti-
oxidants), or externally supplied through foods(exogenous antioxidants). The roles of antioxidantsare to neutralize the excess of free radicals, to
protect the cells against their toxic effects and to
contribute to disease prevention.
/square6Endogenous compounds in cells can be classifiedas enzymatic antioxidants and non-enzymatic anti-
oxidants.
/square6The major antioxidant enzymes directly involved
in the neutralization of ROS and RNS are: Super-oxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT), glutathione
peroxidase (GPx) and glutathione reductase.
/square6Nonenzymatic antioxidants include vit A, C, E, uric
acid, etc.
Uric Acid
/square6Uric acid is by-far the highest concentration anti-oxidant in human blood. Uric acid (UA) is producedfrom xanthine by the enzyme xanthine oxidase, andis an intermediate product of purine metabolism.Studies of high altitude acclimatization show thaturate mitigates the oxidative stress caused by high-
altitude hypoxia. Serum UA levels are inversely
associated with the incidence of multiple sclerosisin humans. Moreover, the administration of UA istherapeutic in experimental animal model ofmultiple sclerosis.
Vitamin A
/square6Vit A supplementation has been shown to reducethe incidences of leukoplakia, lung cancer, fewerepisodes of respiratory tract infections in children.Vit A levels were found to be lower in patients withmeasles, Alzheimer’s disease, etc.
Ascorbic Acid (VIT-C)
/square6Ascorbic acid is redox catalyst which can reduce,and thereby neutralize reactive oxygen species suchas hydrogen peroxide. There are many studiesshowing the beneficial effects of Vit C in conditionssuch as infertility, mood disorders, longevity,
cataract formation, blood pressure, etc.
Vitamin E
/square6Vitamin E is the collective name for a set of eightrelated tocopherols and tocotrienols, which are fat-soluble vitamins with antioxidant properties. Ofthese, alpha-tocopherol is the most mportant.Alpha-tocopherol protects membranes from oxida-
tion by reacting with lipid radicals produced in the
lipid peroxidation chain reaction. Many studieshave documented the benefits of Vit E supplemen-tation in reducing the symptoms of intermittentclaudication, rheumatoid arthritis, and parkinsonism.It has also been shown to reduce the incidence of
cataract formation and enhances immune response
Glutathione
/square6Glutathione is a cysteine-containing peptide and is
synthesized in the body. Glutathione has antioxidantproperties since the thiol group in its cysteinemoiety is a reducing agent and can be reversiblyoxidized and reduced.
/square6In cells, glutathione is maintained in the reducedform by the enzyme glutathione reductase.
/square6Due to its high concentration and its central role in
maintaining the cell’s redox state, glutathione is one
of the most important cellular antioxidants.
Melatonin
/square6Melatonin is a powerful antioxidant. Melatonineasily crosses cell membranes and the blood–brainbarrier. Melatonin, once oxidized, cannot be reducedto its former state because it forms several stableend-products upon reacting with free radicals.
Therefore, it has been referred to as a terminal (or
suicidal) antioxidant.
Should we routinely prescribe /take antioxidants?
/square6Antioxidants are being studied as treatments for
stroke and neurodegenerative diseases
/square6Antioxidants are widely used in dietary supplements
and have been investigated for the prevention of
diseases such as cancer, coronary heart disease andeven altitude sickness.
/square6Although initial studies suggested that antioxidant
supplements might promote health, later large
clinical trials with a limited number of antioxidantsdetect no benefit and even suggested that excesssupplementation may be harmful.
/square6An advisory statement published by the AmericanHeart Association says that there is no good reasonfor people to take antioxidant supplements. Thisconclusion was reached by the AHA’s nutritioncommittee after an extensive review of the medicalliterature.

16
631Q.Enumerate and define the terms used to describe skin lesions.
/square6Primary skin lesions:  Primary lesions are those that occur de novo on a normal skin.Diseases of the Skin
TABLE 16.1: Primary skin lesions
Term Description Examples
Macule A small flat area of altered color <2 cm in diameter Tinea versicolor, measles
Patch Flat area of altered color >2 cm in diameter. This differs from a Vitiligo
macule only in size.
Papule Solid lesions raised above the surface of the skin, generally <1 cm Acne, warts
in size. Larger papules are called nodules.
Plaque A large (>1 cm), flat-topped, raised lesion. Psoriasis
Vesicle A small, fluid-filled lesion, <0.5 cm in diameter, raised above the Herpes simplex, chickenpox
surface of skin. Fluid is often visible, and the lesions are translucent.
Pustule Similar to vesicle but filled with pus. Folliculitis
Bulla A fluid-filled, raised, often translucent lesion >0.5 cm in diameter. Impetigo, pemphigus, pemphi-
goid, toxic epidermal necrolysis
Wheal A raised, erythematous, edematous papule or plaque, usually due Urticaria
to short-lived vasodilatation and vasopermeability.
Telangiectasia A dilated, superficial blood vessel. Rosacea
Petechiae, purpura Petechiae are small pinhead-sized (1–3 mm) hemorrhages in the Thrombocytopenia
and ecchymosis dermis and are not palpable. Purpura are similar to petechiae, but
larger (3–10 mm) and may be palpable. Ecchymosis (‘bruise’) is
bleeding into deeper structures and is more than 10 mm.
/square6Secondary skin lesions:  These occur on pre-existing primary lesions and modify them or follow as a
consequence of the primary lesions.
TABLE 16.2: Secondary skin lesions
Lichenification Thickening of the skin characterized by accentuated skin-fold markings.
Scale Excessive accumulation of stratum corneum.
Crust Dried exudate of body fluids that may be yellow (serous crust) or red (hemorrhagic crust).
Erosion Loss of epidermis without an associated loss of dermis.
Ulcer Loss of epidermis and at least a portion of the underlying dermis.
Excoriation Linear, angular erosions caused by scratching.
Atrophy Loss of substance due to diminution of the epidermis, dermis or subcutaneous fat.
Scar Replacement of normal structure by fibrous tissue.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
16632 Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features, diagnosis and
management of scabies.
Q.Norwegian or crusted scabies.
/square6Scabies is due to infestation of the skin by the mite
Sarcoptes scabiei resulting in an intensely pruriticeruption.
/square6Crowded conditions increase the prevalence of
scabies in the population.
Transmission
/square6It spreads from person to person by direct contact.
/square6It also spreads by wearing or handling contamina-
ted clothing, or by sleeping in an unchanged bedrecently occupied by an infested individual.
Etiologic Agent
/square6Sarcoptes scabiei, is a whitish-brown eight-legged
mite which looks like a turtle. Its small size (0.4 ×
0.3 mm) and burrowing habits prevent it from beingobserved by patients.
/square6The female mite burrows into the epidermis, lays
eggs and dies in place after one to two months.
Larvae hatch, leave the burrow for the surface,copulate, and continue the cycle.
Clinical Features
/square6The prominent clinical feature is itching. It is worseat night. Itching is due to delayed type IV hyper-sensitivity reaction to the mite, mite feces, and miteeggs.
/square6Small, erythematous papules, often excoriated maybe seen. Miniature wheals, vesicles, pustules, andrarely bullae may also be present.
/square6The pathognomonic sign of scabies is burrow. Itappears as a thin, grayish, reddish, or brownishline 2 to 15 mm long. Burrows may be absent orobscured by excoriation or secondary infection.
/square6The distribution of scabies usually involves webspaces of fingers, flexor aspects of the wrists, axillae,waist, genitalia, knees, buttocks and adjacent thighs.
Head is spared except in very young children. Inyoung children involvement of the palms, soles andhead is common.
/square6Secondary infection with Staphylococcus orStreptococcus can occur.
Crusted or Norwegian Scabies
/square6Norwegian scabies (so called because it was firstdescribed in Norwegian patients with leprosy)
occurs in AIDS, leprosy, lymphoma, and other
conditions where cellular immunity is compro-mised. Normally, cellular immunity preventsmultiplication of scabies mites and when it isreduced, there can be unrestricted multiplicationof mites. It may also be seen in patients with Down
syndrome./square6Norwegian scabies  begins as erythematous patches
which quickly develop a prominent scale. Any areamay be affected, but the scalp, hands and feet areprominently involved. If untreated, it spreadsextensively and may involve the entire body. Scalesand crusts appear. The lesions are malodorous.
Crusts and scales contain hundreds of thousands
of mites. Nails may be discolored and dystrophic.Itching may be minimal or absent.
Diagnosis
/square6Diagnosis can be made from history and the distri-bution of lesions.
/square6Other members of the family are also affected.
/square6Presence of burrows.
/square6Diagnosis is confirmed by finding the mite or eggs
on microscopic examination of scrapings from
burrows or papules.
Treatment
Eradication of Mites
/square6Topical agents—permethrin cream (5%) is commonlyused and is safe even in infants. Permethrin isapplied to the entire body including head in infantsand washed after 8 hours. A repeat application isrequired after 1 week. Other topical agents are benzyl
benzoate, crotamiton, lindane, malathion, and sulfur
in petrolatum.
/square6Ivermectin—this is an oral anthelmintic. A singledose of ivermectin 200 μg/kg with a repeat dose two
weeks later is as effective as permethrin cream. This
is very easy to administer and compliance is verygood compared to topical agents. However, it is notrecommended in pregnant or lactating women andsafety has not been established in children with lessthan 15 kg weight.
/square6For Norwegian scabies, two doses of ivermectin twoweeks apart should be given along with topicalpermethrin at the same time. Permethrin should becontinued weekly until all scales and crusts are gone.
Control of Itching
/square6Antihistamines, such as diphenhydramine or cetiri-zine can be used. Severe itching can be controlledby topical or oral steroids.
Secondary Infection
/square6This is treated with appropriate systemic antibiotics.
Control of Transmission
/square6All family members should be treated at the sametime to avoid reinfestation.
/square6Clothing and linen should be bagged for several
days, machine washed, and then dried in a hot
dryer to kill mites.
/square6Patients with Norwegian scabies should be isolatedand treated.

/square6Diseases of the Skin633
16Q.What are the common dermatophytoses? How do
you diagnose and treat them?
/square6Dermatophytoses, also known as ringworm or
tinea, are superficial fungal skin infections caused
by dermatophytes.
/square6Dermatophytes belong to three genera: Microsporum,trichophyton, and epidermophyton . They can origi-
nate from the soil (geophilic), animals (zoophilic),
or be confined to human skin (anthropophilic).
/square6These infections differ from candidiasis in that theyare rarely if ever invasive.
Types
Depending on the site of infection, dermatophytosesare classified as follows:
/square6Tinea corporis —involvement of the body. Waist is a
common site especially in obese women. Lesions
are erythematous, annular and scaly, with a well-defined edge and often central clearing. They may
be single or multiple and are usually asymmetrical.
/square6Tinea capitis— involvement of the scalp and associa-
ted hair. There may be alopecia of the area involved.A soft, boggy mass with loose, easily detachable
hairs may be seen (kerion). Tinea capitis is common
in children.
/square6Tinea barbae— involvement of the beard and moust-
ache area. It presents with perifollicular pustules,
erythema, crusting, seropurulent discharge and
local loss of hairs.
/square6Tinea cruris —involvement of the groins. Features
are similar to those of tinea corporis.
/square6Tinea pedis  (athlete’s foot)—involvement of the foot,
usually interdigital spaces. It usually presents withfissuring, scaling or maceration in the interdigital
areas or as scaly areas all over the soles.
/square6Tinea unguium (onychomycosis)— involvement of
nails. It presents as white discolored nails and chalky
crumbling nails. There may be subungual hyper-
keratosis and partial separation of nail plate. Risk
factors for onychomycosis are diabetes mellitus, nailtrauma, occlusive footwear, and immunosuppression.
Clinical Features
/square6Distribution and morphology of lesions is as descri-
bed above. Lesions are scaly, have slightly raised
border with central clearing.
/square6Patients complain of itching in the lesions which is
often worse at night.
/square6Secondary bacterial infection of the skin lesion mayoccur producing pustules.
Diagnosis
/square6Based on history and clinical findings.
/square6Potassium hydroxide (KOH 10%) mount of skinscrapings—fungi are seen as long, branched and
septate hyphae.
/square6Skin or nail biopsy/square6Culture:  On Sabouraud’s medium.
/square6Wood’s lamp examination:  Lesions of tinea versicolor
and certain types of tinea capitis fluoresce when
examined under Wood’s lamp, emitting ultraviolet
rays.
Treatment
/square6Topical preparations of clotrimazole, miconazole,terbinafine or ketoconazole can be applied twice
daily for 4 weeks. Topical therapy is not effective
for nail infections.
/square6For tinea capitis and barbae, ketoconazole shampoo
can be used as additional therapy.
/square6For severe and unresponsive lesions, oral antifungal
agents can be used. These are griseofulvin, keto-
conazole, fluconazole, itraconazole and terbinafine.
Duration of therapy is 4–8 weeks. For tinea unguium,
duration of therapy is 3 months.
Q.Tinea versicolor (pityriasis versicolor).
/square6This is an opportunistic fungal infection caused
by Pityrosporum orbiculare (Malassezia furfur) , which
affects mainly the stratum corneum.
Clinical Features
/square6Lesions are discrete hypo- or hyperpigmented oval
macules with fine scaling. Versicolor refers to the
variety of colors of lesions.
/square6Lesions are most common on the upper trunk andextremities, and less common on the face. Seborr-
hoeic areas are the sites of predilection as sebum
facilitates proliferation of P. orbiculare . Lesions may
coalesce to form large patches.
/square6Most patients are asymptomatic, but some may
complain of mild pruritus. It is mildly contagious,
and other family members may be affected.
Diagnosis
/square6Diagnosis can be confirmed by examination ofscrapings from lesions with 10 percent potassium
hydroxide (KOH). Both hyphae and budding cells
are seen in a pattern described as “spaghetti and
meatballs”.
/square6A Wood light examination reveals golden-white
fluorescence.
Treatment
/square6Topical preparations of clotrimazole, miconazole,terbinafine or ketoconazole are effective.
/square6Selenium sulphide shampoo applied thrice weekly10–30 minutes before bath for about 15 applications
or ketoconazole 2% shampoo once daily for three
days is also effective.
/square6Oral therapy is more convenient for patients with
extensive disease. Two convenient regimens are a
single 400-mg dose of ketoconazole or fluconazole
150 mg/wk for 2 to 4 wk.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
16634 Q.Enumerate various types of dermatitis (eczema).
Discuss the clinical features and management of
dermatitis.
/square6Dermatitis is superficial inflammation of the skininduced by external or internal factors. The terms‘eczema’ and ‘dermatitis’ are synonymous.
General Features of Dermatitis
/square6Redness and swelling.
/square6Itching.
/square6Papules, vesicles and, rarely, large blisters.
/square6Oozing and crusting.
/square6Fissures and scratch marks.
/square6Pigmentation changes (hypo and hyper).
/square6Scaling.
/square6Lichenification, secondary to rubbing and scratching.
Classification and Types of Dermatitis
Exogenous
• Irritant contact dermatitis• Allergic contact dermatitis• Photoallergic dermatitis
Endogenous
• Atopic• Seborrhoeic• Discoid eczema• Dyshydrotic (pompholyx)
• Asteatotic eczema
• Gravitational (stasis) dermatitis
/square6Irritant contact dermatitis— this occurs due to contact
of skin with irritants. Dermatitis is due to direct
damage caused by non-immune mechanisms asopposed to allergic contact dermatitis. Examples ofirritants are cleansers, soaps, detergents, organicsolvents, alkalies, and vegetables like chillies.
/square6Allergic contact dermatitis —this occurs due to
delayed hypersensitivity reaction mediated byT-lymphocytes against certain chemicals (allergens)on coming in contact with the skin. Most contactallergens are haptens (incomplete allergens) which
become complete allergens after combining with
epidermal proteins. Examples are hair dye,shampoos, cement, etc.
/square6Photoallergic dermatitis —this occurs when the skin
is exposed to sunlight following application of the
chemicals to the skin of a sensitized person.
/square6Atopic dermatitis —this is due to genetic predisposi-
tion to form excessive IgE antibodies to antigens.
There may be family history of atopy. Clinical
features include a low threshold for itching, skinlichenification and raised serum IgE levels. Ininfants, the lesions are distributed on the face, scalpand front of the knees and legs. In children andadults, lesions are mainly in the cubital and
popliteal fossae, sides of the neck, wrists and ankles./square6Seborrheic  dermatitis —this is a chronic dermatitis
characterized by greasy scales overlying erythe-matous patches or plaques. It mainly involves areasrich in sebaceous glands such as scalp, retroauricular
and nasolabial folds, eyelids, trunks and axillae. Itis probable due to overgrowth of malassezia furfur
or its yeast form Pityrosporum ovale,  which is
normally present on the skin. The disorder is morecommon in AIDS due to increased susceptibility toyeast infections.
/square6Discoid (nummular eczema)— this is  characterized
by pruritic circular or oval lesions with closely setpapulovesicles on an erythematous base. It is seenmost often on the limbs of elderly males.
/square6Dyshydrotic eczema (pompholyx) —this is a type of
vesicular eczema with chronic and recurrent lesionsaffecting palms, soles and sides of the fingers.
/square6Asteatotic eczema— this is seen in hospitalized
elderly, often in the lower limbs. Dry skin, low
humidity, over-washing and diuretics are contribu-tory factors.
/square6Gravitational (stasis) dermatitis —this is seen in the
lower limbs due to venous insufficiency.
Investigations of Dermatitis
/square6Patch tests—useful in suspected cases of allergic
contact dermatitis.
/square6IgE levels—are useful in atopic dermatitis.
/square6Bacterial and viral swabs for microscopy and culture
in suspected secondary infection.
General Management of Dermatitis
/square6Explanation and reassurance.
/square6Avoidance of contact with irritants.
/square6Avoidance of dryness by regular use of emollients.
/square6Topical corticosteroids.
/square6Seborrhoeic eczema is treated with antipityrosporal
agents such as ketoconazole shampoo and creams,
supplemented with weak corticosteroids.
Q.Contact dermatitis.
/square6Contact dermatitis (CD) is acute inflammation of the
skin caused by irritants (irritant contact dermatitis)or allergens (allergic contact dermatitis).
Etiology
/square6Irritant contact dermatitis (ICD)  accounts for 80%
of all cases of contact dermatitis. It is caused by agentswhich directly cause irritation and inflammationof the skin. Immune system is not involved here.Agents include:
– Chemicals (e.g. acids, alkalis, solvents, metal salts)
– Soaps (e.g. abrasives, detergents)
– Plants (e.g. parthenium, peppers)– Body fluids (e.g. urine, saliva)

/square6Diseases of the Skin635
16/square6Allergic contact dermatitis (ACD)  is a type IV cell-
mediated hypersensitivity reaction to antigens.Some of the antigens triggering ACD are ragweedpollen, hair dye, cosmetics, poison ivy, latex rubber,etc.
Clinical Features
/square6ICD is more painful than pruritic. Skin changesinclude erythema, crusting, erosion, pustules,
bullae, and edema.
/square6In ACD, the primary symptom is intense pruritus.
Skin changes are same as those of ICD. Skin changesoften occur at the site of contact with allergen, but
later may spread due to scratching. Hands are
commonly involved due to handling of allergens.
Diagnosis
/square6Clinical history and examination.
/square6Sometimes patch testing. Here, standard contactallergens are applied to the upper back using
adhesive-mounted patches containing minute
amounts of allergens.
Treatment
/square6Avoidance of allergens.
/square6Symptomatic treatment: Dressings for excoriationand ulceration, antihistamines for itching.
/square6Topical corticosteroids.
Q.Discuss the etiology, clinical features and manage-
ment of psoriasis.
/square6Psoriasis is a chronic inflammatory disease of the
skin, characterized by well-defined erythematousplaques with silvery scale.
/square6It is more common in European community and lesscommon in African and Asian communities.
/square6It affects men and women equally. Althoughpsoriasis can begin at any age, there seem to be twopeaks in onset: One between ages 20 and 30 andanother between 50 and 60.
Etiology
/square6Psoriasis is considered to be an autoimmune diseasewith a genetic basis. It has a strong genetic predilec-tion in the form of polygenic autosomal dominant
inheritance with variable penetrance. Certain genes
and HLA antigens (Cw6, B13, B17) are implicatedin psoriasis.
/square6Precipitating and aggravating factors include
hormonal changes of puberty and pregnancy,
infections, physical trauma (including sunlight),obesity, smoking, alcohol consumption and mentalstress. Drugs like beta-blockers, antimalarials,NSAIDs, lithium, etc. are known to cause psoriasi-form drug reactions and also to precipitate the
disease./square6Patients with HIV and AIDS can have severe and
resistant disease at a young age.
Pathology
There are two main abnormalities noted in psoriaticplaques:
/square6Inflammatory cell infiltrate in the skin.
/square6Hyperproliferation of keratinocytes with a grosslyincreased mitotic index.
Clinical Features
/square6Psoriasis is characterized by well demarcated
plaques, which may vary from few millimeters to
several centimeters in diameter. The lesions are red,with a silvery-white scale.
/square6Extensor aspects such as elbows, knees and lower
back are commonly affected. Other sites of predilec-
tion include scalp, nails, flexures and palms.
/square6Nails may show pitting, onycholysis (separation ofthe nail from the nail bed), and subungual hyper-
keratosis.
/square6Some patients may have seronegative arthritis
(psoriatic arthropathy) involving spine and/orperipheral joints.
Investigations
/square6Diagnosis is made clinically.
/square6Rarely skin biopsy or scraping may be required to
rule out other disorders.
/square6X-rays and MRI may be needed if there is arthritis.
Management
/square6Explanation and reassurance.
Topical Therapy
/square6Anthralin— it is a topical antiproliferative, anti-
inflammatory agent. It can cause burning sensation
of skin with pain and erythema. It can also cause
brown staining of the skin.
/square6Coal tar —coal tar has anti-mitotic effects and is
effective in the treatment of psoriasis. Coal tar bath
followed by exposure to ultraviolet light is the
method commonly used. Staining of clothes anddevelopment of allergic and irritant dermatitis are
its side effects.
/square6Calcipotriene —this is  a vitamin D agonist. It has
cytostatic and cytotoxic effects on proliferatingkeratinocytes. It also suppresses the underlying
inflammation. It reduces the thickness and scaling
of the psoriatic plaque, but does not clear theplaque. It is applied once or twice daily. Calci-
potriene has almost replaced anthralin and coal tar
for topical therapy.
/square6Corticosteroids— these are useful for many sites,
particularly the flexures where tar and dithranol
may be too irritant. Main side effects are local skin
atrophy. Psoriasis tends to return when steroids are
stopped.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
16636 PUVA Therapy
/square6Psoralen along with ultraviolet A (PUVA) is very
effective for treatment of psoriasis. Psoralens are
natural photosensitisers found in plants. Psoralen
is given orally and is distributed all over the body.
It gets activated only in those sites that are exposed
to UVA. PUVA is as effective as intensive dithranol
therapy. It is given 2 to 5 times a week and clearance
occurs in the majority within 8 weeks. Main concern
is increased risk of skin cancers. NBUVB (Narrow-
band UVB light) is equally effective without the side
effects of psoralen like gastrointestinal upset,
cataract formation, and carcinogenic effect. It can
safely be given to children, pregnant and lactating
females and even elderly.
Systemic Therapy
/square6Methotrexate  is highly effective for psoriasis and is
the drug of choice. It can be given as long as the
disease remains active. It acts by suppressing the
immune system.
/square6Oral retinoids  such as acitretin, etretinate are also
effective in some patients with psoriasis. Retinoids
are teratogens, hence pregnancy should be avoided
for at least 2 years following their use.
/square6Cyclosporine  can be used to induce a clinical response
but its use should be intermittent.
/square6Biological agents such as infliximab, etanercept,efaluzimab have varying degrees of activity against
psoriasis. They are expensive and may be consi-
dered when other treatment agents have failed.
Q.Pityriasis rosea.
/square6Pityriasis rosea is a self-limited, inflammatory disease
characterized by diffuse, scaling papules or plaques.
/square6The cause may be viral infection (human herpes-
viruses 6, 7, and 8). Drugs may cause a similar
eruption.
Clinical Features
/square6Affects mainly children and young adults. It affectswomen more often.
/square6Characterized by sudden appearance of oval,
papulosquamous, pink or salmon colored lesions
on the trunk and proximal limbs. The eruption
usually begins with a “herald” or “mother” patch,
a single oval pink or salmon-colored lesion on the
chest, neck, or back. It is 2 to 5 cm in diameter with
cigarette paper-like scales at the edges.
/square6A few days or weeks later oval lesions similar to
the herald patch, but smaller, appear on the trunk
and proximal areas of the limbs. The long axes of
these oval lesions tend to be arranged along the
cleavage lines of the skin. This arrangement of
lesions on the back parallel to ribs gives rise to
“Christmas tree pattern”.
/square6Mild to moderate pruritus may be present./square6The rash subsides within 6–8 weeks without signi-ficant consequences.
/square6Differential diagnosis includes secondary syphilis,
psoriasis, lichen planus and drug reactions.
Treatment
/square6Generally requires no treatment.
/square6Topical or oral steroids and antihistamines may be
required to relieve itching.
/square6Ultraviolet light B (UVB) is helpful to reduce post-inflammatory hypopigmentation.
/square6Erythromycin has shown benefit in some trials.
Benefit is probably due to its anti-inflammatory and
immune modulating effects.
Q.What is pemphigus? Write briefly about pemphigus
vulgaris.
Q.Nikolsky’s sign.
/square6Pemphigus is a group of rare, chronic, autoimmune
blistering disease affecting skin and mucus mem-
branes (Greek pemphix  = bubble).
/square6There are three major types of pemphigus:
– Pemphigus vulgaris.– Pemphigus foliaceus.– Paraneoplastic pemphigus.
Etiology
/square6It is an autoimmune disease characterized by the
presence of IgG antibodies directed against desmo-glein an adhesion molecule on the surface of
keratinocytes. Blister formation occurs in the epi-
dermis due to loss of cohesion between epidermalcells, a process known as acantholysis.
/square6It can also occur due to drugs such as penicillins,
sulphonamides, captopril, piroxicam, and antiepi-
leptics.
Clinical Features
Pemphigus Vulgaris
/square6Most common form of pemphigus (“vulgar” means“common”).
/square6Blisters are flaccid, nonpruritic, and easily break-
down, leaving behind erosions. Any area of the skin
can be affected.
/square6Mucus membrane of oral cavity is commonlyinvolved. Blisters are often found in areas subjected
to friction such as cheek mucosa, tongue, palate and
lower lip. Pharynx and larynx may be affectedleading to pain on eating, and hoarseness of voice.
Pemphigus Foliaceous
/square6Blisters are more superficial than pemphigus
vulgaris, which easily rupture. Hence, erosions,
rather than blisters, are the presenting feature.
/square6Lesions first appear on the face and scalp and later
on the chest and back.

/square6Diseases of the Skin637
16/square6There may be associated scaling, and crusting.
/square6Unlike pemphigus vulgaris, mucous membrane is
not affected.
Paraneoplastic Pemphigus
/square6Associated with malignancies, such as non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, CLL, and thymoma. Both
skin and mucous membrane are affected.
Diagnosis
/square6The characteristic sign is Nikolsky’s sign. It is
elicited by applying lateral pressure to normal-looking skin at the periphery of active lesions,causing a shearing away of the epidermis leadingto formation of new blisters.
/square6Biopsy of skin lesions—it shows intraepithelialacantholysis without disruption of the basementmembrane. Direct immunofluorescence shows
deposits of IgG between epidermal cells.
Differential Diagnosis
/square6In case of predominant mucus membrane lesions,
herpes simplex, aphthous ulcers, lichen planus, and
erythema multiforme have to be ruled out. In case
of widespread erosions, pyoderma, impetigo,bullous pemphigoid, and bullous drug eruptionsshould be ruled out.
Treatment
/square6Without treatment pemphigus has high morbidityand mortality.
/square6High-dose systemic corticosteroids (e.g. prednisone1 mg/kg/day) are the mainstay of therapy. Mildpemphigus may be treated with local steroids.
/square6Azathioprine and cyclophosphamide are used asadditional immunosuppressive agents. They reduce
steroid requirement, decrease steroid side-effectsand improve remission rate.
/square6Rituximab, alone or in combination with intravenousimmunoglobulin (IVIG), is the treatment of choice
in severe pemphigus refractory to above therapies.
/square6Silver sulphadiazine may be used to prevent secon-dary infection.
Q.Bullous pemphigoid or pemphigoid.
/square6Bullous pemphigoid is a subepidermal blistering
disease usually seen in the elderly (>60 years of age).It is less aggressive than pemphigus vulgaris andusually not life-threatening.
Etiology
/square6It is an autoimmune disease characterized by lineardeposits of IgG at the epidermal basement mem-
brane. The antibodies are directed against hemi-
desmosomes which attach epithelial cells to thebasement membrane). Hence there is a split between
the epidermis and dermis. (Note that in pemphigus
the split is within the epidermis.)/square6Drug-induced bullous pemphigoid develops dueto penicillamine, furosemide, captopril, and anti-
biotics such as penicillin and nalidixic acid.
/square6It can be associated with systemic malignancies.
Clinical Features
/square6Blisters are large and tense, arising on a normal orerythematous skin. They occur anywhere on the body
but common in flexural areas, groin, and axillae.
/square6Mucous membranes are not involved.
/square6Blisters are associated with marked itching. Theymay contain hemorrhagic fluid.
/square6Nikolsky’s sign is negative.
/square6Blisters heal without scarring.
/square6Some patients go into spontaneous remission.
Diagnosis
/square6Direct immunofluorescence shows linear depositsof IgG and complement at the epidermal basement
membrane.
Treatment
/square6Systemic steroids (e.g. prednisolone, 1 mg/kg perday).
/square6Azathioprine or cyclophosphamide can be used asadditional immunosuppressive and steroid sparing
agents.
Q.Discuss the causes, clinical features, investigations
and management of Stevens-Johnson syndrome.
Or
Q.Toxic epidermal necrolysis.
/square6Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) and toxic epi-
dermal necrolysis (TEN) are severe, idiosyncratic
reactions, characterized by fever and mucocuta-
neous lesions that culminate in epidermal necrosis
and sloughing.
/square6SJS and TEN are similar except for the amount of
area involved. Involvement of <10% of body surface
area is called SJS and >30% of body surface area
is called TEN; involvement of 10 to 30% of body
surface area is considered SJS/TEN overlap.
Causes
Drugs
•Anti-gout agents:  Allopurinol
•Antibiotics: Sulfonamides (cotrimoxazole, sulfasalazine),
penicillins, cephalosporins, flouroquinolones
•Antipsychotics and antiepileptics: Carbamazepine, phenytoin,
valproate, lamotrigine, and phenobarbital
•NSAIDs:  Ibuprofen, piroxicam
Infections
• Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Rare
• Vaccinations, systemic diseases, chemical exposure, herbal
medicines, and foods

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
16638 Clinical Features
Stevens-Johnson Syndrome
/square6This is less severe condition with involvement of
less than 10 percent of the body surface.
/square6History of drug intake prior to the onset of rash.
/square6Prodrome of malaise and fever, followed by the onset
of erythematous or purpuric macules and plaques.
/square6Lesions are symmetrically distributed, and start
first on the face and thorax before spreading to other
areas.
/square6Skin lesions progress to epidermal necrosis and
sloughing.
/square6Target lesions may be present.
/square6Mucosal membranes (ocular, oral, and genital) are
involved in most patients. Oral and esophageal
involvement causes difficulty and pain while
swallowing. Genitourinary involvement causes
dysuria and difficulty to void. Bronchial epithelium
may also slough, causing cough, dyspnea, pneu-
monia, pulmonary edema, and hypoxemia.
/square6Glomerulonephritis and hepatitis may develop.
Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis
/square6This is a more severe condition with involvement
of more than 30 percent of the body surface area.
/square6Other features are same as SJS.
Investigations
/square6Anemia and neutropenia may be present.
/square6AST and ALT may be elevated.
/square6Skin biopsy may be required.
Differential Diagnosis
/square6Erythema multiforme.
/square6Viral exanthems.
/square6Drug rashes.
/square6Toxic shock syndrome.
/square6Exfoliative erythroderma (usually spares mucous
membranes).
/square6Paraneoplastic pemphigus.
Management
/square6Treatment of underlying cause (e.g. withdrawal of
causative agent).
/square6Maintenance of fluid and electrolyte balance.
/square6Antihistamines and local steroids are enough for
mild cases.
/square6Silver-impregnated nanocrystalline gauze for
topical wound care.
/square6Systemic corticosteroids are indicated in severe
cases. Prednisolone, 1 to 3 mg/kg daily or an equi-
valent amount of other steroids can be used.
/square6IV immunoglobulin (1 gm/kg daily for three conse-
cutive days) is also useful in severe cases of SJS and
TEN./square6Sepsis is the major cause of death. Systemic anti-
biotics should be given at the first sign of wound
infection.
Q.Erythema multiforme.
/square6Erythema multiforme is an acute inflammatory skin
disease characterized by target or iris skin leisons.
/square6Earlier, erythema multiforme major was being
equated with Stevens-Johnson syndrome. But now
most authorities think that these two entities are
different.
Etiology
/square6Majority of cases are caused by herpes simplex virus
(HSV) infection (HSV-1 more so than HSV-2).
/square6Some cases are caused by drugs (sulfonamides,
NSAIDs, and anticonvulsants), vaccines, other viral
diseases (especially hepatitis C), and SLE.
Clinical Features
/square6Classic manifestation is target lesion, consisting of
three concentric zones of color change. Center and
periphery of the lesion is red and in between there
is pale area. Such classic lesions are found in herpes
simplex infection. They are most often found on
the hands and feet. Wheals, vesicles, and bullae can
also be seen.
Figure 16.1 Erythema multiforme
Differential Diagnosis
/square6Urticaria.
/square6Drug eruptions.
/square6Paraneoplastic pemphigus.
Treatment
/square6Withdrawal of offending agent.
/square6Treatment of infection.
/square6Systemic steroids in severe cases.
Q.Discuss the etiopathogenesis, clinical features and
management of acne vulgaris.
/square6Acne vulgaris  is a chronic skin condition involving
blockage and/or inflammation of pilosebaceous
units (hair follicles and their accompanying seba-
ceous gland).
/square6Acne is seen in most teenagers. Peak severity is in
the late teenage years but acne may persist into the
third decade and beyond, particularly in females.

/square6Diseases of the Skin639
16Etiopathogenesis
/square6Acne occurs through the interplay of 4 major factors:
Increased sebum production, follicular pluggingwith sebum and keratinocytes, colonization of
follicles by Propionibacterium acnes, and release of
multiple inflammatory mediators.
/square6Increased sebum production:  With the onset of puberty,
sebaceous glands enlarge and sebum production
increases. There is a clear relation between severity
of acne and sebum production. In the completeabsence of sebum, acne does not occur. Androgensare mainly responsible for increased sebum produc-tion.
/square6Follicular plugging with sebum and keratinocytes:Blockage of pilosebaceous duct due to retention ofkeratinous material and sebum leads to formationof small cysts, called comedones.
/square6Colonization and activity of bacteria ( Propioni-
bacterium acnes ) within the comedones releases free
fatty acids from sebum, causes inflammation withinthe cyst and rupture.
/square6Rupture of the cyst releases oily and keratinousdebris leading to an inflammatory foreign bodyreaction in the skin.
Clinical Features
/square6The clinical hallmark of acne vulgaris is the come-done, which may be closed (whitehead) or open(blackhead).
/square6Closed comedones appear as 1–2 mm whitepapules. Open comedones have a large follicularorifice and are filled with oxidized, darkened, oilydebris.
/square6Inflammatory papules, nodules and cysts occur andhealing may lead to scarring.
/square6Lesions are maximum on the face, but may alsooccur on shoulders, upper chest and back.
Management
/square6Treatment of acne vulgaris is directed toward elimi-nation of comedones by normalization of follicularkeratinization, decreasing sebum production,
decreasing the population of P. acnes , and decreas-
ing inflammation.
Local Measures
/square6Enough for mild to moderate acne.
/square6Regular washing with soap and water.
/square6Topical keratolytic agents—retinoic acid, benzoylperoxide, or salicylic acid. They alter the pattern ofepidermal desquamation and prevent the formationof comedones.
/square6Topical antibacterial agents—azelaic acid, topicalerythromycin, or clindamycin. They inhibit  Pro-
prionobacterium acnes .
/square6Incision and drainage of cysts./square6Intraleisonal injection of triamcinolone acetonide
reduces inflammation and hastens the resolutionof cysts.
/square6Dermabrasion and excision of scars to improve skin
appearance.
Systemic Measures
/square6Useful in severe acne with prominent inflammatory
component.
/square6Antibiotics—tetracycline (250–500 mg bid), ordoxycycline (100 mg bid). These antibiotics have
anti-inflammatory effect in addition to their anti-
bacterial effect. Oral antibiotics should be given for atleast 6 months. Other antibiotics such as amoxicillin,erythromycin, and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazoleare sometimes used.
/square6Systemic retinoids (isotretinoin) are useful in severeacne unresponsive to other therapies. Retinoids havesignificant adverse effects including teratogenicity.
/square6Estrogens (oral contraceptives) also improve acnein women.
Q.Miliaria (heat rash).
/square6The main cause of miliaria is obstruction of the
eccrine sweat glands or ducts. This can be due tocutaneous debris or bacteria such as Staphylococcus
epidermidis  with its formation of biofilms.
/square6It occurs in hot and humid weather.
Clinical Features
/square6Lesions are small, superficial, red, thin-walled,
discrete but closely aggregated vesicles, papules,pustules or vesicopustules. Itching and burning isusually present.
/square6Miliaria occurs most commonly on the coveredareas of skin such as trunk and intertriginous areas.In hospitalized patients, it occurs commonly on theback.
Treatment
/square6Patient should keep cool and wear loose and lightclothing.
/square6Local application of triamcinolone acetonide, or amid-potency corticosteroid in a lotion or cream base.
/square6Antibiotics for secondary infections (clindamycin).
/square6Anticholinergic drugs may be helpful in severecases (glycopyrrolate, 1 mg twice daily). They helpby decreasing sweating.
Q.Warts.
/square6Warts are mucocutaneous manifestation of human
papillomavirus (HPV) infection.
/square6Viral warts are extremely common and most people
suffer from one or more at some point during theirlife. HPV spreads by direct or sexual contact.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
16640 Clinical Features
/square6Common warts (verruca vulgaris) have smooth
surface initially, but as they enlarge, their surfacebecomes irregular and hyperkeratotic, producing
the typical warty appearance. They are most
common on the hands but may also be seen onthe face, genitalia, arm and leg. They are usuallymultiple.
/square6Plane warts (verruca plana) are smooth, flat-toppapules seen most commonly on the face and backsof hands.
/square6Plantar warts (verruca plantaris) have a rough
surface, surrounded by a horny collar. Plantar warts
may be painful and disabling.
/square6Other types of wart are mosaic warts (mosaic-likeplaques of tightly packed individual warts), facial
warts (often filiform), and genital warts, which may
be papillomatous and protuberant.
Treatment
/square6Wait and watch—spontaneous regression occurs intwo-thirds of warts within two years. However, itis better to treat to avoid the risk of spread.
/square6Warts can be destroyed by local application of liquid
nitrogen, salicylic acid, CO2 laser, bichloroacetic
acid, or cantharidin. Surgical excision and electro-cautery are other options.
/square6Bleomycin injection into warts has a high cure ratefor plantar and common warts.
/square6Podophyllum resin and the immunomodulatorimiquimod are useful in anogenital warts.
Q.Erythema nodosum.
/square6Erythema nodosum (EN) is a specific form of
panniculitis (inflammation of subcutaneous fat)
characterized by tender, red or violet, palpable, sub-cutaneous nodules.
/square6Most likely represents a delayed hypersensitivity
reaction to antigens associated with the various
infectious agents, drugs, and other diseases.
Causes
• Idiopathic (most common cause)
• Streptococcal pharyngitis (most common known cause)• Tuberculosis
• Leprosy
• Other infections (HIV, syphilis, systemic fungal infections,
yersiniosis)
• Sarcoidosis• Inflammatory bowel disease
• SLE
• Behcet’s disease• Hodgkin lymphoma
• Pregnancy
• Drugs (oral contraceptives, sulfa drugs)Clinical Features
/square6EN primarily affects people in their 20s and 30s
but can occur at any age; women are more oftenaffected.
/square6The lesions are deep nodules, 1–10 cm in diameter,red or violet in color and tender.
/square6They are most often located on the anterior surfacesof the legs below the knees (shin) but may rarelyoccur on the arms, trunk, and face.
/square6Fever, malaise, and arthralgia usually accompany
the lesions.
/square6Lesions last about 6 weeks and heal without
scarring.
/square6Recurrence may occur.
Diagnosis
/square6Diagnosis is mainly based on clinical features.
/square6WBC, ESR and CRP are elevated.
/square6Appropriate tests to identify the underlying cause(chest X-ray, montoux test, ANA, ASO titer, etc.).
/square6Biopsy may be required in atypical cases.
Treatment
/square6Usually self-limited.
/square6Underlying cause should be identified and treated.
/square6Pain, arthralgia and fever can be treated by NSAIDs.
/square6Potassium iodide solution, 5–15 drops orally threetimes daily, results in prompt involution in manycases. Exact mechanism of action of potassiumiodide is unknown.
/square6Oral corticosteroids in severe, extensive diseaseunless contraindicated by associated infection.
Q.Vitiligo.
/square6Vitiligo is skin depigmentation due to selective
destruction of skin melanocytes.
Etiology
/square6In vitiligo there are focal areas of melanocyte loss
which is considered to be due to cell-mediated auto-
immune attack. Some patients have antibodies tomelanin. It may be associated with other auto-immune diseases such as diabetes, Addison’sdisease and pernicious anemia.
/square6Genetic factors may play a role; 20 to 30 percent ofpatients may have a family history of vitiligo.
/square6Extrinsic factors also may play a role. Trauma,
certain chemicals and sunburn may precipitate the
appearance of vitiligo.
Clinical Features
/square6Lesions may start at any age, but generally in earlyadolescence or adult life.
/square6Segmental vitiligo is restricted to one part of the
body.

/square6Diseases of the Skin641
16/square6Generalized vitiligo is characterized by many wide-
spread macules, often symmetrical and frequentlyinvolves the hands, wrists, knees and neck as wellas the area around the body orifices.
/square6The patches of depigmentation are sharply demar-
cated.
/square6Sensation in the depigmented patches is normal
unlike leprosy.
/square6Course is static or slowly progressive. Some patients
may experience spontaneous repigmentation.
Differential Diagnosis
/square6Postinflammatory hypopigmentation.
/square6Piebaldism (a rare autosomal dominant disorder;
depigmented patches surrounded by hyperpig-mented areas).
/square6Morphea (localized scleroderma).
/square6Leprosy (lesions are usually hypoesthetic).
/square6Lichen sclerosus.
/square6Pityriasis alba.
/square6Chemical leukoderma.
/square6Leukoderma due to melanoma.
Management
/square6Corticosteroids:  Topical corticosteroids are the first
choice for patients with limited disease. Topical pre-
parations of fluticasone propionate or mometasone,once a day for four to six months has to be applied.Oral corticosteroids may be helpful in progressivedisease.
/square6Calcineurin inhibitors:  Topical calcineurin inhibitors
(e.g. tacrolimus) are also effective.
/square6Ultraviolet light:  Topical or oral psoralens plus
ultraviolet A radiation (PUVA), or ultraviolet B
(UVB) radiation (phototherapy) is used in patientswith extensive vitiligo. A total of 75 to 150 treat-ments (e.g. three times/week for 6 to 12 months)may be necessary.
/square6Surgery:  Split-skin grafts and blister roof grafts, can
be used to cover vitiligo patches.
/square6Depigmentation therapy:  If there is extensive vitiligo
with only small areas of normal skin, these normal
skin areas can be depigmented (by using hydro-quinone) to make the skin look uniform.
/square6Patients should be advised to avoid excessive sun
exposure and to use sunscreens to reduce the risk
of skin cancer in the long run.
/square6Camouflage cosmetics may also be helpful to maskthe patches.
Q.Melanocytic nevi (moles).
/square6Melanocytic nevi (moles) are localized benign
proliferations of melanocytes. Moles are a usual
feature of most human beings. They are used asidentification marks./square6They probably occur due to abnormalities of thenormal migratory pattern of the melanocytesduring development.
Clinical Features
Congenital Nevi
/square6These are present at birth or appear shortly after.
Acquired Nevi
/square6These appear in early childhood, at adolescence,and during pregnancy or oestrogen therapy. Theycan be divided into 3 types based on the location ofclumps of melanocytes.
– Junctional nevi:  These are present in the dermal-
epidermal junction. They are common on theacral surfaces but may occur anywhere. Theyappear as flat, pigmented macules.
–Compound nevi:  These are present in the dermo-
epidermal junction as well as dermis. They areoften raised, and may be papillomatous.
–Dermal nevi:  These are present in the dermis only.
They are typically flesh colored.
Significance of Moles
/square6Most moles are benign and do not cause anyproblems. Rarely there may be malignant trans-formation.  Malignant change is most likely in large
congenital melanocytic nevi.
Danger signs indicating malignant transformation of
moles
• Itching
• Increase in size• Change in color
• Change in shape
• Bleeding• Irregular margin or surface
• Inflammation
• Ulceration
Management
/square6Most nevi do not require any treatment.
/square6Excision may be considered if malignancy is sus-
pected or when they repeatedly become inflamedor traumatized or for cosmetic reasons.
Q.Alopecia (baldness).
/square6Alopecia refers to loss of hair from the body. It is a
sign rather than a diagnosis.
/square6The hair cycle consists of three phases: The growthphase, which is called anagen, the resting phase,which is called catagen, and the shedding phase,which is the telogen phase. Different hairs will be
at different phase at any given time.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
16642 /square6Anagen is long growing phase which lasts from
2 to 6 years. Catagen is a brief transitional phasewhere the hair follicle shrinks in size. Telogen is ashort resting phase lasting 1 to 4 months. At theend of the resting phase, the hair falls out (exogen)and new hair starts growing in the follicle, beginn-
ing the cycle again.
/square6Alopecia can be broadly classified into scarring and
non-scarring types. It can be localized or diffuse.
/square6Scarring alopecia refers to hair loss associated withfibrosis that replaces and often permanentlydestroys the hair follicle.
/square6Nonscarring alopecia refers to hair loss withoutpermanent destruction of the hair follicle.
Causes of Alopecia
Scarring alopecia
• Herpes zoster• Chemical or physical trauma
• Discoid lupus erythematosus
• Scleroderma• Severe folliculitis• Lichen planopilaris
• Dissecting cellulitis
• Tumors• Radiotherapy• Idiopathic
Nonscarring alopecia
• Androgenetic alopecia (most common cause)
• Tinea capitis• Alopecia areata• Traumatic (trichotillomania, traction)
• Syphilis
• Telogen effluvium• Hypo- and hyperthyroidism• Hypopituitarism
• Diabetes mellitus
• HIV• Nutritional deficiency (e.g. iron)• Liver disease
• Postpartum
• Drugs (anticancer drugs, antithyroid drugs, oral contracep-
tives, allopurinol, gentamicin, and levodopa).
Clinical Features
/square6Note the onset and duration of hair loss, whether
hair shedding is increased, and whether hair lossis localized or diffuse. Hair loss can be local ordiffuse depending on the cause. Both scalp andbody hair loss are seen in alopecia universalis. Loss
of up to 100 hairs per day is normal. More than this
is significant.
/square6History of recent exposures to noxious agents (e.g.drugs, toxins, radiation) and stressors (e.g. surgery,
chronic illness, fever, psychologic stressors) suggests
toxic or stress-induced hair loss./square6History of weight gain, fatigue and cold intolerancesuggests hypothyroidism. History of virilizationin women (hirsutism, deepening of the voice, andincreased libido) suggests adrenal disorder orpolycystic ovary syndrome. History of gynecologic/
obstetric complaints in women may suggest hor-
monal problems.
/square6A family history of hair loss should be recorded.
/square6Alopecia areata appears as sharply demarcated bald
patches, with pathognomonic ‘exclamation mark’hairs (broken-off hairs 3–4 mm long, which taperoff towards the scalp). The hair usually regrows insmall bald patches, but may be incomplete in largerpatches.
/square6Androgenetic alopecia or male pattern baldness isphysiological in men over 20 years old. Hair lossusually occurs in an M-shaped pattern (bitemporalrecession and then crown involvement) in the
frontal hair line. It also occurs in females, usually
after menopause, but hair loss is often diffuse.
/square6Hair loss associated with pruritus, erythema, andscaling is seen in chronic cutaneous lupus and tinea
capitis.
/square6Asymmetric, bizarre, irregular hair loss pattern is
seen in trichotillomania.
Investigations
/square6Serum testosterone, DHEA.
/square6Iron, total iron binding capacity.
/square6Urea, creatinine, electrolytes, LFT.
/square6Thyroid function tests.
/square6ANA.
/square6HIV, VDRL and TPHA.
/square6Fungal stain in localized hair loss with scaling.
/square6Scalp biopsy, with direct immunofluorescence, iflichen planus or discoid lupus erythematosus issuspected.
Management
/square6Support and reassurance.
/square6Treatment of underlying cause.
/square6Alopecia areata sometimes responds to topical orintralesional corticosteroids such as triamcinolone.
/square6Systemic finasteride or topical 2% minoxidil solu-tion are useful in severe androgenetic alopecia. Infemales, antiandrogen therapy such as cyproteroneacetate can be used.
/square6Scalp reduction surgery and autologous hair trans-plantation are also options in irreversible alopecia.
/square6Wig may be useful for irreversible extensive alopecia.
Q.Discuss briefly the common skin malignancies.
Basal Cell Carcinoma (BCC) (Rodent Ulcer)
/square6This is the most common skin cancer. It arises from
the basal layer of epidermis and its appendages.

/square6Diseases of the Skin643
16/square6Both environmental and genetic factors contribute
to the development of BCC. Chronic exposure to
ultraviolet (UV) radiation in sunlight is the most
important risk factor. Other risk factors are chronicarsenic exposure, therapeutic radiation, immuno-
suppression, and the basal cell nevus syndrome.
/square6It is common in Europeans and at least 3 times more
common than squamous cell carcinoma.
/square6It is more common in men than in women probablydue to more exposure to sun.
/square6Incidence increases with age.
Clinical Features
/square6Most BCCs occur on the face.
/square6Most common type is noduloulcerative form. Theearliest lesion is a small papule, with fine telangiec-tatic vessels on the surface, which slowly enlarges.
Central necrosis may occur, leaving an ulcer
surrounded by a rolled pearly edge.
/square6The tumor invades locally but rarely metastasizes.
/square6The superficial (multifocal) variant is seen mostoften on the trunk; it appears as a slowly enlarging
pink or brown scaly plaque.
Management
/square6Since metastasis is extremely rare, most BCCs can
be treated by local destruction.
/square6Treatment options include surgery, cryotherapy,radiotherapy, photodynamic therapy or the
topical immunostimulant imiquimod. Surgery is
usually the first choice, as it allows histologicalassessment of the tumor and examination of tumor
margins.
Squamous Cell Carcinoma (SCC)
/square6SCC is the second most common skin cancer after
BCC.
/square6Risk factors for SCC are similar to BCC. Additional
risk factors are chronic cutaneous ulcer, genetic
disorders such as dystrophic epidermolysis bullosaand xeroderma pigmentosum, human papilloma
virus infection, and smoking.
Clinical Features
/square6SCC arises most commonly in areas frequently
exposed to the sun, such as the head and neck (most
common site), dorsum of the hands and forearms,
and legs.
/square6Varying clinical presentations include nodules,plaques, infiltrating tumors and ulcers.
/square6Histological grade varies from well-differentiated
to anaplastic. SCCs of the lip behave more aggressi-
vely and show a greater frequency of metastasis.Management
/square6Surgical excision is the preferred option because ofthe definite risk of metastasis.
/square6Other options are cryotherapy, electrosurgery (i.e.
curettage and electrodessication), topical treat-
ment (5-fluorouracil, or imiquimod) and radio-therapy.
Malignant Melanoma
/square6Incidence of malignant melanoma has increased inrecent decades. There is no effective treatment formetastatic melanoma and hence, the main focus is
on primary prevention and early detection.
/square6Malignant melanoma has very poor prognosis with
a case fatality rate of approximately 20–25%.
/square6The main risk factors for melanoma are ultra-violet rays exposure, pale skin, melanocytic naevi,immunosuppression, and family history of mela-
noma. About 30–50% of melanomas develop in a
pre-existing melanocytic naevus. Developmentof any danger sign in a naevus should raise the
suspicion of malignant transformation.
Clinical Features
/square6Superficial spreading:  This is characterized by super-
ficial and radially expanding, pigmented macule
or plaque. Its margin is usually irregular.
/square6Lentigo maligna:  This is the in situ  phase of superficial
spreading melanoma. It occurs most often on theexposed skin of the elderly. Lentigo maligna may
have been present for many years before invasive
melanoma develops from it.
/square6Nodular:  Appears as a pigmented nodule.
/square6Acral lentiginous:  It occurs on the palms and
soles.
/square6In amelanotic melanomas, pigmentation is minimalor absent.
/square6Subungual melanomas present as painless, expand-ing areas of pigmentation under a nail.
/square6Clinical stages of malignant melanoma:
– Stage I—primary lesion only– Stage II—involvement of regional lymph nodes– Stage III—distant metastases (nodal or visceral).
Management
/square6Surgical excision is the treatment choice. Palpable
local nodes in stage II patients should be removed
by block dissection.
/square6Chemotherapy is rarely curative but can be pallia-
tive in stage III disease or earlier.
/square6Alpha-interferon may reduce recurrences in patients
with high-risk melanomas.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
16644 Q.Skin manifestations of internal disease.
/square6Many systemic diseases manifest as skin diseases which can serve as a clue to systemic disease. The type of
lesion typically relates to a specific disease or type of disease.
TABLE 16.3: Skin manifestations of internal disease
•Erythema nodosum:  TB, leprosy, syphilis, sarcoidosis, inflammatory bowel disease, SLE.
•Acanthosis nigricans:  Internal malignancy, insulin resistance.
•Pyoderma gangrenosum : Inflammatory bowel disease.
•Hyperpigmentation:  Hemochromatosis, Addison disease, ectopic ACTH syndrome, vitamin B12 deficiency, pellagra.
•Hypopigmentation:  Oculocutaneous albinism, Chediak-Higashi syndrome, phenylketonuria, systemic sclerosis (scleroderma),
leprosy, tuberous sclerosis.
•Xanthomas and xanthelasma : Elevated serum triglycerides.
•Acanthosis nigricans, necrobiosis lipoidica, and scleredema:  Diabetes mellitus.
•Thick and dry skin:  Hypothyroidism.
•Striae and skin fragility:  Cushing disease.
•Skin ulcers:  Vasculitis, sickle cell anemia, cryoglobulinemia, diabetes mellitus.
•Vesicles/bullae:  Paraneoplastic pemphigus, porphyrias.
•Purpura:  Thrombocytopenia, clotting factor defects, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, scurvy, DIC, APLA, thrombotic thrombocytopenic
purpura, cholesterol and fat emboli, systemic vasculitis, acute meningococcemia.
•Alopecia:  SLE, secondary syphilis, hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism, deficiencies of protein, biotin, zinc, and iron.
•Urticaria:  Urticarial vasculitis, hepatitis B or C infection, serum sickness.
•Acneiform eruptions:  Cushing’s disease, congenital adrenal hyperplasia, polycystic ovary syndrome.
•Telangiectasias : Carcinoid syndrome, ataxia-telangiectasia, hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia.
•Spider angioma:  Cirrhosis.
•Pruritus:  Occult cancer, often lymphoma.

17
645Q.Discuss the general management/initial stabilization
of a patient who has ingested a poison/drug over-
dose.
/square6A poison is a substance which produces adverseeffects in a living organism.
/square6Poisoning may be accidental, intentional (suicidal)or homicidal. Accidental ingestion of poison iscommon in children. Overdosage of ‘recreational’drugs is frequent in young adults. Intentional(suicidal) poisoning is seen in adults of all ages.Homicidal poisoning (with the intention of
murdering) is less common.
/square6Commonly ingested poisons are organophosphorus
and organochloride insecticides, vegetable poisons(oleander), aluminum phosphide, methyl and ethyl
alcohol, hypnotics and sedatives. Insecticide and
vegetable poisoning is common in rural areasbecause of easy availability. Sedative overdosageis mainly encountered in urban areas.
General Management of a Case of Poisoning
Management of poisoning involves the following steps:
/square6Resuscitation and initial stabilization.
/square6Diagnosis of type of poison.
/square6Prevention of further absorption of poison.
/square6Administration of antidote.
/square6Increasing the clearance of absorbed poison.
/square6Prevention of recurrence of poisoning.
Resuscitation and Initial Stabilization
/square6Airway, breathing and circulation (A, B and C)should be attended to first, even before obtaining ahistory.
Airway
/square6Airway may be compromised by aspiration of
pharyngeal secretions or vomitus, by laryngealPoisoning, Venomous Bites and
Environmental Diseases
edema in corrosive poisoning and anaphylaxis, or
stridor in strychnine poisoning. Airway can beopened by positioning, suction, or insertion of a nasal
or oropharyngeal airway. Endotracheal intubation
is required if the patient is deeply comatose withoutany gag or cough reflex. Emergency tracheostomyis required if there is laryngeal obstruction.
Breathing
/square6Once the airway is opened by the above procedures,
assess the patient for the rate and depth of breathing.Pulse oximetry can be useful to assess the adequacy
of breathing, but is not reliable in methemoglobi-
nemia or carbon monoxide poisoning. An urgentABG analysis (arterial blood gas analysis) provides
important information about blood pH, PaO
2 and
pCO2. If breathing is inadequate, it should be
assisted by bag-mask device or mechanical ventila-
tion. Supplemental oxygen should be given.
Circulation
/square6Next, assess the patient for adequacy of circulation
by measuring pulse rate and BP. Tissue perfusioncan be assessed by urinary output, skin signs, and
arterial blood pH. If BP is low, a large-bore IV line
should be inserted and infusion of fluids (DNS orNS) started. Bradycardia can occur in sedative and
OP compound ingestion and should be corrected
by atropine injection intravenously. If BP does notpick up even after infusion of fluids, inotropes such
as dopamine or noradrenaline infusion should be
started. Patient should be put on continuous electro-cardiographic monitoring.
/square6Before any fluid is given, blood should be drawnfor complete blood count, glucose, electrolytes,serum creatinine and liver tests, and toxicologic
screening.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
17646 Diagnosis of Type of Poison
/square6The diagnosis and treatment of poisons must
proceed rapidly without waiting for the results oftoxicologic screening.
/square6Type of poison, quantity and time of ingestion canbe obtained by history, physical examination andlaboratory tests. Relatives and bystanders may beable to give useful information. They should be
asked to get the container of the suspected poison
or drug. Odor or appearance of the stomach contentsmay help in identification of the poison. A toxico-logical analysis of blood can be performed if thepoison cannot be identified by the above means./square6Emesis can be induced by drinking 200 to 400 mLof a fully saturated sodium chloride solution, sub-cutaneous apomorphine, or syrup of ipecac (10 to30 mL). Apomorphine and syrup of ipecac act bystimulation of vomiting centre.
/square6Emesis is less commonly used now, because of therisk of aspiration.
Gastric Lavage
/square6It is performed by passing a wide-bore nasogastrictube. Patient should be in lateral decubitus positionwith the head 15º to 20º lower than the feet(Trendelenburg position).
/square6Stomach contents are emptied, and then lavage isperformed by introducing 200 to 300 mL fluid intothe somach at a time. The fluid is allowed to drainout by gravity. Lavage is performed till the draining
fluid is clear. Up to 3 to 5 liters of water may be
required. Warm normal saline or tap water is usedas lavage fluid to prevent hypothermia. Foodparticles may block the tube and prevent adequateemptying of the stomach. Intact tablets are incom-pletely recovered by gastric lavage.
Activated Charcoal
/square6Activated charcoal is fine charcoal powder which
is heated with steam, air, or carbon dioxide to add
more surface area.
/square6It has an extensive network of interconnecting poresthat bind (adsorb) and trap chemicals, thereby
preventing their absorption and toxicity.
/square6It is usually given after gastric lavage. The dose is
1 gm/kg body weight (maximum 50 to 60 gm) as asingle dose. Multiple doses can be used in cases of
poisons which undergo enterohepatic circulation.
Side effects of charcoal include nausea, vomiting,and diarrhea or constipation.
Whole Bowel Irrigation
/square6Whole bowel irrigation (WBI) refers to the adminis-tration of large volumes of a balanced electrolytesolution with polyethylene glycol, via a nasogastrictube, to decontaminate the GI tract without causing
fluid or electrolyte shifts. 1 to 1.5 liters of solution
per hour is given until the rectal effluent is clear,which usually takes four to six hours.
/square6WBI is particularly useful in ingestion of enteric-
coated pills, sustained-release preparations, illicit
drug packets, and large ingestions of substancespoorly bound by charcoal, such as iron, lithium andlead.
Administration of Antidote
/square6Antidotes counteract the effects of poisons byneutralizing them or by antagonizing their physio-logic effects. Antidotes are available only for fewpoisons.TABLE 17.1: Identification of poison based on clinical features
Clinical feature Possible poison/drug
Coma Narcotics, benzodiazepines, barbiturates,
alcohol, methanol, organophosphorus
Pupil size Constricted —opioid, phenothiazines,
organophosphorus
Dilated —alcohol, anticholinergics, dhatura,
botulism, carbon monoxide
Respiratory rate Reduced —opioids, benzodiazepines
Increased —salicylates, methanol, ethylene
glycol
Blood pressure Hypotension— TCAs, antihypertensives
Hypertension —cocaine, amphetamines,
sympathomimetics
Heart rate Bradycardia —organophosphorus, digoxin,
beta blockers, opioids
Tachycardia —cocaine, theophylline,
anticholinergics
Body temperature Increased —dhatura, atropine, SSRIs
Decreased —sedatives, opioids
Jaundice Phosphorus, isoniazid, rifampicin, carbon
tetrachloride, paracetamol
Cyanosis Methemoglobinemia —aniline dyes,
sulphonamides, nitrates
Cherry-colored Carbon monoxide
skin and mucousmembranes
Bullous rash Barbiturates
Dystonias, muscle P henothiazines, metoclopramide, strychnine
spasms
Burns and ulcers in Corrosive poison
the lips and mouth
Prevention of Absorption of Poison
Emesis
/square6Vomiting can remove unabsorbed poison from the
stomach when performed within 3–4 hours ofingestion. Patient must be fully conscious and havestable breathing and circulation. Emesis is contra-indicated in corrosive and hydrocarbon (like kero-
sene) ingestion. Kerosene can cause fatal chemical
pneumonitis if aspirated during vomiting.

/square6Poisoning, Venomous Bites and Environmental Diseases647
17Increasing the Clearance of Absorbed Poison
Alkaline Diuresis
/square6Alkalinization of urine enhances excretion of acidic
drugs by increasing the ionic form of the drug
in urine, thereby preventing its reabsorption by
tubules.
/square6It is effective in poisoning due to salicylates, barbi-turates, sulfonamides, barium, bromides, calcium,
etc.
Hemodialysis and Hemoperfusion
/square6Dialysis is based on the property of drugs and
toxins to diffuse down a concentration gradientacross a semipermeable membrane. Hemodialysisis useful in poisoning of methanol, ethylene glycol,
isopropanol, salicylates, theophylline, and lithium.
/square6Hemoperfusion refers to the circulation of blood
through an extracorporeal circuit containing anadsorbent such as activated charcoal or polystyrene
resin. It is useful in poisoning due to Amanita mush-
room, amitriptyline, barbiturates, digitalis, metho-trexate, paraquat, phenytoin and theophylline.
Prevention of Recurrence of Poisoning
/square6Some patients may make another suicidal attempt
by consuming poison. Hence, all patients should
be referred for psychiatric evaluation.
Q.Discuss the clinical features, diagnosis and
management of organophosphorous or carbamate
poisoning.
Q.Intermediate syndrome.
/square6The most common mode of poisoning in India is
with organophosphorus (OP) compounds because
of their wide availability./square6OP compounds are widely used as pesticides in
agriculture. OP nerve agents are used in chemicalwarfare.
/square6Carbamates were synthesized after OP compounds.
The use of OP compounds has declined after the
introduction of carbamates.
Organophosphorus compounds
•Insecticides:  Dichlorvos, fenthion, malathion, methami-
dophos, chlorpyrifos, diazinon, parathion, quinalphos
•Nerve agents:  Sarin, tabun, soman
Carbamates
• Carbaryl, aldicarb and propoxur
Mechanism of Toxicity
/square6OP compounds are well absorbed through the skin,
lungs, and gastrointestinal tract. They inactivate theenzyme acetylcholinesterase (AChE) by phosphory-
lation leading to the accumulation of acetylcholine
(ACh) at cholinergic synapses. After some time, theacetylcholinesterase-OP compound undergoes aconformational change, known as “aging,” whichrenders the enzyme irreversibly resistant to reacti-vation by oximes.
/square6Unlike OP compounds, carbamates are transientacetylcholinesterase inhibitors, which sponta-neously hydrolyze from acetylcholinesterase sitewithin 48 hours. Hence, carbamate toxicity tends
to be of shorter duration than that caused by equi-
valent doses of organophosphates. However, themortality rates are similar to OP compounds.
/square6Recovery follows the reappearance of active AChE
following synthesis or spontaneous hydrolysis of
phosphorylated AChE.
Clinical Features
Clinical features can be divided into following3 phases:
/square6Acute cholinergic phase
/square6Intermediate syndrome (IMS)
/square6Organophosphate-induced delayed neuropathy
(OPIDN).
Acute Cholinergic Phase
/square6This is due to acetylcholine excess at the synapses.
Symptoms usually start within one hour of expo-sure.
/square6Features of cholinergic excess can be divided into
muscarinic, nicotinic and CNS manifestations.
Muscarinic manifestations
/square6Miosis, blurring of vision.
/square6Increased lacrimation.
/square6Increased salivation.
/square6Vomiting and fecal incontinence due to excess GI
motility.
/square6Increased frequency of micturition.TABLE 17.2: Commonly used antidotes
Poison/drug Antidote
Organophosphates Atropine, PAM
Paracetamol N-acetylcysteineCyanide Dicobalt edetate, sodium nitrate
Methanol Fomepizole, ethanol
Amanita phalloides Benzyl penicillin
Calcium-channel blockers Calcium chloride
Methotrexate Folinic acid
Anticholinergics PhysostigmineBeta blockers Glucagon
Benzodiazepines Flumazenil
Warfarin-like compounds Vitamin KLead, arsenic, mercury Dimercaprol (BAL), D-penicill-
amine
Iron DeferrioxamineOpioids Naloxone
Digitalis Digoxin immune Fab (Digibind)

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
17648 /square6Bradycardia, conduction blocks.
/square6Bronchorrhea, bronchospasm, and pulmonary
edema.
/square6The muscarinic signs can be remembered by themnemonic DUMBELS:  Defecation, urination,
miosis, bronchorrhea/bronchospasm/bradycardia,emesis, lacrimation, salivation.
Nicotinic manifestations
/square6Fasciculations.
/square6Muscle weakness and paralysis due to depolarizing
block at neuromuscular junctions similar to succinyl-
choline.
CNS manifestations
/square6Anxiety, restlessness, unconsciousness, convulsions.
Intermediate Syndrome (IMS)
/square6This begins 1 to 3 days after exposure. It usually
occurs after the acute cholinergic phase, but mayoccur along with it.
/square6There are several postulations regarding themechanism of intermediate syndrome: Persistence
of nicotinic effects due to lack of early use of oximes;
release of organophosphates from the adiposetissue acting on the nicotinic receptors; and neuro-muscular junction dysfunction.
/square6Manifestations are mainly neurological and includeweakness of neck muscles, decreased deep tendon
reflexes, cranial nerve abnormalities, proximal and
respiratory muscle weakness or paralysis. If endo-tracheal intubation and ventilation are not instituted
early, respiratory failure and death may occur.Paralysis may continue for 2–18 days. Recoveryfrom IMS is complete with adequate ventilatory
care unless OPIDN develops.
Organophosphate-induced Delayed Neuropathy (OPIDN)
/square6This occurs about 1 to 3 weeks after acute OP expo-
sure. Agents like triorthocresyl phosphate andchlorpyrifos are frequently associated with OPIDN.Carbamates are only rarely associated with OPIDN.
It is due to degeneration of long myelinated nerve
fibers.
/square6Affected patients present with transient, painful“stocking-glove” paresthesias followed by asymmetrical motor polyneuropathy characterizedby flaccid weakness of the lower limbs, which
ascends to involve the upper limbs. Sensory loss is
often mild. Recovery from OPIDN is usuallyincomplete.
Diagnosis
/square6History and examination findings.
/square6Plasma cholinesterase levels are reduced to lessthan 50% of normal.Management
General Measures
/square6Further exposure is prevented by removing thecontaminated clothing and contact lenses.
/square6Patient is admitted to ICU and vital parameters are
continuously monitored.
/square6Oxygen.
/square6Gastric lavage.
/square6Activated charcoal.
/square6IV fluids.
/square6Endotracheal intubation and ventilator support if
required.
Specific Measures
/square6Atropine antagonizes the muscarinic effects ofacetylcholine. Atropine does not reverse nicotiniceffects such as muscle fasciculation. Initially 2 to
5 mg is given IV. If no effect is noted, the dose is
doubled every 3 to 5 minutes until the muscarinicsigns and symptoms are reversed. Atropineinfusion is usually required for several days afterthe exposure. Signs of adequate atropinization aretachycardia, dilatation of pupils, and dryness of
mucous membranes. Excess atropine causes
agitation, confusion, urinary retention, ileus, andhyperthermia.
/square6Oximes such as pralidoxime (PAM) and obidoxime
are cholinesterase reactivating agents and are
effective in treating both muscarinic and nicotiniceffects of OP compound. Dose of PAM is 2 gm IVinfusion over 30 minutes. Oximes are more effectivein poisoning due to compounds which age slowlysuch as diethyl compounds.
/square6Magnesium sulphate blocks ligand-gated calciumchannels, resulting in reduced acetylcholine releasefrom pre-synaptic terminals, thus improving func-tion at neuromuscular junctions, and reduced CNS
overstimulation mediated via NMDA receptor
activation. Intravenous MgSO
4 (4 gm) given on the
first day after admission has been shown to decreasehospitalization period and improve outcomes inpatients with OP poisoning.
/square6Intermediate syndrome is treated by ventilatorsupport.
/square6There is no specific therapy for OPIDN. Regular
physiotherapy may reduce deformities and muscle
wasting.
Q.Discuss the clinical features and management of
sedative-hypnotic (benzodiazepines, barbiturates)
overdose.
/square6Sedative-hypnotics are a group of drugs that causeCNS depression. These drugs include benzodiaze-pines, barbiturates, and other sleeping pills such
as zolpidem and zaleplon.

/square6Poisoning, Venomous Bites and Environmental Diseases649
17Mechanism of Action
/square6All the sedative-hypnotics are general CNS
depressants. Most stimulate the activity of GABA,an inhibitory neurotransmitter in the CNS.
Clinical Features of Acute Intoxication
/square6Clinical features are mainly due to CNS depression
and include the following:
– Slurred speech.
– Incoordination and unsteady gait.
– Impaired attention or memory.
– Impaired consciousness ranging from stupor to
coma.
– Nystagmus and decreased reflexes.
– Severe overdose may lead to respiratory
depression.
/square6Psychiatric manifestations include inappropriate
behavior, labile mood, and impaired judgment and
social functioning.
/square6Bradycardia and hypotension.
/square6Bullous skin lesions may be seen in barbituratepoisoning in addition to above features.
Investigations
/square6Complete blood count (CBC).
/square6Arterial blood gas (ABG).
/square6Blood glucose, electrolytes.
/square6ECG.
/square6Toxicology screen.
Management
General Measures
/square6Patient is admitted to ICU and vital parameters arecontinuously monitored.
/square6Oxygen.
/square6Gastric lavage is not advised in pure benzodia-zepine overdose. However, it is required in mixedand other sedative hypnotic drug poisoning.
/square6Activated charcoal. Repeated doses are necessaryin barbiturate poisoning.
/square6IV fluids.
/square6Endotracheal intubation and ventilator support ifrequired.
Specific Measures
/square6Benzodiazepines:  Flumazenil is a benzodiazepine
antagonist which can be used in acute benzodia-
zepine intoxication. The starting dose of flumazenilis 0.2 mg intravenously (IV) over 30 seconds.Further doses of 0.5 mg may be given every60 seconds up to a total of 5 mg. It can provokewithdrawal seizures in patients with benzodia-
zepine dependence.
/square6Barbiturates:  Alkaline diuresis and hemodialysis are
helpful in enhancing barbiturate removal.Q.Aluminum and zinc phosphide poisoning.
/square6Aluminum phosphide is a solid fumigant pesticide
available in tablet form (sometimes referred to as
rice tablets). Zinc phosphide usually comes as a
black powder. Both are used to protect grains frompests and rats. Poisoning is most common in thepost-harvest season from July to September.
/square6The following description applies to both aluminumand zinc phosphide.
Mechanism of Toxicity
/square6After ingestion, both aluminum and zinc phos-phide react with water in the stomach to releasephosphine gas which has local as well as systemictoxicity.
/square6Local effects are severe burning retrosternal painand vomiting. Systemic toxicity occurs after absorp-tion from GI tract.
/square6Mechanism of systemic toxicity includes cellularhypoxia due to the effect on mitochondria, inhibi-tion of cytochrome c oxidase and formation of
highly reactive hydroxyl radicals. This leads tomultiorgan dysfunction.
Clinical Features
/square6Hypotension, cardiac failure due to myocarditis,acute kidney failure, liver cell necrosis, acute lunginjury, gastrointestinal symptoms (nausea, vomit-
ing, and diarrhea), and metabolic acidosis.
/square6Hypo- or hypermagnesemia can occur.
Diagnosis
/square6Detecting phosphine in the exhaled air or stomachaspirate by using silver nitrate-impregnated strip
or gas chromatography.
Management
/square6Gastric lavage with KMnO4 (1:10000) or with mag-
nesium sulfate (MgSO4) to oxidize the unabsorbed
poison. Gastric lavage with coconut oil has alsobeen found to be helpful.
/square6Activated charcoal orally or through nasogastrictube to adsorb phosphine from the gastrointestinaltract.
/square6Antacids or H2 blockers to reduce burning painin the stomach and to reduce the absorption of
phosphine.
/square6Magnesium sulphate (MgSO4) is very effective
in counteracting the toxic effects of aluminum
phosphide. Magnesium has anti-hypoxic, anti-arrhythmic, and antioxidant properties, hence iseffective in reducing the morbidity and mortalityof aluminum phosphide poisoning. Dose is 1 gmIV stat, followed by 1 gm every 4–6 hours for 5 to
7 days.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
17650 /square6Sodium bicarbonate infusion can be given to correct
metabolic acidosis.
/square6Mortality is high and most patients die despiteoptimal supportive care.
Q.Paracetamol (acetaminophen) poisoning.
/square6Paracetamol poisoning is common because of its
wide availability as an over-the-counter drug.
/square6Maximum recommended daily dose is 4 gm inadults.
/square6Toxicity is likely to occur at doses greater than250 mg/kg per day. Almost all patients who ingest>350 mg/kg develop severe liver toxicity.
Mechanism of Toxicity
/square6Paracetamol is metabolized by conjugation in theliver to nontoxic compounds. In acute overdose,metabolism by conjugation becomes saturated, andexcess paracetamol is oxidatively metabolized by
the CYP enzymes to the hepatotoxic metabolite, N-
acetyl-p-benzoquinone imine (NAPQI) whichcauses hepatic injury.
Clinical Features
/square6Initial complaints are nausea, vomiting, diapho-resis, pallor, lethargy, and malaise.
/square6Liver damage usually develops 1 to 3 days afteringestion. Jaundice, hepatic encephalopathy, hyper-ammonemia, bleeding diathesis and marked eleva-tion of liver enzymes (AST and ALT >1000 IU/L)develop.
/square6Rarely, renal failure and acute pancreatitis mayoccur.
/square6Confirmation of diagnosis and severity of poisoningcan be assessed by measurement of serum para-
cetamol levels.
Management
/square6Gastric lavage.
/square6Activated charcoal.
/square6The antidote is N-acetylcysteine (NAC), which is
most effective if given within 10 hours of theoverdose. NAC works through multiple routes. Itprevents binding of NAPQI to hepatic macromole-cules, acts as a substitute for glutathione, is aprecursor for sulfate, and reduces NAPQI back to
acetaminophen. It can be given either orally or
intravenously. Oral regimen is loading dose of140 mg/kg stat followed by 17 doses of 70 mg/kggiven every 4 hours.
/square6Methionine 12 gm orally 4th hourly, to a total offour doses, is an alternative if NAC is not avail-able.
/square6Liver transplantation should be considered in
patients who develop acute liver failure.Q.Salicylate (aspirin) poisoning.
/square6Aspirin is widely used as antiplatelet agent in
patients with cardiovascular and cerebrovascular
disease.
/square6Ingestion of greater than 150, 250 and 500 mg
aspirin/kg body weight produces mild, moderate
and severe poisoning respectively.
Pathophysiology
/square6Aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) is rapidly converted
to salicylic acid in the body. Other salicylates, suchas salicylic acid (a topical keratolytic agent and wartremover) and methyl salicylate (oil of wintergreen),can also cause intoxication when ingested.
/square6Salicylate directly stimulates cerebral medulla andcauses hyperventilation and respiratory alkalosis.As it is metabolized, it causes an uncoupling ofoxidative phosphorylation in the mitochondria.This leads to anaerobic metabolism and increase in
lactic acid levels resulting in metabolic acidosis.
Hyperventilation worsens in an attempt to compen-sate for the metabolic acidosis. Eventually, thepatient fatigues and is no longer able to compensatevia hyperventilation, and metabolic acidosisprevails. This results in hemodynamic instability
and end-organ damage.
Clinical Features
/square6Nausea and vomiting due to irritation of the gastricmucosa and stimulation of the chemoreceptor
trigger zone.
/square6Tinnitus and deafness.
/square6Hyperventilation due to direct stimulation of therespiratory center.
/square6Petechiae and subconjunctival hemorrhages can
occur due to reduced platelet aggregation.
/square6Renal failure and CNS effects such as agitation, con-
fusion, coma and fits can occur in severe poisoning.Rarely, pulmonary and cerebral edema can occur.
/square6Death can occur as a consequence of CNS depressionand cardiovascular collapse.
Investigations
/square6Plasma salicylate concentration helps in assessingthe severity of poisoning
/square6Serum lactate level
/square6Serum electrolytes, including calcium and magne-sium
/square6ABG
/square6LFTs
/square6CBC
/square6Coagulation studies
/square6ECG to evaluate for arrhythmias
/square6Consider a CT head if the patient has altered mental
status.

/square6Poisoning, Venomous Bites and Environmental Diseases651
17Management
/square6Multiple doses of activated charcoal.
/square6Intravenous fluid should be administered. 5%
dextrose with 3 amps of sodium bicarbonate helpsin correcting both dehydration and metabolic acidosis.
/square6Urinary alkalization enhances the clearance of
salicylate.
/square6Hemodialysis is very effective at removing salicy-
late and should be considered if there is cerebral orpulmonary edema, renal failure or serum salicylate
concentration is >100 mg/dL.
Q.Cyanide poisoning.
/square6Cyanide is among the most rapidly lethal poisons
known to man. It causes death within minutes tohours of exposure.
/square6Cyanide exists in gaseous (hydrogen cyanide),liquid, and solid (potassium cyanide) forms.Depending on its form, cyanide may cause toxicitythrough inhalation, ingestion, dermal absorption,or parenteral administration. Smoke inhalation,suicidal ingestion, and industrial exposures are the
most frequent sources of cyanide poisoning. Inhala-
tion of hydrocyanic acid or ingestion of inorganiccyanide salts or cyanide releasing substances suchas cyanamide result in poisoning. Infusion of sodiumnitroprusside used in hypertensive emergencies canalso cause cyanide toxicity. Amygdala from bitteralmonds also releases cyanide on digestion.
Mechanism of Toxicity
/square6Cyanide is a mitochondrial toxin. It inhibits cyto-
chrome oxidase in the mitochondria leading to
stoppage of oxidative phosphorylation resulting inhistotoxic anoxia, leading to cellular dysfunctionand death. There is formation of lactic acid and thedevelopment of metabolic acidosis due to anaerobicmetabolism.
Investigations
Arterial and venous blood gases
/square6Arterial oxygen tension is normal and venousoxygen tension is abnormally high due to non-utilization of oxygen by cells, resulting in a
decreased arteriovenous oxygen difference (<10%).
A high-anion-gap metabolic acidosis is seen due tolactic acidosis as a result of anaerobic metabolism.
Blood lactate level
/square6Elevated due to anaerobic metabolism. It is a
sensitive marker for cyanide toxicity.
RBC or plasma cyanide concentration
/square6The preferred test is red blood cell cyanide concen-
tration. This test can be used for confirmation of
cyanide poisoning, but results may not be available
early to start treatment.Methemoglobin level
/square6Presence of methemoglobin in the blood is re-
assuring because it indicates that there is no freecyanide available for binding, because methemo-
globin vigorously binds cyanide to form cyano-
methemoglobin.
/square6Methemoglobin level can also be used a guide for
the use of methemoglobin-inducing antidotes, such
as sodium nitrite. Elevated level of methemoglobin(>10%) indicates that further nitrite therapy is notindicated.
Clinical Features
/square6There may be characteristic smell of bitter almonds.
/square6After inhaling cyanide, there is headache, anxiety,nausea, and a metallic taste. There may be eye andmucous membrane irritation, bronchorrhea, cough,and dyspnea.
/square6Ingestion of cyanide salts results in gastric irritation,causing vomiting and abdominal pain.
/square6Multiorgan failure:  Renal failure, hepatic necrosis,
pulmonary edema, rhabdomyolysis.
/square6Hypotension and bradycardia are pathognomonicfor cyanide poisoning though tachycardia is presentin initial stages.
/square6Skin appears flushed and cherry-red due to non-utilization of oxygen by cells.
/square6Convulsions, coma and death occur within few
hours.
/square6Cyanide poisoning should be differentiated from
carbon monoxide poisoning which can present with
similar features.
Investigations
/square6Routines tests:  Complete blood count, electrolytes,
urinalysis, LFT, RFT.
/square6Carboxyhemoglobin level (if in a fire).
/square6ABG usually shows high anion gap metabolicacidosis. Venous PO
2 level is high.
/square6Serum lactate level is elevated.
/square6Plasma cyanide concentration level.
/square6Chest X-ray and ECG
Treatment
/square6Gastric lavage.
/square6Activated charcoal.
/square6Hydroxocobalamin, a precursor of vitamin B12,
contains a cobalt moiety which binds to cyanide,
forming cyanocobalamin. This molecule is stable,with few side effects, and is easily excreted in theurine. Hydroxocobalamin is considered the firstchoice therapy for cyanide poisoning. It is givenintravenously. Combination of hydroxocobalamin
and sodium thiosulfate is effective and safe in
severe cyanide poisoning.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
17652 /square6A cyanide antidote kit  may be used in place of
hydroxocobalamin if it is not available.  It contains
sodium nitrite and sodium thiosulfate. Sodiumnitrite is given intravenously. It induces methemo-globinemia, which binds to cyanide to form lesstoxic cyanomethemoglobin. Sodium nitrite should
be followed by intravenous injection of sodium
thiosulfate which converts cyanide to thiocyanate,which is easily excreted by kidneys.
/square6Use of hyperbaric oxygen remains controversial.
Q.Methanol (methyl alcohol) poisoning.
/square6Methanol (wood alcohol) is used as a denaturant
and is a component of varnishes, paint removers,windshield washers, copy-machine fluid, antifreezesolutions, and industrial solvents.
/square6Ingestion of methyl alcohol usually occurs withingestion of cheap illicit liquor ( hooch ). The toxic
dose is 30 mL of a 40% solution.
Mechanism of Toxicity
/square6Methanol itself is not very toxic except CNSdepression.
/square6Toxicity is mainly due to its metabolites such asformaldehyde and formic acid which are producedby alcohol dehydrogenase.
Clinical Features
/square6Initial manifestations are due to methanol itself and
include inebriation, gastritis, abdominal pain,
nausea and vomiting. High dose causes obtunda-tion, convulsions and coma.
/square6Late manifestations are due to formic acid and
include retinal injury, metabolic acidosis, seizures,
coma and death. Ocular toxicity manifests asdiminished vision, flashing spots, dilated or fixedpupils, hyperemia of the optic disc, retinal edemaand blindness.
Investigations
/square6Serum methanol levels.
/square6Arterial blood gas (ABG) shows high anion gapmetabolic acidosis.
/square6Renal function tests and liver function tests.
/square6CT scan of the brain shows bilateral putamennecrosis.
Management
General Measures
/square6Correction of acidosis by sodium bicarbonateinfusion.
/square6Gastric lavage is useful if performed within 1 hour
of ingestion. Activated charcoal is not useful.
/square6Control of seizures.
/square6IV fluids.Specific Measures
/square6Fomepizole (4-methylpyrazole) blocks alcohol
dehydrogenase and prevents the formation of toxicmetabolites.
/square6If fomepizole is not available, ethanol is given tosaturate alcohol dehydrogenase in the liver andprevent the formation of the toxic metabolites ofmethanol. A 5% solution of ethanol is prepared;
15 mL/kg is given as a loading dose and than
2–3 mL/kg/h as maintenance dose. It can be givenorally also.
/square6Hemodialysis should be done if there is severe
metabolic acidosis, or evidence of end-organ
damage (e.g. visual changes, renal failure).
Q.Opioid/morphine poisoning.
/square6Opioids include heroin, morphine, methadone,
codeine, pethidine, dihydrocodeine and dextro-propoxyphene. Heroin (diacetylmorphine, diamor-phine) is an artificial alkaloid derived from morphine,
is the most dangerous drug of addiction.
/square6Opioids are commonly used as drugs of abuse. They
give a rapid, intensely pleasurable experience, oftenaccompanied by heightened sexual arousal. Physical
dependence occurs within a few weeks of regular use.
/square6Overdose may occur due to therapeutic use, recrea-
tional use, intended self-harm, attempt to hidedrugs from law enforcement agencies (“bodystuffing”), swallowing packaged drugs in order to
transport them across borders (“body packing”),
and unintentional pediatric exposures.
Clinical Features of Overdose
/square6The classic signs of opioid intoxication include:
– Decreased conscious level.
– Decreased respiration.
– Decreased bowel sounds.
– Decreased pupil size (pinpoint pupils).
/square6There may be signs of intravenous drug abuse (e.g.
needle track marks).
/square6Severe poisoning is indicated by respiratorydepression, hypotension, ARDS and hypothermia.Death occurs due to respiratory arrest or aspirationof gastric contents.
/square6Dextropropoxyphene can also cause ventriculararrhythmias and heart blocks.
Management
General Measures
/square6Maintenance of airway.
/square6Supplementary high-flow oxygen.
/square6Endotracheal intubation and ventilatory support ifrequired.
/square6Gastric lavage and activated charcoal are usually
not indicated because of risk of aspiration.

/square6Poisoning, Venomous Bites and Environmental Diseases653
17Specific Measures
/square6Naloxone is a specific opioid antagonist which
reverses the features of opioid toxicity. It is givenas IV bolus (0.8–2 mg) and repeated every 2 minutes
until the level of consciousness and respiratory rate
increase and the pupils dilate. This is followed byintravenous infusion of naloxone.
/square6Withdrawal symptoms can be managed by substi-tution with oral methadone.
Q.Enumerate the common plant poisons.
Common plant poisons are as follows:
/square6Poison hemlock
/square6Strychnos nux-vomica
/square6Cannabis sativa
/square6Belladonna
/square6Datura
/square6Oleander
/square6Castor beans
/square6Abrus precatorius
/square6Argemone mexicana
Q.Oleander poisoning ( Cerbera thevetia; Cerbera
odallam;  yellow oleander).
/square6This is an ornamental plant that is grown for its
yellow bell-shaped flowers in the gardens of India.
/square6It contains highly toxic cardiac glycosides whichare responsible for various heart blocks, brady-arrhythmias and tachyarrhythmias.
/square6All parts of the plant contain toxin, but seeds havemaximum amount.
/square6The roots and seeds are used as abortifacients, for
suicidal and homicidal purposes and also as cattle
poisons.
Clinical Features
/square6GI symptoms—dryness of the throat, vomiting,diarrhea.
/square6CNS effects—dizziness, dilated pupils, muscular
weakness, tetanic convulsions.
/square6Cardiac effects—bradycardia, irregular pulse, heart
blocks.
/square6Death may occur from circulatory failure.
Management
/square6Gastric lavage.
/square6Repeated doses of activated charcoal.
/square6Correction of acidosis, fluid and electrolyte distur-bances.
/square6Atropine and pacing for bradycardia and heart
blocks.
/square6Digoxin specific Fab antibodies can be used in
severe poisoning.Q.Datura poisoning.
/square6Datura stramonium  (also known as thorn apple,
angel’s trumpet, Devil’s trumpet, Devil’s weed, etc.)
is a common weed along roadsides, in cornfields and
pastures and in waste areas. Its toxic componentsare tropane belladonna alkaloids which have anti-cholinergic action. It has been used voluntarily byteenagers for its hallucinogenic effect. Scopolamine,a muscarinic antagonist is thought to be mainly
responsible for the toxic anticholinergic effects. The
seeds and fruits are the most poisonous parts ofthe plant.
Clinical Features
/square6Datura produces anticholinergic syndrome.
/square6Initial symptoms are dry mouth and throat, burningpain in the stomach and difficulty in swallowingand talking.
/square6Later, giddiness, ataxia, incoordination of muscles,flushed appearance of the face, dry hot skin, diplopia,
dilated pupils with loss of accommodation,
reddening of the conjunctiva and drowsiness ensue.Sometimes, an erythematous rash appears all overthe body.
/square6Delirium, stupor, convulsions, and coma occur insevere poisoning.
/square6Death can occur from respiratory failure.
/square6Classically the effects of Datura are described as“hot as a hare” (rise in skin temperature), “blindas a bat” (diplopia, loss of accommodation), “dry
as a bone” (dryness of mouth, skin), “red as a
beet” (cutaneous flushing) and “mad as a hatter”(delirium).
Management
/square6Gastric lavage with potassium permanganate solu-tion or 5% tannic acid solution.
/square6Activated charcoal.
/square6Delirium is treated with sedatives.
/square6Cholinergic agents such as neostigmine, physostig-
mine or methacholine may be given to counteract
anticholinergic effects of Datura.
Q.Lead poisoning (plumbism).
/square6Lead exposure can occur in numerous work settings,
such as manufacturing or use of batteries, solder,ammunitions, paint, car radiators, cable and wires,some cosmetics, ceramic ware with lead glazes, tincans and lead pipes used in plumbing. Earlier lead
was being added to gasoline and petrol to increase
the octane level, but this practice has been dis-continued and only unleaded fuel is available now.Lead is also found in some traditional Hispanic andAyurvedic medicines.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
17654 /square6Lead toxicity usually results from chronic repeated
exposure and is rare after a single ingestion. Lead-containing bullets lodged in the body can result inchronic lead toxicity.
Pathophysiology
/square6Lead is absorbed from the lungs or gastrointestinaltract. In adults, absorption of lead via the respira-tory tract is the most significant route of entry. GI
absorption can also be significant, if working and/
or eating in a lead-contaminated environment. GIabsorption is the predominant route in children.
/square6Once absorbed, lead is distributed to the blood, softtissues, and skeleton. In blood, 99% of lead is boundto the erythrocytes.
/square6Lead is a toxic metal that affects many organ systemsand functions in humans. It inhibits sulfhydryl-dependent enzymes such as gamma-aminolevulinicacid dehydratase (ALA-D) and ferrochelatasewhich are important for heme synthesis. It alsointerferes with mitochondrial respiration and
various nerve functions. Lead can also affect DNA
and RNA. Lead has effects on cell membranes,interfering with various energy and transportsystems.
Clinical Features
/square6Colicky abdominal pain, constipation, joint pains,muscle aches, headache, anorexia, decreased libido,difficulty concentrating and deficits in short-term
memory, anemia, and nephropathy.
/square6Coma and convulsions may occur in severe
poisoning.
/square6A bluish lead line may be seen at the gum-toothline, and is due to reaction of lead with dentalplaque.
/square6Chronic lead poisoning can cause learning dis-orders (in children) and motor neuropathy (e.g.wrist drop).
Diagnosis
/square6Whole blood lead levels above ≥5 mcg/dL are
diagnostic of lead poisoning. Level >10 mcg/dL for
extended period of time is associated with impairedneurobehavioral development in children. Level of>50 mcg/dL may be associated with headache,irritability, subclinical neuropathy, colicky abdo-minal pain, etc. Level greater than 70 mcg/dL is
often associated with severe poisoning and acute
encephalopathy.
/square6Microcytic anemia with basophilic stippling.
/square6Elevated free erythrocyte protoporphyrin level isoften inaccurate and is not used now.
/square6X-ray fluorescence is a new technology that can be
used to make rapid, noninvasive measurements of
lead in bone.Treatment
/square6Maintain airway and treat coma and convulsionsin severe poisoning.
/square6Avoid further exposure—if a large lead-containingobject (e.g. fishing weight) has been ingested, it shouldbe removed by repeated cathartics, whole bowel
irrigation, endoscopy, or even surgical removal to
prevent subacute lead poisoning. Workers with asingle lead level greater than 60 mcg/dL must beremoved from the site of exposure.
/square6Chelation therapy—patients with severe intoxication(encephalopathy or levels greater than 70 mcg/dL)should receive calcium EDTA. Dimercaprol (BAL)can be used in addition to EDTA. An oral chelator,
succimer (DMSA—dimercaptosuccinic acid) is
available for use in children.
Q.Arsenic poisoning.
/square6Arsenic is a metalloid element. It is tasteless, odor-
less, and well absorbed after ingestion or inhalation.Common sources of exposure are ground water andfood with high arsenic content.
/square6In exposed individuals, high concentrations ofarsenic are present in bone, hair and nails.
/square6The primary target organs for arsenic toxicity arethe gastrointestinal tract, skin, bone marrow,kidneys, and peripheral nervous system.
Mechanism of Toxicity
/square6Arsenic inhibits the enzyme pyruvate dehydro-genase complex, which catalyzes the oxidation of
pyruvate to acetyl-CoA. This leads to disrupted
energy system of the cell resulting in cell death.
Clinical Features
Acute Poisoning
/square6Classic acute toxicity presents with gastroenteritisfollowed by hypotension.
/square6This can occur after ingestion or inhalation ofarsenic dusts or fumes.
/square6Symptoms may develop within minutes or hours.
/square6Initially GI symptoms are seen and include nausea,
vomiting, abdominal pain, and diarrhea. There may
be a garlic odor of the breath and stool.
/square6These are followed by dehydration, hypotension,irregular pulse and cardiac instability.
/square6Acute encephalopathy may develop and lead todelirium, coma, and seizures.
/square6Renal injury can lead to proteinuria, hematuria, andacute tubular necrosis.
/square6In severe cases, shock, ARDS, and death may occur.
/square6If patients survive the initial illness, hepatitis,pancytopenia, and sensorimotor peripheral neuro-
pathy may develop.

/square6Poisoning, Venomous Bites and Environmental Diseases655
17Chronic Poisoning
/square6Chronic arsenic exposure from drinking water has
been reported in many parts of the world.
/square6Manifestations are peripheral neuropathy, skineruptions, hepatotoxicity, bone marrow depression,and increased risk of cancers.
/square6Mee’s lines (transverse white lines on fingernails)may be seen in some.
Management
/square6Elimination of further exposure.
/square6Gastric lavage and activated charcoal in cases ofingestion.
/square6Chelation is indicated in patients with symptomaticarsenic poisoning. Dimercaprol (British Anti-Lewisite, or BAL) and succimer (DMSA) are usedas chelating agents.
Q.Classify poisonous snakes. Discuss the clinical mani-
festations, diagnosis and management of snakebites.
/square6Snakebite is a common life-threatening condition
worldwide, especially in tropical countries. Farmers,
hunters and rice-pickers are at particular risk ofsnakebite.
/square6More than 5 million poisonous snakebites occurannually worldwide, with >125,000 deaths. Nearly40% of bites by venomous snakes do not producesigns of envenomation. The peak seasonal incidenceis usually during the monsoon. Most of the bitesoccur in the evening, after sunset, when snakes
come out for feeding. Nearly 75% of snakebitesoccur in outdoor and in rural settings. Males arebitten twice as often as females. Most frequent sitesof bite are lower limbs.
Major Families of Poisonous Snakes
Family Main toxic effect
Elapidae:  Cobras, kraits, mambas, Neu rotoxic
coral snakes
Hydrophidae : Sea snakes Myotoxic
Viperidae : Vipers and pit vipers Severe local reaction, co-
agulation defects, renal
failure
Composition of Snake Venoms
Snake venoms are complex mixtures of enzymes, poly-
peptides, glycoproteins, and metal ions. Most snake
venoms have multisystem effects. Major components
are as follows:
/square6Hemorrhagins—cause vascular leakage and bleeding.
/square6Procoagulants—activate clotting factors and causeconsumptive coagulopathy.
/square6Proteolytic enzymes—cause local tissue necrosis,
coagulation defects, and organ damage.
/square6Cardiotoxins—myocarditis, reduce cardiac output.
/square6Neurotoxins—act at peripheral neuromuscular
junctions and inhibit nerve impulses.
/square6Myotoxins—local tissue necrosis, rhabdomyolysis.
(contd. )
TABLE 17.3:  Differentiating venomous from nonvenomous snakes
Character Venomous Nonvenomous
Teeth In upper jaw two fangs are present which are All the teeth in the upper jaw are uniform and
modified teeth no fangs present
Snakebite mark 1 or 2 punctures on the skin by fangs Many punctures made by maxillary teeth but no
fang marks


/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
17656
Clinical Features of Venomous Snakebite
/square6Snakebite victims usually develop anxiety and fear.
This may lead to hyperventilation which causes pares-
thesia, and carpopedal spasm. Some may develop
syncope, vasovagal shock and may even collapse.Clinical presentation of snakebite varies depend-
ing on the type of snake bitten, age of the patient,
the area bitten, and the amount of poison injected.
Local Manifestations
/square6It manifests as pain, tenderness, paresthesia at local
site followed by swelling of bitten limb. Entire limb
with adjacent trunk can get involved. Severe localreaction leads to local tissue necrosis and bullae
formation. Local bleeding and ecchymotic patches
may develop due to hemostatic defects. Severe limbpain, absence of arterial pulse and cold limb suggest
compartment syndrome (due to rise in the pressure
of facial compartments which block the arteries)and may lead to ischemia and gangrene of the limb.
Other complications like secondary infections,
tetanus and gas gangrene may also develop.
Neurotoxicity
/square6Neurotoxic features are prominently seen with
elapidae bites (cobra, krait, coral snakes). Features
start within 6 hours but may be delayed.
/square6Paralysis first appears as bilateral ptosis followedsequentially by bilateral ophthalmoplegia, paralysisof muscles of palate, jaw, tongue, larynx, neck and
muscles of deglutition. Pupillary reflexes are preser-
ved till late stages. Diaphragm paralysis causesrespiratory failure. Patients may become drowsy
which may progress to coma. Neurotoxic effects are
completely reversible, either spontaneously overseveral days or weeks, or immediately with anti-
snake venom and anticholinesterases (neostig-
mine).TABLE 17.3:  Differentiating venomous from nonvenomous snakes (contd.)
Character Venomous Nonvenomous
Pupil shape Vertical slit-like Round
Head Triangular and broad Elongated and oval
Tail Flat or cylindrical Cylindrical or blunt
Ventral scales Large and cover the belly region completely Small or large but not cover the belly region
completely
Head scales Small or large Large shield
Dorsal scales Smaller (hexagonal in krait) Large, not in hexagonal shapeColor Bright color Not bright (some nonvenomous snakes such as
python, sand boa, etc. are also brightly colored)


/square6Poisoning, Venomous Bites and Environmental Diseases657
17Cardiotoxicity
/square6Features include tachycardia, hypotension, and
ECG changes. Myocarditis can lead to congestivecardiac failure. Myocardial infarction and sudden
cardiac arrest may occur.
Hemostatic Abnormalities
/square6These are due to hemorrhagins and consumption
coagulopathy (DIC). Manifestations include bleed-ing from wound site, gums, nose and venipuncturesite. Ecchymoses and bruising are common in thebitten limb. Hemoptysis, hematemesis, hematuria,and intracranial hemorrhage can also occur. Severe
bleeding may lead to hypotension and shock. DIC
with multiorgan dysfunction including ARDS canoccur. Infarction of the anterior pituitary may occurcausing acute pituitary adrenal insufficiency or, insurvivors, chronic panhypopituitarism.
Nephrotoxicity
/square6Acute kidney injury commonly occurs in viperbites.
Myotoxicity
/square6Manifestations are generalized muscle pain, stiffness
and myoglobinuria. Rhabdomyolysis is a prominent
feature of sea snakebites.
Snakebite without Envenomation (Dry Bites)
/square6This can happen when a person is bitten by a non-poisonous snake, or when a poisonous snake failsto inject poison. If a poisonous snake has bitten aprey prior to biting a person, then the poison wouldhave been injected into the prey and hence, there
will not be poison injection into the person.
Similarly, when the snakebites into bony areas suchas shin, or heel, there is a little venom depositedbecause of the absence of adequate tissue space toaccommodate the poison.
Investigations
/square6Snake venom detection kits are available in somecountries. The venom is detected from a dry swab
of the bite site using monoclonal antibody techniques.
/square620-minute whole blood-clotting test:  2 to 3 mL of
venous blood is kept undisturbed in a bottle for at
least 20 minutes. Absent coagulation indicateshemostatic defect from systemic envenomation.
/square6PT and aPTT may be elevated.
/square6Full blood count —anemia may be present due to
bleeding. Total WBC is elevated.
/square6Urea and creatinine may be elevated due to AKI.
/square6Electrolytes —hyperkalemia may be present due to
renal failure, hemolysis and rhabdomyolysis.
/square6Liver function tests may be altered.
/square6Creatine kinase may be high due to rhabdomyolysis./square6Troponins may be elevated due to myocardial
damage.
/square6Blood grouping, typing and cross-matching as bothvenom and ASV can interfere with cross-matching.
/square6Urine examination may show RBCs, RBC casts,protein and myoglobin.
/square6ECG may show arrhythmias or changes due toelectrolyte abnormalities.
Management of Snakebite
Field Management
/square6Apply a splint to the bitten limb to immobilize it.Immobilization reduces the spread of poison.
/square6Application of pressure bandage —it limits the
spread of poison, but concentrates the poison
locally leading to greater local tissue damage andincreased risk of amputation and loss of function,particularly with necrotic venoms such as vipervenom. Pressure bandage can be used in Elapid biteswhich are primarily neurotoxic without much local
effect. Pressure bandage is applied by wrapping the
entire limb with a bandage (e.g. crepe or elastic).The wrap pressure must reach 40–70 mmHg to beeffective.
/square6Application of tourniquet is not recommended asmost of the time it is not applied properly.
/square6Incision, cauterization and sucking out of venomare not recommended as they are not effective in
removing poison and lead to more bleeding and
local tissue damage.
/square6Transport the victim to a hospital as early aspossible.
/square6The best first aid advice, as coined by Dr Ian Simpsonof the WHO’s snakebite treatment group, is to “doit RIGHT ”: Reassure the victim, Immobilize the
extremity, Get to the Hospital, and inform the
physician of Telltale symptoms and signs.
Hospital Management
/square6Blood pressure, heart rate, respiration, coagulation,
renal, and neurological status must be monitored.
/square6Administration of anti-snake venom (ASV)—thisis the most important step. ASV should be given assoon as possible.  ASV is most effective if given within
4 hours of bite, but can be given up to 24 hours orlonger. Beneficial effects are reported even up to
7 to 10 days.
/square6ASV may be monovalent (effective against a parti-
cular snake species) or polyvalent (effective againstseveral species).
/square6Initially a test dose is given by injecting 0.02 mL ofsaline-diluted ASV, intradermally at a site distantfrom the bite. The injection site is then observedfor at least 10 minutes for the development of
redness, hives, pruritus or other adverse effects.
However, a negative skin test does not rule out a

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
17658 reaction following administration of the full dose
of ASV. Hence, adrenaline injection (epinephrine)should be kept ready whenever ASV is adminis-tered. If the risk of allergic reaction is significant,pretreatment with IV antihistamines (e.g. diphen-hydramine) and hydrocortisone may be considered.
If the patient develops an acute reaction to ASV,
infusion should be temporarily withheld and IMepinephrine and IV antihistamine and steroidsshould be given. ASV should be further diluted innormal saline and restarted at a slower rate.
Indications for Antivenom
Evidence of systemic envenomation
• Neurotoxicity
• Coagulopathy• Rhabdomyolysis
• Persistent hypotension
• Renal failure
Evidence of severe local envenomation
• Local tissue destruction
• Swelling• Pain
Dosage of ASV
/square6Local reaction only at the site of bite:  5 vials.
/square6Local reaction with severe cellulitis:  5 to 15 vials.
/square6Severe reactions with systemic envenomation:  15 to
30 vials.
/square6The recommended initial dose of ASV is 8 to 10 vialsadministered over 1 hour as IV infusion in 5%dextrose or normal saline, at the rate of 5–10 mL/kgbody weight or as slow IV injection as 2 mL/minute.
/square6The newest available antivenom in the United States(CroFab) is an ovine, Fab fragment antivenomwhich is effective against all North American pit
vipers. It requires less dosing and carries very low
risk of allergic reactions.
Supportive Measures
/square6IV fluids for hypotension and shock.
/square6Inj tetanus toxoid 0.5 cc IM if not given in the last5 years.
/square6Antibiotics:  Gram-negative and anaerobic organisms
should be covered. Augmentin plus metronidazolemay be used intravenously. Antibiotics are notrequired routinely. They are required if there issignificant local tissue damage with risk ofinfection.
/square6Fresh blood or FFP transfusion if bleeding manifes-tations occur.
/square6If neuromuscular paralysis is present, neostigmine1 mg IV stat plus atropine 1 mg IV should be given.
It is repeated every half hourly and then tapered to
hourly, 2nd hourly, and 4th hourly. It is most usefulwhen there is respiratory muscle weakness pending
ventilatory support and ASV administration.
/square6Artificial ventilation for respiratory paralysis.
/square6Surgical debridement for local necrosis and skingrafting.
Q. Scorpion stings.
/square6More than 80 species of scorpions are seen in India.Most important are black scorpions and redscorpions. Red scorpion is the most dangerous type.
Stings occur most commonly at night, on the
extremities.
/square6Scorpion venoms contain neurotoxins which stimu-late synaptic sodium and potassium channels with
release of catecholamines and acetylcholine.
Clinical Features
Local Features
/square6Most scorpion bites produce only local features.
/square6Severe local pain radiating throughout the affected
dermatome.
/square6Swelling.
Systemic Features
/square6Red scorpion bites can cause severe systemicenvenomation.
/square6Symptoms are due to cholinergic and adrenergicstimulation.
/square6Cholinergic symptoms include vomiting, increased
gastrointestinal motility, profuse sweating, hyper-
salivation, pupillary constriction, bronchoconstric-tion, increased secretion of lacrimal, bronchial andpancreatic acinar glands, bradycardia, hypotensionand priapism.
/square6Adrenergic features are hypertension, tachycardia,heart failure and pulmonary edema. Intracranialhemorrhage and convulsions may occur due tosevere hypertension.
/square6In later stages, hypotension and shock maydevelop.
/square6ECG may show features of myocarditis or
ischemia.
/square6Urinary excretion of vanillylmandelic acid (VMA)
is increased and cardiac enzymes are elevated.
Treatment
/square6Severe local pain is treated by injection of localanesthetic (0.1% lignocaine). Systemic analgesics
(NSAIDs and opiates) may be needed.
/square6Hypertension and pulmonary edema are treated
by selective α1-adrenergic blockers such as
prazosin.
/square6Tachycardia is treated with intravenous metoprololor esmolol.
/square6Hypotension may require fluid resuscitation.

/square6Poisoning, Venomous Bites and Environmental Diseases659
17Q.Enumerate the causes of hyperthermia (hyper-
pyrexia).
• Infection
• Environmental exposure• Cerebral and pontine hemorrhage• Tetanus• Thyroid storm• Pheochromocytoma• Malignant hyperthermia• Neuroleptic malignant syndrome• Catatonia• Status epilepticus• Alcohol, sedative-hypnotic withdrawal• Drug overdose (sympathomimetics, anticholinergics)• Dystonic reactions• Serotonin syndrome
Q.Enumerate various heat-related illnesses and the
predisposing factors.
Various heat-related illnesses are:
/square6Heat syncope
/square6Heat cramps
/square6Heat exhaustion
/square6Heat stroke (heat injury)
Predisposing Factors for Heat-related Illnesses
• High temperature
• High humidity
• Dehydration
• Elderly persons and infants
• Heavy exercise, particularly in the sun
• Heavy clothing
• Decreased sweating
• Associated infection
• Obesity
• Alcohol withdrawal
• Mental illness
• Hyperthyroidism
• Drugs (anticholinergics, phenothiazines)
Q.Heat syncope.
/square6This is sudden unconsciousness due to cutaneous
vasodilation in a hot weather leading to cerebralhypoperfusion. Skin is cool and moist, and there isweak pulse and hypotension.
/square6Treatment consists of rest and recumbency in acool place and fluid and electrolyte rehydration bymouth (or intravenously if necessary).
Q.Heat cramps.
/square6This is due to salt depletion or water intoxication.
Salt depletion occurs due to loss in sweat coupled
with inadequate salt intake when a person exercises
in hot environment./square6It is characterized by painful skeletal muscle con-tractions (“cramps”) often affecting the extremities.The affected muscles are contracted into stony hardlumps.
/square6Blood shows hemoconcentration and reducedsodium and chloride concentration.
/square6Treatment involves moving the person to a coolenvironment and giving oral saline solution (4 tsp
of salt per gallon of water) to replace both salt and
water. For severe cramps 0.5 to 1 liter of normalsaline is administered intravenously.
/square6It can be prevented by liberal salt intake.
Q.Heat exhaustion.
/square6Heat exhaustion is a non-life-threatening clinical
syndrome of weakness, malaise, nausea, syncope,and other nonspecific symptoms caused by heatexposure. Thermoregulation and CNS function arenot impaired.
/square6Heat exhaustion results from prolonged exertionin hot weather, profuse sweating and inadequatesalt and water replacement.
/square6There can be pure water depletion, salt depletionor combined water and salt depletion.
/square6Core body (rectal) temperature is usually below39°C.
/square6The main differences between heat stroke and heatexhaustion are lesser elevation of core bodytemperature and absence of severe CNS damage inheat exhaustion. If untreated, heat exhaustion mayprogress to heat stroke.
Clinical Features
/square6Features of dehydration such as dryness of tongue
and mouth, excessive thirst, tachycardia, hypo-
tension, tachypnea, oliguria and weakness.
/square6Nausea, vomiting, malaise, and myalgia mayoccur.
/square6Tachypnea may lead to tetany.
/square6Irritability and incoordination may be present.
Death may occur due to hypovolemic shock.
Investigations
/square6Elevation of the blood urea, sodium and hematocrit
due to water depletion. Sodium level may be lowin salt depletion type heat exhaustion due to waterreplacement without salt.
Treatment
/square6Removal of the patient from the heat.
/square6Active cooling using cool sponging.
/square6Fluid and salt replacement using oral rehydrationmixtures containing both salt and water or intra-venous isotonic saline. Hypertonic (3%) saline may
be needed for severe hyponatremia.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
17660 Q.Heat stroke.
/square6Heat stroke is defined as a core body temperature
in excess of 40°C (105ºF) with associated CNS dys-
function in the setting of a large environmental heat
load that cannot be dissipated.
/square6Heat stroke results from a complete breakdown ofthe thermoregulatory mechanism, with complete
failure of sweating. There is widespread cellular
damage of vital organs due to high body tempera-ture.
Clinical Features
/square6There are two types of heat stroke; exertional andnon-exertional (classic).
/square6Exertional heat stroke occurs in healthy individualswho engage in heavy exercise during high ambient
temperature and humidity. Typical patients are
athletes and military recruits in basic training.
/square6Non-exertional (classic) heat stroke occurs in indivi-duals with an underlying disorder such as mental
illness, hyperthyroidism, obesity, extremes of age,
and use of drugs.
/square6Clinical features are due to shock, renal and liverdamage, involvement of CNS and DIC.
/square6Rectal temperature is 40°C or more.
/square6Initial manifestations are faintness, dizziness,
vertigo, nausea, and abdominal pain.
/square6CNS manifestations are altered sensorium, seizures
and coma.
/square6Skin is flushed, hot and dry.
/square6Jaundice and petechiae may be present.
/square6Tachypnea, and bibasal lung crepitations may bepresent due to ARDS.
/square6Excessive bleeding may occur due to DIC.
/square6Death may occur due to ARDS, DIC, myocardialinfarction and acute adrenal insufficiency.
Laboratory Features
/square6Investigations show hemoconcentration, leuco-cytosis, elevated urea and creatinine, proteinuria,coagulopathy and DIC, elevated liver enzymes,respiratory alkalosis and metabolic acidosis. Myo-globinuria may be present due to rhabdomyolysis.
/square6ECG may show non-specific ST depression andT wave inversion.
Treatment
/square6100% oxygen.
/square6Endotracheal intubation and ventilatory support ifrequired.
/square6Reduction of body temperature
– Augmentation of evaporative cooling is the
treatment of choice because it is effective, non-
invasive, and easily performed. The naked
patient is sprayed with lukewarm water and airis circulated with large fans.– Other cooling methods are immersing the patient
in an ice-water tub (most rapid method ofcooling), covering with water cooled sheets,keeping ice bags over of the body, intravenousor intraperitoneal administration of cool fluid,and gastric lavage or enema with ice-water.
/square6Hydrocortisone or dexamethasone injection IV8 hourly helps to correct shock, cerebral edema andadrenal insufficiency.
/square6Renal failure may require hemodialysis.
Q.Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS).
/square6Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS) is a life-
threatening medical emergency associated with theuse of neuroleptic agents such as phenothiazines,butyrophenones and thioxanthines.
/square6It usually develops during the first two weeks ofneuroleptic therapy. It is not a dose-dependentphenomenon, but is an idiosyncratic reaction.
Clinical Features
/square6NMS is characterized by mental status change, mus-cular rigidity, hyperthermia, and dysautonomia.The diagnosis should be suspected if any two of thesefour features appear in the setting of neuroleptic use.
/square6Mental status changes are delirium with confusionwhich may evolve to stupor and coma.
/square6Muscular rigidity is generalized. It can be lead pipeor cogwheel type rigidity. Other motor abnorma-
lities include tremors, dystonia, opisthotonus,
trismus, chorea, and other dyskinesias.
/square6Autonomic instability manifests as tachycardia,labile or high blood pressure, tachypnea, arrhyth-
mias, and increased sweating.
Differential Diagnosis
/square6Malignant hyperthermia:  Almost clinically indistin-
guishable from NMS, but the history of exposureto depolarizing muscle relaxants such as succinyl-choline can help differentiate it from NMS.
/square6Serotonin syndrome: Has similar presentation to
NMS but serotonin syndrome has prominentgastrointestinal manifestations. History of use ofSSRI is another important clue.
/square6Malignant catatonia:  This has increased positive
symptoms as compared to NMS and a behavioralprodrome of automatisms, agitation, or psychosis.
/square6Heat stroke.
/square6CNS infections (encephalitis, meningitis).
Laboratory Features
/square6Leukocytosis.
/square6Elevated creatine kinase (CK) and hyperkalemia
due to rhabdomyolysis.
/square6Elevated liver enzymes.
/square6Myoglobinuria and acute renal failure.

/square6Poisoning, Venomous Bites and Environmental Diseases661
17Treatment
/square6Neuroleptics should be withheld.
/square6Supportive measures.
/square6Temperature should be lowered by external and
internal cooling methods.
/square6Dantrolene and bromocriptine may be consideredin severe cases.
Q.Define hypothermia. Discuss the causes, clinical
features and management of hypothermia.
/square6Hypothermia is defined as core body temperature
below 35°C. Either rectal or esophageal temperature
should be measured, as oral temperature is inaccurate.
Predisposing Factors for Hypothermia
• Elderly persons and infants
• Alcoholics
• Cold weather• Immersion in cold water
• Mental retardation
• Malnutrition• Stroke
• Cardiovascular disease
• Hypothyroidism• Hypopituitarism
• Addison’s disease
• Transfusion of large amounts of refrigerated blood• Drugs: Sedatives, phenothiazines
Clinical Features
/square6Core body temperature is below 35°C.
/square6Early manifestations are weakness, drowsiness,
lethargy, irritability, confusion, shivering, andimpaired coordination.
/square6Below 30°C there is cessation of all cerebral activity.Pulse and respiration become slow.
/square6Below 27°C, patient becomes unconscious, anddeeply comatose at 25°C. Pulse and BP may be
unobtainable, leading clinicians to believe that the
patient is dead.
/square6Skin may appear blue or puffy.
/square6Other features are pulmonary edema, sluggishreflexes and generalized rigidity.
/square6Metabolic acidosis, pneumonia, pancreatitis, ventri-
cular fibrillation, hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia,
coagulopathy, and renal failure may occur.
/square6Death is usually due to cardiac asystole or ventri-cular fibrillation.
Investigations
/square6Hemoconcentration.
/square6Hyperkalemia.
/square6Arterial blood gas (ABG) analysis may show low
PaO2 and metabolic acidosis./square6ECG may show characteristic J waves of Osborn
(positive deflection in the terminal portion of theQRS complex) and prolongation of the PR, QRS,and QT intervals.
/square6SGOT and CK may be elevated due to muscledamage.
/square6Thyroid function tests.
/square6Serum amylase may be elevated due to pancreatitis.
/square6If the cause of hypothermia is not obvious, additionaltests may be done to identify any predisposing
condition.
Management
/square6Goals of treatment are to rewarm the patient in a
controlled manner and to treat the associated abnor-malities.
/square6Any underlying condition should be treated
promptly (e.g. hypothyroidism).
Mild Hypothermia (Core Temperature >32°C)
/square6Patient should be put in a warm room, and given
additional thermal insulation (blankets and/or spacefilm blanket). They should be given warm drinks.Core temperature will rise slowly over a few hoursas a result of normal metabolic heat production.
Severe Hypothermia (Core Temperature <32°C)
/square6Patients should be handled gently and maintainedin a horizontal position to avoid precipitating
cardiac arrhythmias.
/square6Active external or internal rewarming methods are
used to raise the core body temperature.
/square6Active external rewarming methods include heatedblankets, forced hot air, radiant heat, and warmbaths.
/square6Active internal rewarming methods include extra-corporeal blood rewarming (method of choice),peritoneal or hemodialysis using warm dialysatefluid, administration of warm IV fluids, administra-tion of heated, humidified air warmed to 42°Cthrough a face mask or endotracheal tube, and
gastric lavage with warm fluid.
Q.Discuss briefly the various cold related illnesses.
Various cold related illnesses are:
/square6Frostbite (freezing cold injury).
/square6Trench or immersion foot (non-freezing cold injury).
/square6Chilblains.
Frostbite (Freezing Cold Injury)
/square6Frostbite results from the freezing of tissue and
usually affects the exposed parts of the body suchas fingers, toes, ears and face. It usually occurs inmountaineers, soldiers, those who work in the cold,the homeless, and individuals stranded outdoors
in the winter.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
17662 /square6Tissue destruction occurs due to formation of ice
crystals and subsequent inflammatory process.
/square6Predisposing factors are same as those listed underhypothermia.
Clinical Features
/square6Frostbitten tissue is initially pale and doughy to thetouch and insensitive to pain. Once frozen, thetissue is hard.
/square6Other features are edema, hemorrhages, blistersand blebs.
/square6Local gangrene may occur.
Treatment
/square6Rewarming—this is done by immersing the affectedarea in a waterbath heated to 40º to 42ºC. Highertemperatures may result in burns. Rubbing anddirect heat should be avoided as they may exacer-bate tissue injury. Thawing is usually complete in15 to 30 minutes. Rewarming of frostbitten tissue
is painful, hence, analgesics, generally opioids,
should be administered.
/square6Tetanus prophylaxis, protection of the injuredtissue and avoidance of infection.
/square6Because frostbite is associated with vascular throm-bosis of the affected tissue, intravenous heparinalong with thrombolytics (tPA) may improveoutcome and prevent future amputation.
/square6Surgery may be required to remove dead tissue, but
should be delayed, as surprisingly good recoverymay occur over an extended period.
Non-freezing Cold Injury
Trench or Immersion Foot
/square6This is caused by prolonged immersion in cool orcold water or mud, usually less than 10°C. Foot iscommonly affected. Trench foot got its name during
the First World War when many British and
American soldiers developed the condition afterspending long periods of time in the cold, wettrenches on the front line.
/square6Initial symptoms are cold and numbness, but thereis no freezing of the tissue. Later manifestations areedema, blistering, swelling, redness, ecchymoses,hemorrhage, necrosis, peripheral nerve injury, organgrene and secondary complications such aslymphangitis, cellulitis, and thrombophlebitis.
/square6Treatment involves gradual rewarming and recoveryis usually complete. Tetanus prophylaxis is required.
Chilblains (Pernio)
/square6Chilblains, also called perniosis, are an inflamma-tory skin condition related to an abnormal vascularresponse to the cold without actual freezing of the
tissues. Pernio is most common in young women,
but both sexes and all age groups may be affected./square6It typically presents as tender, pruritic red or bluishlesions located symmetrically on the dorsal aspectof the fingers, toes, ears and nose. Lesions usuallyresolve spontaneously.
/square6Treatment involves slow and passive rewarmingof the affected part. Prazosin or nifedipine areuseful for treatment and prevention of recurrence.
Q.Drowning.
/square6Drowning is defined as a process of experiencing
respiratory impairment from submersion/
immersion in a liquid medium. Drowning can leadto death, morbidity, or no morbidity. Terms likewet drowning, dry drowning and near-drowningare no longer accepted although they are still in use.Dry drowning refers to death due to intense
laryngospasm without water entering the lungs.
/square6Drowning is a common cause of accidental death
throughout the world and is particularly common
in young children.
/square6Drowning is more common in males and duringsummer months.
Conditions that Increase Risk of
Drowning/Submersion Injury
/square6Suicide.
/square6Use of alcohol or other sedative drugs.
/square6Extreme fatigue.
/square6Hyperventilation.
/square6Sudden acute illness (e.g. hypoglycemia, seizure,arrhythmia, myocardial infarction).
/square6Muscle cramps while swimming.
/square6Acute brain or spinal cord injury.
/square6Venomous stings, bites, or injury in the water.
Pathogenesis of Drowning
/square6Inhalation of water into the lungs leads to diffusepulmonary edema, ARDS, ventilation-perfusion
mismatching and intrapulmonary shunting,
leading to hypoxemia. Hypoxemia causes diffuseorgan dysfunction. CNS and heart are the two majororgans which suffer hypoxic damage leading todeath.
/square6Fresh water is hypotonic, and if absorbed intocirculation in large amounts, may lead to hemolysis.Seawater is hypertonic and draws plasma into thealveoli leading to alveolar edema.
/square6Both salt water and fresh water wash out surfactant,leading to alveolar collapse and ventilation per-fusion mismatching.
/square6Prolonged immersion in cold water may lead tohypothermia.
/square6Survival is possible after immersion for periods ofup to 30 minutes in very cold water particularly in
children.

/square6Poisoning, Venomous Bites and Environmental Diseases663
17Clinical Features
/square6Patients are often unconscious with absent breath-
ing and may be in shock. Patients usually haveanxiety, dyspnea, cough, wheezing, trismus,
cyanosis, chest pain, arrhythmia, hypotension,
vomiting, and diarrhea. A pink froth from themouth and nose indicates pulmonary edema.
/square6RS—breathlessness, crepitations, and wheezing
due to pulmonary edema and ARDS. Hemoptysis
may occur due to alveolar damage.
/square6Nervous system —patients are in altered sensorium
or unconscious due to cerebral hypoxia. Neuronal
damage may lead to cerebral edema and raised ICT.
/square6CVS —hypothermia and hypoxemia can lead to
arrhythmias. Sinus bradycardia and atrial fibrilla-tion are common. Ventricular fibrillation or asystole
may rarely occur.
/square6Renal —renal failure due to acute tubular necrosis
may occur due to hypoxia, shock, hemoglobinuria,or myoglobinuria.
Laboratory Features
/square6Chest X-ray may show pulmonary edema or ARDS.
/square6ABG shows hypoxemia.
/square6ECG may show arrhythmias.
/square6Metabolic acidosis may be present.
/square6Hypernatremia may occur due to absorption of
swallowed seawater.
Management
/square6Cardiopulmonary resuscitation if pulse and respira-
tion absent. Basic life support (BLS) protocol to be
followed.
/square6Administration of oxygen.
/square6Airway should be cleared of foreign bodies. There
is no need to try to drain the lungs of water sincemost inhaled water would have been absorbed.
/square6Intubation and ventilator support may be required
for those unable to maintain oxygen saturation even
after oxygen supplementation. Continuous positiveairways pressure (CPAP) is useful in improvingarterial oxygenation for spontaneously breathingpatients.
/square6Cardiovascular support:  Central venous pressure
must be monitored to determine the intravascularvolume status. Fluid overload and pulmonaryedema should be treated with diuretics. Inotropicagents such as dopamine or noradrenaline should
be used for persistent hypotension in spite of
adequate intravascular volume.
/square6Prophylactic antibiotics are required only if drown-ing took place in contaminated water.
Q.Hanging.
/square6Hanging is a form of strangulation that involves
suspension by the neck. Hanging can be completeor incomplete. In complete hanging, feet do not
touch the ground and the entire weight of the victimis suspended at the neck. In incomplete hanging(partial hanging), some part of the body is touchingthe ground and the weight of the victim is not fullysupported by the neck. Hanging may be suicidal,
homicidal, accidental, or judicial.
Pathophysiology
/square6The following mechanisms are responsible for
morbidity and mortality seen in cases of hanging.
/square6Fracture of the upper cervical spine (fracture of C2in the classic hangman fracture), and transectionof the spinal cord. This is especially seen in judicialhanging where the body is dropped from a height.Partial injury to the spinal cord can also occur.
/square6Venous and arterial (carotids) obstruction, leadingto cerebral edema, hypoxia, and unconsciousness,which in turn produces loss of muscle tone and
airway obstruction.
/square6Vagal collapse, caused by pressure to the carotidsinuses and increased parasympathetic tone.
Clinical Features
/square6Cough, stridor, muffled voice, respiratory distress
and hypoxia may be present.
/square6Altered mental status.
/square6Abrasions, lacerations, contusions, edema and
ligature mark may be observed on the neck.
/square6Subconjunctival hemorrhage and petechial spotsmay be seen in the head and neck area (Tardieu
spots).
/square6Tenderness over the larynx may be present andindicates laryngeal fracture.
Investigations
/square6Routine tests.
/square6ABG analysis.
/square6X-ray of cervical spine, anteroposterior and lateral
view. It may show fracture of cervical spine. X-ray
should be taken after stabilizing the neck with hardcollar.
/square6Chest X-ray.
/square6CT or MRI of cervical spine provides details of spineand spinal cord injury.
Management
Pre-hospital Care
/square6C-spine stabilization and airway assessment are ofparamount importance.
/square6Avoid endotracheal intubation in the field unlessthe airway is acutely compromised in view ofpossible C-spine fracture. Intubation is indicatedif respiratory failure or airway obstruction is
present.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
17664 In the Hospital
/square6Take care of airway and breathing. Endotracheal
intubation and ventilator support is given forrespiratory failure after ruling out C-spine injury.
Cricothyroidotomy is performed if endotracheal
intubation fails.
/square6Monitor the patient for cardiac arrhythmias.
/square6Mannitol is used to treat cerebral edema.
/square6Phenytoin is given IV to prevent hanging-inducedseizures.
/square6Methylprednisolone 30 mg/kg IV bolus followedby infusion at a dose of 5.4 mg/kg/hr for next23 hours is given if there is spinal cord injury,because it has been shown to prevent secondary
cord damage due to edema and inflammation and
improve final functional outcome.
Q.Electric shock/lightening injury.
/square6Electric current is two types; alternating and direct
current. Alternating current is more dangerousthan direct current as the former can cause tetanicspasms which hook the victim to the source of
current.
/square6Electrical injuries are almost always accidental and
generally preventable.
Mechanism of Injury
/square6Injuries due to electricity occur by three mecha-nisms: (1) Direct effect of electrical current on bodytissues; (2) Conversion of electrical energy tothermal energy, resulting in deep and superficial
burns; (3) Blunt mechanical injury from lightning
strike, muscle contraction, or as a complication ofa fall after electrocution.
/square6The major determinant of injury is the amount of
current flowing through the body. In addition, the
type and extent of injury also depend on the voltage,resistance, type of current (AC or DC), the currentpathway, and duration of contact. Voltage as lowas 50 V can be dangerous. Higher the voltage morethe danger of cardiopulmonary arrest.  Injuries can
be generally divided into high voltage (>1000 V)
and low voltage (<1000 V) injuries. Voltage in high-tension power lines is greater than 100,000 V, whiledomestic voltage is 110–220 V. lightning strikeshave a voltage of >10 million V.
/square6Tissues with higher resistance have a tendency toheat up and coagulate, rather than transmit electriccurrent. Skin, bone, and fat have high resistances,while nerves and blood vessels have lower resis-tances.
/square6DC current tends to cause a single muscle spasmthat throws the victim from the source. This resultsin a shorter duration of exposure, but a higherlikelihood of associated trauma. In contrast, AC
repetitively stimulates muscle contraction. Often,the site of exposure is at the hand and, because the
flexors of the arm are stronger than the extensors,the victim may actually grasp the source, prolong-ing the duration of contact and perpetuating tissueinjury.
Clinical Features
/square6If the current passes through the heart or brainstem,death may be immediate due to ventricular fibrilla-tion, asystole, or apnea.
/square6CVS:  Cardiopulmonary arrest can be caused by
low-voltage electric injury but is more commonwith high-voltage electric injury. Various cardiacarrhythmias can occur immediately or later andpatients should undergo continuous ECG monitor-
ing for at least 48 hours after electric injury. Vascular
injury can result from a compartment syndrome orthe electrical coagulation of small blood vessels.
/square6Skin and internal organ burns:  Superficial, partial
thickness, and full thickness thermal burns can
occur following electrical injury. Burns occur dueto exposure to electrical arc, clothes catching fireand the heating effect of electricity. Deep burns inthe internal organs can occur along the path ofcurrent flow. Seemingly minor surface burns may
coexist with massive muscle coagulation and
necrosis as well as internal organ injury.
/square6Nervous system:  Damage to both the central and peri-
pheral nervous systems can occur after electrical
injury. Manifestations include loss of consciousness,
weakness or paralysis, respiratory depression,autonomic dysfunction, and memory disturbances.Current traversing peripheral nerves can causeacute or delayed neuropathy.
/square6Renal:  Myoglobinuria due to rhabdomyolysis may
lead to renal failure. Hypovolemia due to extra-vascular extravasation of fluid can also lead toprerenal azotemia and acute tubular necrosis.
/square6GIT:  Direct liver injury, focal pancreatic and gall-
bladder necrosis, and intestinal perforation havebeen reported, but are rare. Intestinal perforationmay lead to infection, sepsis, and death.
/square6Musculoskeletal:  Rhabdomyolysis is common after
electrical injuries. It may lead to hyperkalemia,myoglobinuria and renal failure. Damaged musclesmay swell and lead to compartment syndromewhich may require fasciotomy. Since, bone has the
highest resistance to electricity, it generates large
amount of heat, resulting in periosteal burns,destruction of bone matrix, and osteonecrosis. Inaddition, bones can fracture from falls, blastinjuries, or repetitive tetanic muscle contractions.
/square6Eye: Cataracts, hyphema, and vitreous hemorrhage
may occur.
/square6Ears:  Ruptured eardrums, sensorineural hearing
loss, tinnitus, vertigo, and injury to the facial nerve
may occur especially after lightening strike.

/square6Poisoning, Venomous Bites and Environmental Diseases665
17Investigations
/square6Cardiac monitoring and ECG.
/square6Complete blood count.
/square6Electrolytes.
/square6Renal function tests, LFT.
/square6Serum CK, and CK-MB.
/square6Urinalysis, urine myoglobin.
Treatment
/square6Immediate removal of the patient from the electrical
source. The rescuer must be protected. Turn off thepower, sever the wire with a dry wooden-handledaxe, or separate the victim using nonconductiveobjects such as dry clothing.
/square6Cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
/square6All patients must undergo ECG monitoring in an
ICU for 48 hours.
/square6IV fluids are required if there are extensive burns
and wounds. If there is myoglbinuria, urine outputshould be maintained at more than 100 mL/hr to
minimize intratubular cast formation and renal
failure.
/square6Burns are treated in a similar manner to otherthermal burns. Patients may require transfer to a
burn unit, fasciotomy, escharotomy, and extensive
skin reconstruction.
/square6Deep tissue damage due to high-voltage injury callsfor surgical exploration for assessment of muscle
function, and debridement of necrotic tissues to
reduce the risk of infection and hyperkalemia.Extensive damage to muscles, nerves, tendons andvessels may call for amputation at a suitable level.
/square6If there is any evidence of injury to the abdominalorgans, exploratory laparotomy may be required.
/square6Ophthalmologic examination is required to detectdevelopment of cataracts, particularly following
lightning injury. Cataracts generally develop
several days after injury.
/square6Physical therapy to maintain functional status.
/square6Psychiatric consultation for any behavioral distur-bances or post-traumatic stress disorder.
Q.High altitude illness.
Q.Acute mountain sickness.
/square6Exposure to high altitude occurs during air travel
and mountaineering. The barometric pressure falls
as altitude increases. As a result, the higher one
climbs, the lower the barometric pressure and thepartial pressure of ambient oxygen. For example,on the summit of Mount Everest, barometricpressure is 253 mmHg and the ambient oxygentension is only 53 mmHg. Reduction in oxygen
tension results in a fall in arterial oxygen saturation.
Acclimatization to hypoxemia at high altitudeinvolves a shift in this dissociation curve (dependenton 2,3-DPG), erythropoiesis, polycythemia, and
hyperventilation due to hypoxia. These changestake a few days to occur.
/square6Ascent to altitudes up to 2500 meters or travel in a
pressurized aircraft cabin is harmless to healthy
people. Above 2500 m high-altitude illnesses mayoccur in healthy people, and above 3500 m theybecome common.
/square6Illnesses occurring at high altitude include thefollowing.
– Acute mountain sickness.
– High altitude periodic breathing of sleep.
– High altitude pulmonary edema.
– High altitude cerebral edema.
– High altitude retinal hemorrhage.
/square6In addition to the above, sudden ascent to altitudes
above 6000 m may result in decompression illnesswith the same clinical features as seen in divers.Rapid ascent to altitudes above 7000 m may resultin loss of consciousness.
Acute Mountain Sickness (AMS)
Cause
/square6Hypoxemia at high altitude increases cerebral bloodflow and hence intracranial pressure. Cerebraledema occurs in severe cases.
Clinical Features
/square6Symptoms occur within 6–12 hours of an ascent.
/square6Symptoms include headache, fatigue, anorexia,nausea and vomiting, difficulty sleeping and dizzi-ness. Ataxia and peripheral edema may also occur.
Treatment
/square6Most effective treatment is descent to a loweraltitude.
/square6For mild cases, rest and simple analgesia areenough.
/square6For severe cases, acetazolamide, a carbonic anhy-
drase inhibitor can be used. It induces metabolic
acidosis and stimulates ventilation leading to CO2
wash out, which causes cerebral vasoconstrictionand decreases intracranial pressure. Cortico-steroids, diuretics and mannitol are also useful todecrease raised intracranial pressure.
/square6Acetazolamide may also be used as prophylaxis ifa rapid ascent is planned.
Q.Low altitude illness/decompression sickness
(caisson disease).
/square6Decompression sickness occurs when rapid pressure
reduction (e.g. during ascent from a dive, exit froma caisson or hyperbaric chamber, or ascent to altitude)causes gas previously dissolved in blood or tissues
to form bubbles and cause organ dysfunction.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
17666 /square6Decompression sickness is commonly seen among
scuba divers. Ambient pressure under waterincreases by 1 atmosphere for every 10 meters ofseawater depth. As the diver descends and breathesair under increased pressure, the tissues becomeloaded with increased quantities of nitrogen. As the
diver ascends to the surface, there is liberation of
free nitrogen gas from the tissues in the form ofbubbles. The liberated gas bubbles can cause organdysfunction by blocking blood vessels, rupturingor compressing tissue, or activating clotting andinflammatory cascades.
Clinical Features
/square6Symptoms usually occur during or within 4 hours
of a dive.
/square6General— tender lymph nodes, edema, headache,
nausea, vomiting, fatigue, general malaise.
/square6Musculoskeletal —osteonecrosis, pain in joints due
to gas bubble formation.
/square6Nervous system —confusion, visual disturbances,
weakness, paralysis, dizziness, paresthesias,
aphasia, and coma.
/square6RS—gas embolism may lead to chest pain, cough,
hemoptysis, dyspnea.
/square6Skin— itching, erythematous rash.
/square6Audiovestibular— ear and sinus  barotrauma may
lead to deafness, vertigo, tinnitus, nystagmus.
Management
/square6Patient is kept in horizontal position.
/square6Continuous administration of 100% oxygen or
hyperbaric oxygen if available. This increases thewashout of excess inert gas (nitrogen) and reduces
tissue hypoxia due to gas embolism.
/square6Recompression, in a recompression chamber facility
as soon as possible.
/square6IV fluids to correct the intravascular fluid loss fromendothelial bubble injury and the dehydrationassociated with immersion.
/square6NSAIDs may be given for pain, but narcotics shouldbe avoided.
Q.Bioterrorism.
/square6Bioterrorism is terrorism by intentional release or
dissemination of biological (bacteria, viruses, ortoxins) or chemical agents. These agents may be in
a naturally-occurring or in a human-modified form.
/square6Biological agents can be spread through the air,
water, food or objects. Terrorists may use biologicalagents because they can be extremely difficult to
detect and do not cause illness for several hours to
several days.
/square6Bioterrorism is an attractive weapon because bio-logical agents are relatively easy and inexpensive
to obtain or produce, can be easily disseminated,and can cause widespread fear and panic beyond
the actual physical damage they can cause. However,bioterrorism has some important limitations; it isdifficult to employ a bioweapon in a way that onlythe enemy is affected and not friendly forces.
History of Bioterrorism
/square6Bioterrorism dates as far back as ancient Romancivilization, where feces was thrown into faces ofenemies. In 14th century bubonic plague was usedto infiltrate enemy cities. Over time, biological warfare
became more complex. Countries began to develop
weapons which were much more effective, andmuch less likely to cause infection to the wrong party.
/square6In World War I poisonous mustard gas became the
biological weapon of choice. Germany used cultures
of glanders, a virulent disease of horses and mulesto infect French cavalry horses and many of Russia’smules and horses. These actions hindered artilleryand troop movements, as well as supply convoys.
/square6Recently anthrax became a weapon of choicebecause it is easily transferred, has a high mortalityrate, and could be easily obtained. In 1993, areligious group Aum Shinrikyo released Anthraxin Tokyo. The attack was a total failure, infecting
not a single person. In 2001, anthrax attacks, several
cases of anthrax broke out in the United States.Letters laced with infectious anthrax were deliveredto news media offices and the US Congress. Theletters killed 5. Tests on the anthrax strand used inthe attack pointed to a domestic source, possibly
from the biological weapons program.
Types of Agents Used in Bioterrorism
Biologic Agents
/square6Anthrax, smallpox, botulinum toxin, bubonic plague,
brucellosis, glanders, Vibrio cholerae , viral hemorr-
hagic fever and tularemia.
Chemical Agents
/square6Nerve agents (sarin, soman, tabun), arsine, hydrogencyanide, phosgene, mustard gas, lewisite, etc.
Prevention and Preparedness
/square6Government agencies which would be called on torespond to a bioterrorism incident would includelaw enforcement, hazardous materials/deconta-mination units and emergency medical units.
/square6Medical profession must maintain a high index ofsuspicion especially when there are unusual clinicalpresentations or the clustering of cases of a raredisease.
/square6Many countries are creating specially trained forcesto deal with bioterrorism.
/square6Laboratories are working on advanced detection
systems to provide early warning, identify
contaminated areas and populations at risk, and to

/square6Poisoning, Venomous Bites and Environmental Diseases667
17facilitate prompt treatment. Forensic technologies
are working on identifying biological agents, theirgeographical origins and/or their initial son.
/square6Some of the detection methods are: Tiny electronicchips that would contain living nerve cells to warnof the presence of bacterial toxins (identification of
broad range toxins), fiberoptic tubes lined with
antibodies coupled to light-emitting molecules(identification of specific pathogens, such as anthrax,botulinum, ricin), ultraviolet avalanche photodiodes
detect anthrax and other bioterrorism agents in theair.
/square6In the United States, a Strategic National Stockpile(SNS) has been created by the CDC to provide rapidaccess to quantities of pharmaceuticals, antidotes,vaccines, and other medical supplies that maybe of value in the event of biologic or chemicalterrorism.
Management of Bioterrorism
/square6Surveillance:  If an attack can be detected early,
potential victims can be protected with prophylactic
medicines or vaccines, and new cases can receiveproper medical treatment. Enhanced surveillanceshould include ERs, primary care physicians,laboratories, pharmacists, and emergency responsesystems.
/square6Public health response:  State and local health depart-
ments should work along with law enforcementagencies.
/square6Confirmation/diagnostic testing:  Confirmation of the
etiologic agent is important for planning preventiveand treatment plans./square6Decontamination:  It involves removal of clothing and
personal effects, placing all items in plastic bags,and shower using copious quantities of soap andwater. These items should be disposed appropria-tely or kept as evidence in a criminal trial or returned
to the owner if the threat is unsubstantiated. Regular
soap and water were as effective as antimicrobial
soap and 2 percent chlorhexidine gluconate aftercontact with B. anthracis . For incidents involving
possibly contaminated letters, the environment indirect contact with the letter or its contents shouldbe decontaminated with a 0.5 percent hypochlorite
solution.
/square6Prophylaxis:  Chemoprophylaxis should be given to
all exposed persons if appropriate. Vaccines areuseful in control of a smallpox epidemic and
prevention of a global pandemic. Post-exposure
prophylaxis against anthrax (along with antibiotics),protection of laboratory and health care providersworking with these agents are also additional pre-ventive measures.
/square6Infection control —this is done by isolation of infected
patients, etc. Patients infected with smallpox require
aerosol and contact precautions, while those withpneumonic plague require droplet precautions.
/square6Specific treatment —this involves specific antimicro-
bial drugs, antitoxins, antidotes and vaccines. If theagent is unknown, symptomatic treatment and treat-ment of coexisting injuries should follow standardguidelines. If the etiologic agent is known, then speci-
fic treatment should be instituted against that agent.
/square6Psychological support —panic among public should
be allayed by assurance and educating the publicabout disease course and outcome.

18
668Q.Shock.
/square6Shock is defined as multifactorial syndrome result-
ing in inadequate tissue perfusion and cellularoxygenation affecting multiple organ systems.
Classification and Causes
/square6Hypovolemic shock:  Occurs as a consequence of
inadequate circulating volume, as may be seen inhemorrhage).
/square6Obstructive shock:  This is caused by extra-cardiac
obstruction of blood flow. Examples: Cardiac
tamponade, pulmonary embolism, tension pneumo-thorax.
/square6Cardiogenic shock:  This is caused by primary pump
failure. Examples: Myocardial infarction, myocarditis,
etc.
/square6Distributive shock:  This is due to widespread vaso-
dilatation leading to hypotension and maldistribu-
tion of blood flow and volume. Examples: Septic
shock, anaphylactic shock neurogenic shock.
/square6Endocrine shock:  This results from hormonal
pathology. Examples: Acute adrenal insufficiency,
myxedema coma.
Pathophysiology
/square6The fundamental defect in shock is reduced per-fusion of vital tissues. Reduced perfusion leads to
tissue hypoxia leading to anaerobic metabolismwith increased production of CO
2 and accumulation
of lactic acid. Cellular function declines, and if shockpersists, irreversible cell damage and death occur.
/square6During shock, both the inflammatory and clottingcascades may be triggered in areas of hypoper-fusion. There is widespread endothelial dysfunctionwith increased capillary permeability leading toleakage of fluid and plasma proteins into the inters-
titial space. In the GI tract, increased permeabilityEmergency Medicine and
Critical Care
may allow the enteric bacteria to enter into the
bloodstream, potentially leading to sepsis or meta-static infection. Inflammatory cascade also releases
vasodilator substances such as nitric oxide (NO)
leading to vasodilatation and hypotension. BP maybe normal in the early stages of shock (althoughhypotension eventually occurs if shock is notreversed).
/square6In septic shock, blood flow to microvessels includ-ing capillaries is reduced due to fibrin depositioneven though large vessel blood flow is preserved.
/square6Compensatory measures occur to counteract tissuehypoxia and hypotension. Cells extract more oxygenfrom the blood and there is sympathetic stimulationdue to hypotension leading to tachycardia and
Figure 18.1 Pathophysiology of shock


/square6Emergency Medicine and Critical Care669
18peripheral vasoconstriction. There is selective vaso-
constriction (splanchnic circulation, skin) shuntingblood to vital organs such as heart and brain.
/square6Ultimately, because of all these changes, multiple
organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS) which is
defined as the progressive dysfunction of ≥2 organs
sets in leading to death.
Clinical Features
/square6Lethargy, confusion, and somnolence are common.
/square6The hands and feet are pale, cool, and clammy.
/square6Cyanosis may be present.
/square6Capillary filling time is prolonged.
/square6Peripheral pulses are weak, tachypnea and tachy-cardia may be present.
/square6BP is low (<90 mm Hg systolic) or not recordable.However, it may be normal in early stages of shock.
/square6In septic shock, skin may be warm, or fever may bepresent. Some patients with anaphylactic shock
have urticaria or wheezing.
/square6Chest pain and dyspnea may be present in cardio-
genic shock due to myocardial infarction.
/square6Evidence of multiorgan dysfunction (MODS) suchas decreased urine output (kidney involvement),jaundice (liver involvement), dyspnea (ARDS), etc.may be present.
Investigations
/square6Complete blood count.
/square6LFT, RFT.
/square6Serum electrolytes.
/square6PT, aPTT.
/square6Serum cortisol (if suspecting adrenal insufficiency).
/square6ABG.
/square6ECG, echocardiogram.
/square6Monitoring of central venous pressure (CVP).
/square6Chest X-ray, ultrasound abdomen to identify anychest (pneumonia, ARDS) or abdominal pathology.
Treatment
/square6Admit the patient in ICU and monitor vital para-meters.
/square6Supplemental oxygen by face mask.
/square6Intubation and mechanical ventilation if shock is
severe or if ventilation is inadequate.
/square6Intravenous fluids:  Initially 1 liter of 0.9% saline is
infused over 15 min. Further fluid therapy is basedon the underlying condition and may require
monitoring of CVP.
/square6If BP remains low even after giving fluid challenge,
intravenous infusion of noradrenaline or dopamineis started. Dobutamine is preferred in cardiogenic
shock.
/square6Cardiogenic shock is treated by percutaneous
coronary interventions, intra-aortic balloon pump,etc./square6Parenteral antibiotics (meropenem or piperacillintazobactam) are started if there is suspicion of septicshock.
/square6Intravenous steroids (hydrocortisone or dexametha-
sone) are given for adrenal insufficiency.
Q.Define systemic inflammatory response syndrome
(SIRS) and MODS (multiple organ dysfunctionsyndrome). Discuss the etiology, pathogenesis and
management of SIRS.
/square6SIRS is a widespread inflammatory response to avariety of severe clinical insults. SIRS is defined bythe presence of ≥2 of the following conditions:
– Fever (oral temperature >38°C) or hypothermia
(<36°C).
– Tachypnea (>20 breaths/min) or arterial carbon
dioxide tension (PaCO
2) of less than 32 mm Hg.
– Tachycardia (>90 beats/min).
– Leukocytosis (>12,000/ μL), or leukopenia
(<4,000/ μL), or >10% bands in peripheral blood.
/square6The etiology of SIRS may be infectious or noninfec-
tious. SIRS that has a proven or suspected microbial
etiology is referred to as ‘sepsis’.
/square6MODS is severe form of SIRS where there is damage
to 2 or more organs.
Causes of SIRS
• Infections (e.g. pneumonia, UTI, cellulitis, meningitis)
• Burns
• Trauma
• Drug reaction
• Electrical injuries
• Myocardial infarction
• Pancreatitis
• Seizure
• Extensive surgical procedures
• Transfusion reactions
Pathogenesis
/square6Basically microorganisms themselves and their
products or the noninfectious insult cause activa-tion of inflammatory cells such as macrophages,
monocytes, neutrophils, etc. in the host. Activated
inflammatory cells release immune mediatorscalled cytokines such as IL-1, IL-6, IL-8 and TNF- α.
Other cytokines that have a supposed role in sepsisare IL-10, interferon gamma, IL-12, macrophagemigration inhibition factor (MIF), granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), and granulocyte
macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF).The release of all these cytokines lead to a systemicinflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) in thehost characterized by diffuse endothelial damage,increased vascular permeability, vasodilation, and
activation of coagulation cascade.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
18670 /square6Endothelial damage leads to increased capillary
permeability leading to intravascular fluid loss andhypotension. Arterial vasodilation is another impor-tant cause of hypotension. Cause of vasodilation ismultifactorial, but the primary factors are activationof ATP-sensitive potassium channels in vascular
smooth muscle and activation of NO synthase.
Initially counter-regulatory mechanisms like sym-pathetic overactivity maintain BP but when thesemechanisms fail, BP falls and septic shock develops.
/square6Septic shock is characterized by hypotension(systolic BP less than 90 mmHg), which leads totissue hypoxia which in turn leads to anaerobicmetabolism and increased production of lactic acid.Increased lactic acid leads to metabolic acidosis.Metabolic acidosis leads to tachypnea to allow
respiratory compensation. Hypotension also causes
decreased renal perfusion which leads to decreasedurine output.
/square6The organism responsible for sepsis may directly
affect all the organs like liver, brain, blood, etc.
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) maydevelop in severe sepsis due to altered regulationof clotting mechanisms.
/square6A combination of direct affection, hypotension andDIC lead to multiple organ dysfunction as evidencedby bleeding (affection of blood ), jaundice (affectionof liver), decreased urine output (affection ofkidney), altered mental status (affection of CNS),ARDS (affection of lungs). 1 in 2 persons with
multiorgan dysfunction and DIC die.
Clinical Features, Investigations and Management
/square6See under sepsis.
Q.Define bacteremia, sepsis, severe sepsis and septic
shock.
Q.Discuss the etiopathogenesis of sepsis. How do
you investigate and manage a case of sepsis?
Definition
/square6Bacteremia  means the presence of bacteria in the
blood.
/square6Sepsis means SIRS that has a proven or suspected
microbial etiology.
/square6Septic shock  is sepsis with hypotension (arterial
blood pressure <90 mm Hg systolic, or reduction of
more than 40 mm Hg from baseline) in the absenceof other causes of hypotension. Hypotension is notcorrected by fluid resuscitation.
Etiology
/square6Sepsis may be due to any microorganisms likebacteria, virus, fungus, protozoa or rickettsiae. Butmajority of sepsis cases are due to gram-negative
and gram-positive bacteria.Pathogenesis
/square6It is same as that described under SIRS.
Clinical Features
History
/square6Fever or hypothermia.
/square6Tachypnea.
/square6Decreased urine output.
/square6Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea.
/square6Disorientation and confusion.
Examination
General examination
/square6Patient may be confused and disoriented.
/square6Presence of tachycardia, tachypnea and hypotension.
/square6Temperature high or rarely low (oral temperature>38°C or <36°C, respectively) (low temperature may
be seen in neonates, elderly patients, uremic patients,alcoholic patients and immunocompromised patients.
/square6Pallor and jaundice may be present.
/square6Peripheries may be cold and cyanosed.
/square6Cellulitis, pustules, bullae/hemorrhagic lesions
may be there. These findings may be the cause or
effect of sepsis.
/square6Petechiae or purpura may be seen in meningococcalinfection and Rocky Mountain spotted fever.
RS
/square6Features of pneumonia and/or ARDS may be there.
CVS
/square6Features of myocardial dysfunction may be present
due to myocarditis such as S3, S4, dilated heart, etc.
Abdomen
/square6Paralytic ileus, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly.
CNS
/square6Encephalopathy, especially in elderly patients or
those with prior neurologic impairment.
Investigations
/square6Complete blood count (CBC):  Shows leukocytosis
(WBC count >12,000/ μL) or leukopenia (WBC
count <4000) or normal WBC count with >10%
immature forms. Thrombocytopenia (plateletcount, <100,000/ μL) may be present and may
indicate direct effect of infections such as dengueor may indicate DIC.
/square6Blood cultures:  Send at least two blood cultures from
different sites preferably before administration ofantibiotics. Culture of other specimens as clinicallyindicated. For example urine culture in suspectedurosepsis or CSF culture in suspected meningitis.
/square6Markers of inflammation:  Elevation of C-reactive
protein (CRP) and procalcitonin.
/square6RFT:  Elevation of urea and creatinine.

/square6Emergency Medicine and Critical Care671
18/square6LFT:  Elevation of bilirubin, AST, ALT and ALP.
/square6Coagulation abnormalities:  INR >1.5 or aPTT> 60 secs.
/square6Arterial blood gases (ABG):  Show hypoxemia and
usually metabolic acidosis.
/square6Serum lactate:  Elevated due to hypotension, tissue
hypoxia and anaerobic metabolism.
/square6Procalcitonin: Elevated serum procalcitonin levelis seen in sepsis. This test can be used to differentiatesepsis from SIRS.
/square6Chest X-ray:  May show presence of pneumonia,
empyema (which may be cause of sepsis) or ARDSdue to sepsis.
/square6Echocardiogram:  It can rule out infective endocarditis
as a cause of sepsis and may also show myocardialdysfunction in the form of poor ejection fraction.
/square6Imaging studies:  Ultrasound or CT scan may be used
to identify the source of sepsis in case of localized
infections (example, intra-abdominal abscess).
/square6Other investigations as required to identify theinfecting organism such as tests for malaria, WIDAL
test, HIV and HBsAg serology, dengue serology,
tests for leptospirosis, scrub typhus, etc.
Management of Sepsis and Septic Shock
/square6The goals are to identify the causative organism,eradicate the focus of infection and pathogens from
the blood stream, and correct organ dysfunction.
/square6Prompt and aggressive treatment is often successful
but once septic shock supervenes the mortality ishigh.
Antibiotics
/square6Initially a broad spectrum antibiotic is chosen basedon the suspected organism and focus of infection.Reasonable initial choice of antibiotics includecarbapenems (imipenem, meropenem), or cefopera-zone with sulbactam, or piperacillin-tazobactam.
Antibiotics can be changed later, once the infecting
organism is identified and culture sensitivityreports are available.
/square6Antibiotics should be administered intravenously.
Supportive Measures
/square6Intravenous fluids should be administered.
/square6If the BP is low in spite of giving adequate IV fluidsBP should be maintained by giving infusions ofnoradrenaline or dopamine either alone or incombination. Noradrenaline is the drug of choicein septic shock to maintain BP.
/square6Respiratory function should be carefully monitoredfor the development of ARDS and timely intuba-tion and mechanical ventilation instituted wherenecessary.
/square6Renal function, hepatic function, and disturbancesin coagulation should be assessed and if abnormalmanaged accordingly. Renal failure may requirehemodialysis./square6Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) prophylaxis is required.Use unfractionated heparin (UFH) or low molecularweight heparin (LMWH) unless contraindicated. Ifheparin is contraindicated, mechanical prophylacticdevice, such as compression stockings or anintermittent compression device can be used.
Corticosteroids
/square6Steroids are indicated in septic shock when hypo-tension responds poorly to fluid resuscitation andvasopressors (noradrenaline). Steroids should notbe used in sepsis if hypotension is not present unlessthe patient’s endocrine or corticosteroid history
warrants it. Choice of steroid is hydrocortisone (50 mg
6th hourly).
Surgery
/square6Has a role when there is a well-defined abscess or aforeign body. Wherever there is an abscess it shouldbe drained. Antibiotics alone may be inadequate
without draining the abscess.
/square6Surgery also has a role when the tissues are necrosed
and gangrenous and act as a source of infection andsepsis. Such necrosed and gangrenous foci should
be removed.
Q.Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).
Q.Acute lung injury (ALI).
/square6ARDS was earlier defined as the acute onset of
respiratory failure, bilateral infiltrates on chestX-ray, hypoxemia (PaO
2/FiO2 ratio ≥200 mmHg),
and pulmonary capillary pressure <18 mmHg(if measured) to rule out cardiogenic edema. In
addition, acute lung injury (ALI) was defined as
PaO
2/FiO2 of 200 to <300 mmHg.
/square6However, the above definition of ARDS was foundto be inadequate and hence, the definition was
further refined in 2011 by a panel of experts who
met at Berlin and is termed the Berlin definition ofARDS. In the Berlin definition, there is no use ofthe term acute lung injury (ALI).
ARDS Berlin Definition
TABLE 18.1: ARDS definition
Timing Within 1 week of a known clinical
insult or new or worsening respiratory
symptoms
Chest imaging Bilateral opacities—not fully explained
(X-ray or CT scan) by effusions, lobar/lung collapse, or
nodules
Origin of pulmonary Respiratory failure not fully explained
edema by cardiac failure or fluid overload
Oxygenation (with PEEP Mild ARDS: PaO2/FiO2 200 to
or CPAP ≥≥≥≥≥5 cm H2O ≤300 mmHg
Moderate ARDS: PaO2/FiO2 100 to
≤200 mmHg
Severe ARDS: PaO2/FiO2 ≤100 mmHg

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
18672
Pathogenesis
/square6Inflammatory cells collect in the lungs because of
direct or indirect lung injury listed above. Cytokinesare released from inflammatory cells which causedamage to capillary endothelial cells and alveolarepithelial cells. Damage to these cells causesincreased vascular permeability and decreased
production of surfactant which result in interstitial
and alveolar pulmonary edema, alveolar collapse,and hypoxemia.
/square6Three stages can be recognized in the evolution of
ARDS; exudative, proliferative, and fibrotic stages.
/square6The exudative phase is characterized by alveolar
edema, neutrophil-rich leukocytic infiltration andhyaline membrane formation.
/square6Proliferative phase occurs within 7 days and ischaracterized by interstitial inflammation and earlyfibrotic changes. Some patients enter the fibroticphase approximately 3 weeks after the initial lung
injury which is characterized by substantial fibrosis
and bullae formation.
Clinical Features
/square6ARDS is marked by the rapid onset of profound
dyspnea that usually occurs 12–48 hours after the
initiating event.
/square6Physical examination reveals labored breathing,tachypnea, intercostal retractions, and diffuse
crepitations.
/square6Many patients with ARDS have multiple organ
failure.
Investigations
/square6Chest X-ray  shows diffuse or patchy bilateral
infiltrates which become confluent with sparing ofcostophrenic angles. Air bronchograms may beseen. Heart size is normal, and pleural effusionsare nil or minimal./square6ABG  analysis shows marked hypoxemia that is
refractory to supplemental oxygen.
/square6Bronchoscopy and lung biopsy  can be considered in
patients in whom the cause of ARDS is not clear.
Treatment
/square6Treatment of ARDS must include identification andtreatment of the underlying precipitating condition(e.g. sepsis, aspiration, trauma).
/square6Treatment of hypoxemia usually requires trachealintubation and positive pressure mechanicalventilation. The lowest levels of PEEP (used torecruit atelectatic alveoli) and supplemental oxygenrequired to maintain the SaO
2 above 90% should
be used. Prone positioning may improve oxygena-
tion by recruiting atelectatic alveoli. A variety ofmechanical ventilation strategies like using volume-cycled ventilation with small tidal volumes (6 mL/kg of ideal body weight) have shown benefit in trials.
/square6Fluid administration should be restricted andenough to maintain pulmonary capillary wedgepressure at the lowest level compatible with ade-quate cardiac output. Crystalloid solutions shouldbe used when intravascular volume expansion is
necessary. Diuretics should be used to reduce intra-
vascular volume if pulmonary capillary wedgepressure is elevated.
/square6Systemic corticosteroids have been studied extensi-
vely with variable and inconsistent results. Though
steroids cannot be recommended routinely for allpatients, studies have shown benefit in late phaseARDS.
/square6Supportive care should be provided to minimizevenous thromboembolism, gastrointestinal bleeding,and central venous catheter infections. Adequatenutrition should be provided for a good outcome.
Course and Prognosis
/square6Mortality rate associated with ARDS is 30–40%.Median survival is about 2 weeks.
/square6Most survivors of ARDS are left with some pulmo-nary symptoms (cough, dyspnea, sputum produc-
tion), which tend to improve over time.
Q.Respiratory failure.
/square6Respiratory failure is a condition in which the
respiratory system fails in one or both of its gasexchange functions, i.e. oxygenation and/orelimination of carbon dioxide. Arterial blood gascriteria for respiratory failure are a PaO
2 under
60 mm Hg or a pCO2 over 50 mm Hg.
/square6Respiratory failure can arise from an abnormalityin any of the components of the respiratory system,including the airways, alveoli, central nervoussystem (CNS), peripheral nervous system, respira-
tory muscles, and chest wall.Causes of ARDS
/square6ARDS is caused by diffuse lung injury due to many
medical and surgical disorders.
TABLE 18.2: Causes of ARDS
Direct lung injury Indirect lung injury
Pneumonia Anaphylaxis (drugs, wasp, bee
Aspiration of gastric contents sting)Lung contusion Drug overdose (heroin, barbitu-Smoke inhalation rates)Amniotic fluid embolism Pancreatitis
Fat embolism Cardiopulmonary bypassNear-drowning SepsisDiffuse alveolar hemorrhage Shock
Severe traumaMultiple bone fracturesMultiple blood transfusionsBurns

/square6Emergency Medicine and Critical Care673
18/square6Respiratory failure can be classified as follows:
–Hypoxemic respiratory failure (type 1) : Hypoxemia
present, pCO2 normal or low. It is caused by
processes that impair oxygen transfer in the lung,
e.g. acute asthma, pulmonary edema, pulmonary
embolism, pneumonia, ARDS.
–Hypercapnic respiratory failure (type 2):  Hypoxemia
usually present, pCO2 high. It is caused by
inadequate ventilation leading to retention of
CO2, and hypoxemia, e.g. COPD, myasthenia
gravis, brainstem stroke.
–Mixed respiratory failure: Here,  there is a combina-
tion of type 1 and type 2 respiratory failure
(acute-on-chronic respiratory failure).
/square6Respiratory failure may be further classified aseither acute or chronic. Acute respiratory failure
develops over minutes to hours, e.g. pneumothorax,
pulmonary edema. Chronic respiratory failuredevelops over several days or longer, e.g. COPD.
/square6Respiratory failure is a serious condition associated
with poor prognosis. Incidence and mortality from
respiratory failure increase with age and in the pre-sence of other comorbid conditions.
/square6Prognosis has improved now because of advances
in mechanical ventilation and airway management.
Even patients with irreversible chronic respiratoryfailure can now have a reasonably good quality oflife with domiciliary ventilator support systems.Lung transplantation is another option for patientswith chronic respiratory failure.
Causes of Respiratory Failure
Lung disorders
• Asthma
• COPD• Bronchiolitis• Obstruction of airways due to mass or foreign body• Pulmonary edema• Pneumonia
• Interstitial lung diseases
• Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage syndromes• Aspiration• Lung contusion• Pulmonary embolism• Pulmonary AV malformations
Muscular disorders
• Botulism• Neuromuscular blocking agents•Electrolyte disturbances:  Hypokalemia, hyperkalemia
Nervous system disorders
• Brainstem disorders
• CNS infections
• Guillain-Barré syndrome• Myasthenia gravis• Poliomyelitis• Spinal cord injuryChest wall, diaphragm, and pleural disorders
• Rib fracture• Pneumothorax• Pleural effusion• Phrenic nerve injury or dysfunction• Massive ascites
Drugs
• Sedative overdose• Anesthetics
Clinical Features
/square6Symptoms and signs of acute respiratory failure are
those of the underlying disease plus those of hypo-
xemia and/or hypercapnia.
Due to Hypoxemia
/square6Dyspnea, cyanosis, restlessness, confusion, anxiety,delirium, tachypnea, hypertension, cardiac arrhyth-mias, and tremor.
Due to Hypercarbia
/square6Dyspnea, headache, peripheral flushing, boundingpulses, hypertension, tachycardia, tachypnea, alteredsensorium, papilledema, and flapping tremors
(asterixis).
Investigations
/square6Routine blood tests:  Complete blood count, renal func-
tion tests, liver function tests, serum electrolytes.
Abnormalities in electrolytes such as potassium andmagnesium can cause or aggravate respiratoryfailure.
/square6Pulse oximetry  is a noninvasive method to determine
arterial oxygen saturation.
/square6Arterial blood gas (ABG)  analysis can accurately
assess blood oxygen and carbon dioxide content.
/square6Chest X-ray  can show any lung pathology such as
pneumonia, ARDS, etc.
/square6Pulmonary function tests  if feasible.
/square6Thyroid function tests  should be done to rule out
hypothyroidism as the cause of respiratory failure.
/square6Cardiac evaluation  with ECG, ECHO and troponins
are important to rule out cardiac problem as a causeof respiratory failure.
Treatment
/square6Treatment of respiratory failure consists of: (1) Treat-ment of underlying disease, (2) respiratory support,
and (3) general supportive care.
/square6Treatment of underlying disease : Treating pulmonary
edema, COPD, myasthenia gravis, etc. which havecaused respiratory failure.
/square6Respiratory support: Providing supplemental oxygen
through mask or nasal cannula helps correctinghypoxemia. High concentrations of oxygen areneeded for patients with ARDS, pneumonia, and

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
18674 other parenchymal lung diseases. Low flow oxygen
should be used in COPD because their respiratorydrive may be due to hypoxia. Mechanical ventilatorsupport is required if the patient is not respondingto oxygen supplementation. It may be providedvia face mask (noninvasive) or through tracheal
intubation. Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
(ECMO) is a treatment that uses a pump to circulateblood through an artificial lung and back into thebloodstream. ECMO is indicated in severe respira-tory failure not responding to even mechanicalventilation.
/square6General supportive care: This includes providing
adequate hydration and nutrition, preventing stressulcers in the stomach by using sucralfate syrup,preventing bedsores, and preventing deep vein
thrombosis by using subcutaneous heparin or low
molecular weight heparin.
Q.Discuss the causes, clinical features and manage-
ment of hypoxia.
/square6Hypoxia is defined as lack of oxygen in tissues.
Hypoxemia is decreased oxygen concentration ofblood. Hypoxia is usually preceded by hypoxemia.
Causes of Hypoxia
/square6Hypoxia secondary to high altitude.
/square6Anemic hypoxia.
/square6Carbon monoxide intoxication.
/square6Respiratory hypoxia (due to advanced respiratorydisease).
/square6Hypoxia secondary to right-to-left shunting (tetra-
logy of Fallot, transposition of the great arteries,
and Eisenmenger’s syndrome).
/square6Stagnant hypoxia (heart failure, shock).
/square6Histotoxic hypoxia (cyanide poisoning).
Clinical Features
/square6Cyanosis, dyspnea, tachycardia.
/square6CNS effects:  Impaired judgment, motor incoordina-
tion, fatigue, drowsiness, apathy, inattentiveness,
delayed reaction time, and reduced work capacity.
/square6CVS:  Pulmonary vasoconstriction, increase in
pulmonary vascular resistance and right ventricularafterload. Increase in cardiac output due to genera-
lized vasodilation.
/square6Metabolic effects:  Anaerobic metabolism leading to
lactic acid production and metabolic acidosis.
/square6Blood:  Chronic hypoxia causes secondary polycy-
themia.
Investigations
/square6Pulse oxymetry  may show decreased oxygen
saturation.
/square6ABG (arterial blood gases)  show decreased PaO2
except in histotoxic hypoxia./square6Chest X-ray  to rule out any underlying lung disease.
/square6Blood tests  to rule out anemia.
/square6ECG and echocardiogram to rule out cardiac dis-
orders.
Treatment
/square6Oxygen supplementation:  This will correct hypoxia
in all cases except in left to right shunts and ventila-tion perfusion mismatching. Oxygen can be givenby nasal cannulae, face mask or through endotra-cheal intubation.
/square6Treatment of the underlying cause.
Q.Oxygen therapy.
/square6Oxygen is widely available and commonly pres-
cribed.
/square6Oxygen is the vital gas. When administered correctlyit is lifesaving.
/square6It should be treated like any other drug; it should
be prescribed in writing, with the required flow rate
and the method of delivery clearly specified.
Indications for Oxygen Therapy
/square6Cardiac and respiratory arrest.
/square6Hypoxemia (PaO2 <60 mmHg, SPO2 <90%).
/square6Hypotension (systolic blood pressure <80 mm Hg).
/square6Low cardiac output and metabolic acidosis(bicarbonate <18 mmol/L).
/square6Respiratory distress (respiratory rate >24/min).
/square6High dose oxygen therapy:  60–100% oxygen, e.g.
asthma, pulmonary embolism, MI, cardiac arrest,
respiratory arrest, hypotension, etc. When high
flow masks are used for prolonged periods, oxygenshould be humidified by passing it over warm water.
/square6Low dose oxygen is given to patients with COPD.
Recognizing Hypoxia
/square6Tissue hypoxia occurs within 4 minutes of stoppage
of oxygen supply.
/square6Successful treatment of tissue hypoxia requires
early recognition.
/square6Clinical features are often non-specific and includealtered mental state, dyspnea, cyanosis, tachypnea,arrhythmias, and coma.
/square6Arterial oxygen saturation (SpO2) and PaO2 are
easily measured and are the main indicators forstarting oxygen therapy. However, PaO
2 and SpO2
can be normal when tissue hypoxia is caused bylow output cardiac states, anemia, and failure oftissue to use oxygen.
How to Give Oxygen?
Oxygen Masks
/square6The mask and valve design allows delivery of an
inspired oxygen of 24 to 90%.

/square6Emergency Medicine and Critical Care675
18/square6There are two basic types of oxygen masks. High
flow mask and low flow mask. High flow maskscontain Venturi valves, which use the principle ofjet mixing (Bernoulli effect). When oxygen passesthrough a narrow orifice it produces a high velocitystream that draws a constant proportion of room
air through the base of the Venturi valve. Air
entrainment depends on the velocity of the jet (thesize of orifice and oxygen flow rate) and the size ofthe valve ports. It can be accurately controlled togive inspired oxygen levels of 24 to 60%.
Nasal Prongs
/square6These are simple and convenient to use. The FiO2
depends on the flow rate of oxygen (1–6 L/min).Nasal prongs prevent rebreathing, are comfortablefor long periods, and allow talking and eating.
High-flow Nasal Oxygen Therapy (HFNO)
/square6High-flow nasal oxygen (HFNO) administration isa relatively new technique that is used in theintensive care unit (ICU), and increasingly in the
operating theaters. HFNO has become popular in
the ICU for management of patients with acutehypoxemic respiratory failure when attempting toavoid intubation or to help after extubation. HFNOhas become a valuable tool in the management ofCOVID-19 patients with hypoxia. HFNO provides
humidified, titrated oxygen therapy matching or
even exceeding the patients’ inspiratory demand.In addition, HFNO has been proposed to limitoxygen desaturation by prolonging apneicoxygenation during intubation both in ICUs andoperating theaters.
Noninvasive Ventilation
/square6Supplemental oxygen may be provided throughtight fitting nasal or full face masks during nasalintermittent positive pressure ventilation and
continuous positive airways pressure.
Invasive Ventilation
/square6Patient is intubated and endotracheal tube is connec-
ted to an oxygen source or a ventilator. Inspired O2
(FiO2) can be varied by adjusting ventilator settings.
Monitoring Oxygen Therapy
/square6ABG measurements:  ABG analysis provides accurate
information on the pH, PaO2, and PaCO2, but invasive.
/square6Pulse oximetry:  Noninvasive, and provides conti-
nuous monitoring of the state of oxygenation.
Dangers of Oxygen Therapy
/square6Fire:  Oxygen promotes combustion. Facial burns
and deaths of patients who smoke when using
oxygen are well documented./square6Oxygen toxicity:  100% oxygen is both irritant and
toxic if inhaled for more than a few hours. Pre-
mature infants develop retrolental fibroplasia and
blindness if exposed to excessive concentrations.
High concentrations of oxygen (>60%) may damage
the alveolar membrane when inhaled for more than
48 hours. Progression to the acute respiratory distress
syndrome with high protein alveolar edema and
pulmonary radiographic infiltrates is associated
with high mortality.
/square6Paul-Bert effect:  Breathing hyperbaric oxygen (for
example, when diving) can cause severe cerebral
vasoconstriction and epileptic fits.
Q.Mechanical ventilation.
/square6Mechanical ventilation is a method to mechanically
assist or replace spontaneous breathing by using a
mechanical ventilator.
/square6Mechanical ventilation can be noninvasive or inva-
sive. In noninvasive method, tracheal intubation is
not done and ventilation is provided through a tight
fitting face mask, e.g. NPPV (noninvasive positive
pressure ventilation). In invasive ventilation endo-
tracheal intubation or tracheostomy is done and
patient is ventilated through these.
Indications
• Bradypnea or apnea with respiratory arrest
• Severe hypercapnia not reversed by appropriate specific therapy
• ARDS
• Severe pneumonia• COPD with respiratory failure• Acute severe asthma• Circulatory failure• Pulmonary edema
• Coma
• Status epilepticus• Respiratory muscle paralysis (e.g. Guillain-Barre, polio-
myelitis, myasthenia gravis)
• Head injury—to reduce intracranial pressure by hyper-
ventilation
• Brainstem disorders affecting respiratory center.
Modes of Ventilation
/square6There are several modes of mechanical ventilation.
/square6In CMV (controlled mechanical ventilation), minute
ventilation is completely dependent upon the rate
and tidal volume set. Respiratory efforts made by
the patient do not contribute to minute ventilation.
CMV is used in patients who are making no respira-
tory effort (e.g. spinal cord injury or those who have
been subjected to pharmacologic paralysis).
/square6AC (assist control):  Here, the minimal minute
ventilation is determined by setting the respiratory
rate and tidal volume. The patient can increase the
minute ventilation by triggering additional breaths.
Each patient-initiated breath receives the set tidalvolume from the ventilator.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
18676 /square6IMV (intermittent mandatory ventilation):  This is
similar to AC in that the minimal minute ventilationis determined by setting the respiratory rate andtidal volume. But in IMV, the additional patientinitiated breaths are not supported by ventilator.
/square6In SIMV (synchronized intermittent mandatoryventilation), patient can breathe on his own inaddition to the set number of breaths delivered byventilator. In addition, ventilator breaths aresynchronized with patient’s inspiratory efforts.
/square6In CPAP (continuous positive airway pressureventilation) breaths are taken by patient and venti-lator provides only pressure support.
Weaning from Mechanical Ventilation
/square6Weaning is slowly taking off the ventilator support.It is done over a period of hours to days. Mechanicalventilation cannot be stopped suddenly as the
patient is adapted to ventilator and may not be able
to breathe.
/square6Weaning should be considered when the under-lying cause of respiratory failure has resolved.Complications of Mechanical Ventilation
/square6Migration of the tip of the endotracheal tube into a
main bronchus can cause atelectasis of the contra-lateral lung and overdistension of the intubated
lung.
/square6Barotrauma can occur in patients ventilated with
high tidal volumes and high pressures. There is
rupture of alveoli and small airways due to high
pressures. It is manifested by subcutaneous emphy-sema, pneumomediastinum, pneumothorax, or
systemic gas embolism.
/square6Acute respiratory alkalosis can occur due to hyper-
ventilation.
/square6Hypotension can occur in patients put on excessivePEEP, because excess intrathoracic pressure pre-vents venous return to heart and hypotension.
/square6Tracheal stenosis can occur if endotracheal tube iskept for long time.
/square6Ventilator-associated pneumonia is another serious
complication.

19
677Case scenario based discussions are very helpful to
sharpen your diagnostic and interpreting skills. Theyare an excellent way of learning medicine. Recently,
many UG and PG medical examinations include one
or two case scenario based questions. In the followingpages, there are many case scenarios which wecommonly encounter in our daily clinical practice.
Q.A 30-year-old man presents with 5 days history of
fever, headache and vomiting. Headache is diffuseand severe. Examination shows neck stiffness andKernig sign is positive. Discuss about the most likely
diagnosis in this patient.
/square6Because of presence of fever, headache and neckstiffness, the most likely diagnosis in this patient isacute meningitis most probably pyogenic.Differential diagnosis includes migraine headache,
subarachnoid hemorrhage, and encephalitis. In case
of migraine similar episodes of headache areusually present previously with spontaneousrecovery and fever is absent. Subarachnoidhemorrhage is usually characterized by abruptonset of severe diffuse headache and fever is usually
absent. Encephalitis is also a differential diagnosis,
but neck stiffness is usually absent and alteredsensorium is usually present. Other differentialdiagnoses are brain abscess and cortical venoussinus thrombosis
/square6CSF analysis will confirm the diagnosis in thispatient.
/square6Acute meningitis is a medical emergency. Empiric
antibiotic therapy should be started as early as
possible. The empirical drug of choice is a combina-tion of third generation cephalosporin (such asceftriaxone or cefotaxime) plus vancomycin. Ceftri-
axone covers Streptococcus pneumoniae  (the most
common organism causing meningitis in adults),
whereas vancomycin covers penicillin resistantCase Scenario
Based Discussions
Streptococcus pneumoniae . Vancomycin can be
stopped if Streptococcus pneumoniae  penicillin
sensitive as per culture sensitivity report.
/square6Complications of this condition include hearingloss, cortical blindness, cranial nerve palsies, stroke,seizures, mental retardation, subdural effusions,hydrocephalus, cerebral atrophy and sepsis.
/square6Refer to ‘Acute pyogenic meningitis’ in Chapter 5for more detailed discussion.
Q.A middle-aged farmer presents with 4 days history
of fever and generalized body ache. He has also
noticed yellowish di scoloration of eyes and oliguria.
Examination reveals muscle tenderness.
1. What is your diagnosis?2. What investigation will you do to confirm the
diagnosis?
3. How do you treat this patient?
/square6The most likely diagnosis is leptospirosis becauseit presents with prominent myalgia due to muscleinvolvement, jaundice due to liver involvement andoliguria due to kidney involvement. Leptospirosis
is common in certain occupations such as farmers,
sewage workers and abattoir workers. This patientis a farmer. Patients may also present with meningo-
encephalitis and ARDS. Leptospirosis is trans-mitted via direct contact with the body fluid of anacutely infected animal or by exposure to soil or
fresh water contaminated with the urine of an
animal that is a chronic carrier.
/square6Differential diagnosis includes dengue, acute viralhepatitis, brucellosis, malaria, and other infectious
diseases with sepsis.
/square6Serum IgM leptospira antibody will be positive in
the blood. Creatine kinase (CK) levels will beelevated in the blood due to muscle damage. LFT
and RFT will also be abnormal in this case.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
19678 Darkfield microscopy can demonstrate leptospira,
but not available in all the labs.
/square6Oral doxycycline can be used in stable patients. Forseriously ill patients intravenous penicillin G is
the treatment of choice. Third generation cephalo-
sporins (cefotaxime, ceftriaxone) are as effective asdoxycycline and penicillin.
/square6Refer to ‘leptospirosis’ in Chapter 1: Infectious
Diseases for detailed discussion.
Q.A 30-year-old lady presents with history of breath-
lessness and wheezing of 2 days duration. She alsogives history of similar episodes since childhood
usually during spring season. She is not a smoker.
Her mother also has similar complaints.
What is your diagnosis? Discuss the etiology, patho-
genesis, clinical features and treatment of the same.
/square6Most likely diagnosis is acute exacerbation of
asthma because of similar episodes in the past withseasonal exacerbation, positive family history andonset since childhood. She is also a nonsmoker(COPD has to be considered in chronic smokers).
All these points favor the diagnosis of asthma.
/square6Other possibilities to be considered when a patient
presents with acute onset breathlessness withwheezing are acute pulmonary edema due to left
ventricular failure, acute exacerbation of COPD,
allergic reactions causing bronchospasm, tropicalpulmonary eosinophilia, eosinophilic pneumonias,etc. Acute bronchitis needs to be considered for asingle isolated episode of wheezing. But this patienthas recurrent episodes.
/square6Treatment involves bronchodilators preferablygiven via nebulizer, i.e. salbutamol nebulizationplus ipratropium bromide nebulization 4th to 6thhourly. Nebulized steroids also help in decreasingthe severity of attack (e.g. budesonide nebulization
every 12th hourly). Oral steroids or parenteral
steroids can be given in acute severe asthma.Antibiotics can be given if the cause of asthmaexacerbation is respiratory tract infection.
/square6For a detailed discussion refer to asthma inChapter 2: Respiratory System.
Q.A 55-year-old man, who has been smoking for the
last 25 years presents with dyspnea on exertion of8 years duration. Dyspnea has progressed fromgrade 1 to grade 2 for the last 3 years. He also
gives history of recurrent episodes of cough with
scanty mucoid sputum associated with wheezing.He does not report any chest pain, orthopnea orparoxysmal nocturnal dyspnea (PND).
1. What is your diagnosis?
2. What findings are you likely to get on examination?
3.How do you treat this patient??/square6Most likely diagnosis is COPD, predominantly
chronic bronchitis because of chronic cough withwheezing. Other points favoring a diagnosis ofCOPD are smoking history and progressivebreathlessness. It is unlikely to be asthma becauseasthma does not lead to progressive worsening of
breathlessness over the years. It is unlikely to be
IHD or heart failure because of the absence of chestpain, orthopnea and PND.
/square6Other differentials for progressive breathlessnessare heart disease (IHD, rheumatic heart disease,cardiac failure), interstitial lung diseases, etc.
/square6Examination may show barrel-shaped chest,bilateral lung crepitations, and bilateral rhonchi. Inadvanced COPD, cyanosis, signs of pulmonaryHTN such as loud P2, right ventricular hypertrophy
(suggested by parasternal heave, shift of apex beat
laterally) may be present. Cor pulmonale may deve-lop in advanced cases with significant pulmonaryHTN which produces raised JVP with peripheraledema.
/square6Refer to COPD in Chapter 2: Diseases of RespiratorySystem for detailed discussion.
Q.A 40-year-old lady presents with history of recurrent
episodes of cough with copious amount of sputumfor the past 10 years. She had suffered from pulmo-nary tuberculosis 15 years ago. Examination revealspresence of clubbing and bilateral basal coarse
crepitations.
1. What is the most likely diagnosis? Discuss the
etiology, clinical features, investigations andmanagement of the same.
2. How do you prevent recurrent chest infections
in her?
/square6The most likely diagnosis is bronchiectasis which
has developed as a sequela of past pulmonarytuberculosis. Recurrent episodes of cough withsputum are due to recurrent lower respiratory tract
infections.
/square6Differential diagnosis of chronic cough with
bilateral crepitations include extrinsic allergicalveolitis, heart failure, interstitial lung disease,pneumonia and tuberculosis.
/square6Diagnosis can be confirmed by high resolution CT(HRCT) of chest which will show dilated bronchi.Bronchography can also be done but not commonly
done nowadays due to the availability of CT scan.
/square6Treatment involves antibiotics and chest physio-
therapy. Surgery is an option for selected patientswith advanced or complicated disease. Antibioticchoices include amoxicillin, doxycycline, trimetho-prim-sulfamethoxazole, a newer macrolide (e.g.azithromycin or clarithromycin), cephalosporins or
a fluoroquinolone.

/square6Case Scenario Based Discussions679
19/square6Recurrent infections can be prevented to some
extent by smoking cessation, avoidance of second-hand smoke, good nutrition and immunizations forinfluenza and pneumococcal pneumonia.
/square6Refer to bronchiectasis in Chapter 2: Diseases ofRespiratory System for more detailed discussion.
Q.A 50-year-old man presents with cough with
expectoration of 2 weeks duration. He says his
sputum is of large quantity and foul smelling. Patientsays cough and sputum quantity are more on lyingin left lateral position. He also gives history of fever.
1. What is your diagnosis?2. What are the causes of this condition?
3. What investigation will you do to confirm the
diagnosis?
4. How do you treat this patient?
/square6Diagnosis is lung abscess in view of large quantityof foul smelling sputum, postural variation ofcough and sputum and high grade fever. Theabscess is probably in the right lung since thepatient gets more cough in left lateral position. Inleft lateral position right lung is in the upper
position and due to gravity the abscess drains into
central airways producing more cough and sputum.
/square6Causes of lung abscess include necrotizing pneu-monias due to Staphylococcus  aureus and Klebsiella
pneumoniae, tuberculosis, and aspiration pneumonia.
Other organisms causing lung abscess are anaerobes
such as Peptostreptococcus species, Bacteroides
species, Fusobacterium species, and microaerophilic
streptococci. Aerobic bacteria that may infrequentlycause lung abscess include Streptococcus pyogenes,
Streptococcus pneumoniae  (rarely), Haemophilus
influenzae, Actinomyces  species , Nocardia  species, and
gram-negative bacilli. A malignant lesion cancavitate and produce lung abscess. Nonbacterialpathogens may also cause lung abscesses in theimmunocompromised host. These include parasites(e.g. Paragonimus  and Entamoeba  species), and
fungi (e.g. Aspergillus, Cryptococcus, Histoplasma,
Blastomyces,  and Coccidioides  species).
/square6A chest X-ray will show a cavity with air fluid level.
HRCT chest can clearly show the size and extent of
an abscess. Microbiological studies of the sputum
will identify the microorganism.
/square6Treatment depends on the presumed infectingorganism. For infections caused by anaerobic
bacteria, clindamycin (600 mg four times daily IV
initially followed by oral dosage of 300 mg fourtimes daily once the patient becomes afebrile andimproves clinically) is the drug of choice. Otheroptions are any beta-lactam/beta-lactamase inhibitorcombination (example amoxicillin/clavulanate) or
carbapenems (e.g. meropenem). Lung abscess dueto S. aureus  is usually treated with vancomycin.
Duration of therapy is usually 4 to 6 weeks.
/square6Refer ‘lung abscess’ for a detailed discussion.
Q.A 25-year-old man who is a known case of rheumatic
heart disease presents with fever of three weeksduration. Examination shows petechial hemorrhages,subungual (splinter) hemorrhages, and tender sub-cutaneous nodules on the digits.
1. What is the most likely diagnosis?
2. What investigation will you do to confirm the
diagnosis?
3. How do you treat this patient?
/square6The most likely diagnosis is infective endocarditisbecause the patient is a known case of RHD. Tendersubcutaneous nodules are Osler nodes. Other signssuggestive of endocarditis should be looked for inthis patient such as Janeway lesions (nontendermaculae on the palms and soles) and Roth spots
(retinal hemorrhages with small, clear centers). Infec-
tive endocarditis can be acute or subacute. Acuteinfective endocarditis is caused by Staphylococcusand Pseudomonas, whereas subacute infectiveendocarditis is caused by Streptococcus viridans .
/square6Though, the obvious possibility is infective endo-
carditis, simultaneous work up to rule out othercauses of fever such as tuberculosis, HIV infection,etc. should be done.
/square6Duke criteria are used in the diagnosis of infectiveendocarditis. Presence of two major criteria, or onemajor and three minor criteria, or five minor criteriais required to make a clinical diagnosis of definiteendocarditis. Blood culture and echocardiogram arethe most important investigations used to confirm
the diagnosis of infective endocarditis and form the
major Duke criteria. At least three blood culturesets, ideally with the first separated from the lastby at least 1 hour, should be sent from differentvenipuncture sites over 24 hours.
/square6Treatment involves empirical antibiotic therapystarted as soon as possible after obtaining bloodcultures. Empirical therapy should be targeted atthe most likely pathogens. Initial choices of anti-biotics include benzylpenicillin plus gentamicin. If
MRSA is suspected vancomycin should be added.
Antibiotics should be given parenterally.
Q.A 50-year-old chronic smoker presents with retro-
sternal chest pain on exertion which lasts few
minutes and subsides on taking rest. Pain radiates
to left shoulder. He also gives history of excessivesweating during episodes of pain.
Discuss the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features,
investigations and management of the most likely
diagnosis?

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
19680 /square6The most likely diagnosis is stable angina.
/square6Investigations to confirm the diagnosis include ECG,
treadmill testing and coronary angiogram (CAG).
Resting ECG can be normal, hence all patients withsuspected angina should undergo treadmill testingeven if the ECG is normal. CAG can identify whichand how much of the coronary artery is blocked.
/square6Treatment involves nitrates (glyceryltrinitrate,isosorbide dinitrate and mononitrate), betablockers, antiplatelet agents (aspirin or clopidogrel)
and statins (atorvastatin, rosuvastatin). Other useful
drugs are ACE inhibitors, nondihydropyridinecalcium channel blockers (diltiazem, verapamil)and nicorandil (potassium channel activator witha nitrate component). Percutaneous transluminalcoronary angioplasty (PTCA) with stenting and
coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) can be used
to relieve or bypass the stenotic area. Transmyo-cardial laser revascularization (TMR) is anothernew technique where laser is used to make channels(small holes) in the myocardium to allow directperfusion of the myocardium from blood within
the ventricular cavity.
/square6See ‘stable angina’ for a detailed discussion.
Q.A 55-year-old diabetic and hypertensive develops
severe left-sided chest pain while working. Pain hasbeen present for the last 30 minutes. He also hasdyspnea and fatigue. Examination shows diapho-
resis, pale cool skin, tachycardia, presence of S3
and bilateral basal lung crepitations.
1. What is your diagnosis?2. What investigation will you do to confirm the
diagnosis?
3. How do you treat this patient?
/square6Most likely diagnosis is acute myocardial infarctionwith left ventricular failure (LVF). Chest pain of MIis more severe than angina and lasts for more than20 minutes (this patient has severe pain and pain is
present for 30 minutes). Diaphoresis and tachy-
cardia are due to sympathetic stimulation. Pale coolskin is due to peripheral vasoconstriction due to heartfailure and sympathetic stimulation. Presence of S3and bibasal lung crepitations is due to left ventri-cular failure and pulmonary edema respectively.
/square6Investigations to confirm the diagnosis of MI includeECG, CK-MB, troponins and echocardiogram. ECGusually shows ST elevation and formation of patho-
logical Q waves. However, ST elevation may not
be present in non-ST elevation MI. Cardiac enzymessuch as CK-MB and troponins get elevated after MI.Echocardiogram may show dilated heart and hypo-kinesia or akinesia of the affected myocardium.Coronary angiogram (CAG) can identify which and
how much of the coronary artery is blocked./square6Treatment involves nitrates (glyceryltrinitrate, iso-
sorbide dinitrate and mononitrate), beta blockers,antiplatelet agents (aspirin or clopidogrel) andstatins (atorvastatin, rosuvastatin). Other usefuldrugs are ACE inhibitors, nondihydropyridinecalcium channel blockers (diltiazem, verapamil)
and nicorandil (potassium channel activator with
a nitrate component). Percutaneous transluminalcoronary angioplasty (PTCA) with stenting andcoronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) can be usedto relieve or bypass the stenotic coronary arteries.Thrombolysis (using streptokinase or urokinase)
can be considered if facility for percutaneous
coronary interventions is not available. Transmyo-cardial laser revascularization (TMR) is anothernew technique here laser is used to make channels(small holes) in the myocardium to allow directperfusion of the myocardium from blood within
the ventricular cavity.
/square6See ‘myocardial infarction’ under CVS chapter fordetailed discussion.
Q.A 35-year-old lady presents with easy fatigability
and dyspnea on exertion of 4 years duration. Shealso gives history of recurrent respiratory tract
infections. Examination shows hyperdynamic pre-
cordium, signs of pulmonary hypertension, widelysplit and fixed second heart sound.
1. What is your diagnosis?
2. What investigation will you do to confirm the
diagnosis?
3. How do you treat this patient?
/square6Most likely diagnosis is atrial septal defect (ASD).In ASD there is shunting of blood from highpressure left atrium to low pressure right atrium.Consequently, there is increased blood flow intopulmonary circulation. Increased pulmonary bloodflow leads to development of pulmonary HTN. This
usually happens above the age of 30 years. Dyspnea
and easy fatigability are due to development ofpulmonary hypertension. Recurrent respiratoryinfections are due to increased pulmonary blood flowleading to congestion of pulmonary circulation.
/square6Differential diagnosis includes total anomalouspulmonary venous connection (TAPVC), ventri-cular septal defect (VSD), pulmonary stenosis,
truncus arteriosus, and tricuspid atresia. All these
conditions can produce split second sound.
/square6Echocardiogram and cardiac catheterization can beused to confirm the diagnosis. Echocardiogramshows right ventricular hypertrophy, dilatedpulmonary artery, and presence of ASD. Abnormalshunt and blood flow can be assessed by colorDoppler. Cardiac catheterization can confirm the
presence of ASD but usually echo is enough for

/square6Case Scenario Based Discussions681
19confirmation. Cardiac catheterization shows
increased oxygen content of right atrial blood dueto blood flow from left atrium.
/square6Surgical closure should be done between 3 to6 years of age or as soon as possible in significant
ASD (i.e. pulmonary flow more than 50% increased
compared with systemic flow). Closure should notbe carried out in patients with small defects andtrivial left-to-right shunts or in those with severepulmonary hypertension. Angiographic closure isnow possible by using a transcatheter device.
Infective endocarditis prophylaxis is not required
for uncorrected ASDs unless there is anotheraccompanying valvular lesion.
/square6See ‘atrial septal defect’ under CVS chapter fordetailed discussion.
Q.A 55-year-old man with history of hypertension
presents with sudden onset retrosternal chest painwhich is tearing in nature. Examination shows blood
pressure of 200/120 and asymmetric peripheralpulses.
Discuss the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical
features, investigations and management of the
most likely diagnosis.
/square6This is a case of aortic dissection. Most patients withaortic dissection have history of hypertension. Painis usually tearing in nature, but it can also be sharpor stabbing in nature. Asymmetry of pulses is acommon finding. The DeBakey classificationdivides the dissection into 3 types. Type 1 involvesthe ascending aorta, aortic arch, and descending
aorta. Type II is confined to the ascending aorta.
Type III is confined to the descending aorta distalto the left subclavian artery.
/square6Differential diagnosis includes myocardial infarc-
tion, aortic aneurysm rupture, cardiac tamponade,
esophageal rupture (Boerhaave syndrome), sponta-neous pneumothorax, and pulmonary embolism.
/square6Chest X-ray may show mediastinal widening. Echo-
cardiography can identify proximal dissections but
not very useful for confirmation of diagnosis. CTor MRI of chest is required for the confirmation ofdiagnosis.
/square6See ‘aortic dissection’ under CVS chapter fordetailed discussion.
Q.A 25-year-old man presents with 2 months history
of of diarrhea, low grade fever, and pain abdomen.
Stools are watery and contain blood and mucus.
Patient has had similar episodes in the past and hasrecovered without treatment. Examination is normal.
1. What could be the diagnosis in this case? What
are the differential diagnoses?
2. How do you confirm the diagnosis?
3. How do you treat this patient?/square6The diagnosis in this case could be inflammatory
bowel disease (IBD) because of chronic diarrhea,presence of blood and mucus in the stool andrecurrent exacerbations and remissions. IBD is oftwo types; ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease.
/square6Other possibilities can be chronic amebiasis,intestinal tuberculosis and AIDS-related infections(Mycobacterium avium complex, Microsporidia,
Cryptosporidium, Isospora belli ). Irritable bowel
syndrome (IBS) is unlikely because there will notbe weight loss and blood in the stool. In addition,IBS will not be associated with fever. Malabsorptionsyndromes are unlikely again because there will notbe fever in these conditions and blood will not be
present in the stool.
/square6Diagnosis can be confirmed by colonoscopy andmucosal biopsy.
/square6The mainstay of therapy for IBD is 5-ASA (amino-salicylic acid) agents. Example is sulfasalazine.
Sulfasalazine is not broken down in small intestineand the intact molecule reaches colon where it isbroken down by colonic bacteria into sulfa and 5-ASA moieties. 5-ASA acts as local anti-inflammatoryagent in the colon. Newer sulfa-free agents such as
mesalamine, olsalazine and balsalazide have less
of side effects. Glucocorticoids (prednisolone) canbe tried in patients with moderate to severe UC andCD. Immunosuppressive agents (azathioprine, 6-mercaptopurine, methotrexate and cyclosporine)are useful as steroid sparing agents in the manage-
ment of glucocorticoid-dependent IBD. Tacrolimus
and mycophenolate mofetil are newer immuno-suppressive agents.
Q.A 30-year-old man who is a chronic alcoholic pre-
sents with epigastric pain of 2 days duration after
a binge of alcohol intake. Epigastric pain radiatesto the back between the scapulae and is associatedwith nausea and vomiting. Pain worsens on takingfood and on lying down. Pain is relieved partiallyon sitting and bending forward. There is no history
of of fever or diarrhea.
Discuss the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features,
investigations and management of the most likely
diagnosis in this case.
/square6Diagnosis is acute pancreatitis. It is common inalcoholics and alcohol binge often triggers an attack.Other causes of acute pancreatitis are gallstones,post-ERCP, post-surgical (abdominal, cardio-pulmonary bypass), trauma (blunt or penetratingabdominal injury), drugs (azathioprine, thiazides,
sulphasalazine, valproate), hypercalcemia, hyper-
triglyceridemia, infection (mumps, coxsackievirus,HIV, Leptospira, Ascaris), and idiopathic.
/square6Diagnosis can be confirmed by measuring serum
amylase and lipase which will be elevated. Other

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
19682 useful tests are ultrasound abdomen and CT
abdomen which can show inflamed and bulkypancreas.
/square6Treatment : Patient should be kept NPO (nil per oral).
Ryle’s tube aspiration is also required if there is
recurrent vomiting. Intravenous fluids are given tomaintain intravascular volume. Analgesics aregiven for to control abdominal pain. Proton pumpinhibitors are used to decrease the acid output. Therole of somatostatin or octreotide infusion is
controversial.
/square6Complications of acute pancreatitis include abscess
and pseudocyst formation, splenic or portal veinthrombosis, systemic inflammatory response
syndrome (SIRS) and multiorgan failure, ARDS,
and hypocalcemia (due to sequestration of calciumin fat necrosis).
/square6See pancreatitis for detailed discussion.
Q.A 20-year-old girl presents with pain abdomen and
vomiting of 2 days duration. Initially pain was inthe periumbilical region, but later on pain hasshifted to right iliac fossa. Examination reveals
tachycardia and rebound tenderness in the right
iliac fossa at the McBurney’s point.
Discuss the clinical features, investigations and
management of the most likely diagnosis in this
case.
/square6Diagnosis is acute appendicitis. In acute appen-dicitis pain is initially felt in the umbilical area(referred pain), but later, it shifts to right iliac fossadue to involvement of peritoneum surrounding theinflamed appendix. Other differential diagnoses are
pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) or tubo-ovarian
abscess, endometriosis, ovarian cyst or torsion,ureteric colic, diverticulitis, Crohn’s disease, andurinary tract infection (UTI).
/square6Diagnosis can be confirmed by ultrasoundabdomen and if required CT abdomen.
/square6Patient should undergo emergency appendicec-tomy. Supportive measures include intravenous
antibiotics (ceftriaxone and metronidazole), intra-
venous fluids and analgesics.
/square6Complications are bowel obstruction, abdominal/pelvic abscess, and, rarely, death.
Q.A 35-year-old man presents with painless, profuse
diarrhea of 2 days duration. There is no history of
fever or pain abdomen. Stool is watery and appearslike rice water. Examination shows moderatedehydration and no other abnormal findings.
1. What is the possible diagnosis?2. What investigations are helpful to confirm the
diagnosis?
3. How do you treat this patient?/square6Diagnosis is cholera. Cholera commonly presents
as sudden onset, painless diarrhea. Since the
causative organism Vibrio cholerae  does not invade
the intestinal mucosa, there is no fever or painabdomen. Stool appears like ‘rice water’ because
of mucus flecks floating in the watery stools
(resemblance to the water in which rice has beenwashed).
/square6Other causes of noninvasive watery diarrhea areETEC (enterotoxigenic E. coli ), rotavirus, Crypto-
sporidium, and Giardia.
/square6Diagnosis of cholera can be confirmed by hangingdrop preparation of stool sample (shows rapidlymotile organisms) and also by stool culture.
/square6Mainstay of therapy is oral rehydration salt (ORS).ORS takes advantage of a co-transport mechanismnot affected by cholera toxin wherein sodium (Na
+)
moves across the gut mucosa along with actively
transported glucose. Intravenous fluids may berequired if the patient is severely dehydrated or has
vomiting. Ringer lactate is the fluid of choice since
it contains almost all the electrolytes lost in thestools. Antibiotics can diminish the duration and
volume of fluid loss and hasten clearance of the
organism from the stool. Single dose doxycycline(300 mg) is effective in adults but is not recommen-
ded for children <8 years of age because of possible
deposition in bone and developing teeth.
Q.About 15 people have been brought to emergency
department with history of nausea, vomiting, andabdominal cramps. Five of them also have fever
and diarrhea. All of them had food at a function
30 minutes prior to the onset of the abovesymptoms.
1. What is the possible diagnosis?
2. What investigations would you do?
3. How do you treat them?
/square6The diagnosis is food poisoning probably due to a
preformed toxin produced by Staphylococcus or
Bacillus cereus since the onset of symptoms after the
food intake is within 1 to 6 hours and many areaffected at the same time after having the same
food.
/square6Suspected food can be tested for the presence of
enterotoxin and Staphylococcus, but usually not
necessary.
/square6Most cases of food poisoning are self-limiting.
Intravenous fluids and antiemetics should be given
to patients with severe vomiting and diarrhea.
/square6Refer to ‘food poisoning’ in Chapter 1: Infectious
Diseases for more details.

/square6Case Scenario Based Discussions683
19Q.A 20-year-old lady complains of recurrent episodes
of headache since 5 years. She gets 1 to 2 attacksof headache per week lasting 4 to 12 hours. Head-ache is unilateral and throbbing type and interfereswith routine activity. She also reports nausea andvomiting during attacks. Headache worsens on
exposure to bright light. There are no other symp-
toms before or during the headache. Her motheralso has similar history of headache.
1. What is the diagnosis?
2. How do you treat her?
/square6Diagnosis is migraine without aura (also known as
common migraine). Migraine with aura is lesscommon and the headache is preceded by transientneurological symptoms such as visual aura
(fortification spectra, scotomas), vertigo, speech
difficulty, motor weakness, etc. the lady in this casescenario does not have any aura symptoms, hence,it is a case of migraine without aura.
/square6Migraine is three times more common in femalesthan males and young females are commonlyaffected. It tends to run in families. Migraine head-ache is usually unilateral and commonly associatedwith nausea and/or vomiting. Photophobia (sensi-tivity to light) and phonophobia (sensitivity to
sound) are also common in migraine.
/square6For an acute attack, paracetamol or any other
analgesic can be given along with an antiemeticsuch as metoclopramide. Triptans (sumatriptan,zolmitriptan) can also abort an attack. Attacks can
be prevented by prophylactic drug therapy such
as beta-blockers (propranolol, atenolol, metoprolol),amitriptyline, verapamil, sodium valproate andtopiramate. Precipitating factors such as certainfoods and scents should be avoided.
Q.A 35-year-old man presents with 4 days history of
fever, headache, altered mental status, seizures andaphasia. Neck stiffness is absent on examination.
1. What is the likely diagnosis?
2. What are the differential diagnoses?
3. What investigations would you do to confirm the
diagnosis?
4. How do you treat him?
/square6Likely diagnosis is acute encephalitis probably dueto herpesvirus. Acute encephalitis typically pre-sents with the above symptoms and speech deficitsare common in herpes encephalitis because ofinvolvement of temporal lobe. Absence of neckstiffness argues against meningitis.
/square6Encephalitis should be differentiated from othercauses of altered sensorium such as: Fever with deli-rium, meningitis with cerebral edema, metabolicencephalopathy, stroke, cerebral venous thrombosis,cerebral abscess, acute disseminated encephalo-
myelitis (ADEM), and cerebral malaria.
/square6Diagnosis can be confirmed by CSF analysis whichshows a raised WBC count with predominant
lymphocytes, normal sugar and mildly elevated
protein. CSF PCR for herpes simplex and other viralserology is helpful to identify the virus. CT and MRIscan may show areas of cerebral edema, often inthe temporal lobes. EEG often shows characteristicslow waves.
/square6Treatment of herpes simplex encephalitis is withintravenous acyclovir (10 mg/kg IV q8h) for 10 to14 days. There is no specific treatment for other viralencephalitis. Supportive treatment involves anti-
convulsants, antiedema measures, bedsore preven-
tion, and attention to nutrition through Ryle’s tube.
Q.A 40-year-old man presents with 2 days history of
progressive bilateral lower limb weakness. Patientsays he first noticed weakness in the proximalmuscles of lower limbs which has then progressedto involve trunk and upper limbs also. There are
no sensory symptoms and there is no history of
bowel bladder involvement. Examination showsabsent deep tendon reflexes in all 4 limbs and thereare no sensory deficits. He also gives history ofupper respiratory tract infection 1 week prior tothe onset of weakness.
1. What is the diagnosis?
2. What are the differential diagnoses?3. What investigations would you do to confirm the
diagnosis?
4. How do you treat him?
/square6Diagnosis is acute inflammatory demyelinatingpolyneuropathy (AIDP) also known as Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS). The cardinal features of GBSare progressive, symmetric muscle weakness andabsent or depressed deep tendon reflexes. Weak-
ness usually starts in the proximal legs, and then
ascends up to involve trunk and upper limbs(ascending paralysis). However, in some patientsweakness can begin in the arms or facial musclesand then descend down to involve trunk and lowerlimbs (descending paralysis). Sensory symptoms
such as paresthesias occur in the hands and feet in
most of the patients, but usually there are noobjective sensory deficits. There is often prominentsevere pain in the lower back.
/square6Differential diagnosis includes other causes ofsymmetric flaccid paralysis such as hypokalemicand hyperkalemic periodic paralysis, tick paralysisand toxin-induced neuropathies. Neurotoxic snakebite and botulism can mimic GB syndrome ofdescending type where the weakness first starts in
bulbar muscles.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
19684 /square6Investigations to confirm the diagnosis are nerve
conduction studies (NCS) and electromyography
(EMG) which show decreased nerve conduction
velocity due to demyelination and decreased ampli-
tude of nerve action potentials due to axonal injury.
CSF analysis shows elevated protein with normal
WBC count which is known as albuminocytologic
dissociation.
/square6Treatment is by plasmapheresis or intravenousimmune globulin (IVIG). Plasmapheresis removes
the circulating antibodies and helps in fast recovery.
Four sittings of plasmapheresis are recommended.
Intravenous immune globulin (IVIG) acts by
neutralizing circulating antibodies and immuno-
modulation. IVIG is given in a dose of 0.4 g/kg daily
for 5 days. Both plasmapheresis and IV immuno-
globulins have equal efficacy and combining both
of them is not better than any one given alone.
Steroids are not effective in GBS.
/square6See ‘Guillain-Barré syndrome’ in neurology chapter
for detailed discussion.
Q.A 30-year-old man presents with 3 days history of
bilateral lower limb weakness which developed over
few hours. He says he has decreased sensation
below the level of umbilicus. He also has urinary
retention for which he has undergone bladder
catheterization in a local hospital. He had suffered
from an acute febrile illness 1 week prior to the
onset of lower limb weakness. Examination revealsa sensory level at the level of umbilicus, increased
tone in lower limbs, exaggerated deep tendon
reflexes and bilateral extensor plantar response.
1. What is the likely diagnosis?
2. What are the differential diagnoses?
3. What investigations would you do to confirm the
diagnosis?
4. How do you treat him?
/square6Likely diagnosis is transverse myelitis. The term
myelitis is a nonspecific term for inflammation of
the spinal cord; transverse refers to involvement of
complete width of spinal cord. In this case the lesion
seems to be at the level of T10, since below this level
(level of umbilicus) there is both sensory and motor
weakness. Transverse myelitis produces UMN type
weakness below the level of lesion which this
patient has (as evidenced by exaggerated reflexes,
extensor plantars and increased tone in lower
limbs). Definite sensory level and bladder involve-
ment also support a diagnosis of transverse myelitis.
Causes of transverse myelitis include idiopathic,
parainfectious (occurring in association with an
acute infection), postvaccinial (rabies, cowpox),
autoimmune diseases (e.g. SLE, sarcoidosis),
multiple sclerosis, paraneoplastic syndrome and
thrombosis of spinal arteries./square6Differential diagnosis includes other causes of para-paresis/paraplegia such as GB syndrome (LMNtype paralysis, absent reflexes, absent sensory level,and objective sensory deficits), compression ofspinal cord (due to tumor, disc prolapse, trauma,epidural abscess), and unpaired ACA territory
infarct (absent sensory level, and sensory deficits).
/square6MRI of spinal cord should be done to rule out any
alternate pathology (abscess, mass, etc.).
/square6Treatment of idiopathic transverse myelitis is byintravenous steroids (methylprednisolone). Anyunderlying cause should also be treated.
Q.A 65-year-old man is brought with history of episo-
des of motionless stare with altered consciousness
followed by lip smacking. Each episode lasts 1 to
2 minutes.
1. What is the diagnosis?2. What investigations would you do to confirm the
diagnosis?
3. How do you treat him?
/square6Diagnosis is focal seizure without awareness(complex focal seizure). A motionless stare withaltered consciousness followed by automatism (e.g.
lip smacking, chewing, swallowing) is the usual
pattern. Complex focal seizures commonly arisefrom the temporal lobe.
/square6EEG usually shows abnormal spikes in the temporalarea if done during an attack. MRI brain can pick
up any lesion responsible for the seizure.
/square6Almost all the antiepileptic drugs (AEDs), except
ethosuximide are effective in complex focal seizures.Some examples are carbamazepine, phenytoin,
sodium valproate, and gabapentin.
Q.A 70-year-old man, who is a known diabetic for the
past 30 years is brought with history of recurrentepisodes of right-sided hemiparesis which recoversfully within one hour. He also gives history of
episodes of transient loss of vision in the left eye.
Discuss the clinical features, investigations and
management of the most likely diagnosis in this
case.
/square6Diagnosis is transient ischemic attack (TIA). TIA isdefined as a transient episode of neurological dys-function caused by focal brain, spinal cord, orretinal ischemia, without acute infarction (this isthe new definition from American Heart Associa-
tion and American Stroke Association (AHA/
ASA)) which has eliminated the earlier time limitof 24 hours). This man also has episodes of transientloss of vision in the left eye (amaurosis fugax)indicating left carotid artery disease causing emboliinto retinal artery as well as into the brain.

/square6Case Scenario Based Discussions685
19/square6As per definition, brain imaging should not show
any infarct. Hence, we expect a normal CT or MRIbrain. Cardiac source of emboli should be ruled out
by echocardiogram. Four vessels Doppler study of
neck (2 vertebral and 2 carotid arteries) can showany stenosis in these vessels which can be further
confirmed by angiogram.
/square6Treatment involves antiplatelet agents (aspirin orclopidogrel) daily lifelong along with lipid lowering
agents (statins; atorvastatin, rosuvastatin, etc.).These agents reduce the risk of stroke. Internal
carotid endarterectomy is recommended if internal
carotid artery stenosis is greater than 70%. Percuta-neous transluminal angioplasty (stenting) is an
alternative procedure which is being commonly
done nowadays.
Q.A 24-year-old man complains of fever, nausea and
vomiting of 1 week duration. For the past 2 days,
fever has come down but the patient has noticed
yellowish discoloration of eyes. There is no historyof alcohol or any drug intake. There is no history
of clay-colored stools or pain abdomen. His brother
also had similar complaints 2 weeks before.Examination shows moderate icterus and tender
hepatomegaly.
1. How do you approach this patient?2. What is the likely diagnosis?3. What investigations are helpful to confirm the
diagnosis?
4. How do you treat him?
/square6Basically this patient has fever with jaundice. Someimportant causes of fever with jaundice are acuteviral hepatitis, liver abscess, cholecystitis, cholan-
gitis, sepsis, malaria, leptospirosis, dengue,
rickettsial fever, etc.
/square6First possibility to be considered in this patient isacute viral hepatitis. Other causes of acute hepatitisare alcoholic hepatitis, ischemic hepatitis, drug-
induced hepatitis, autoimmune hepatitis, and
Wilson disease. This patient does not have historyof alcohol or drug ingestion; hence, these are ruled
out. Fever is unusual in autoimmune hepatitis and
Wilson disease. Malaria, dengue and leptospirosisproduce multiorgan involvement and fever is a
prominent feature. Fever continues along with
jaundice. In viral hepatitis, jaundice becomes promi-nent as the fever subsides. Hence, this patient most
likely has viral hepatitis, though other causes
described above have to be ruled out with appro-priate investigations.
/square6Acute viral hepatitis typically presents with fever,nausea and vomiting. Tender hepatomegaly alsosupports the diagnosis of acute hepatitis. Jaundice
appears when fever starts coming down. Absenceof clay-colored stool and abdominal pain goes
against the diagnosis of obstructive jaundice.
Hemolytic anemia typically has mild jaundice andpallor also will be present which is not the case here
(this patient has moderate icterus). Hemolytic
anemia is usually not associated with fever (thispatient has fever). Hepatitis A and hepatitis E
spreads through food and water and may affect
multiple family members. The fact that this patient’sbrother also had jaundice supports the diagnosis
of hepatitis A or E. However, hepatitis B and C also
may spread among family members through closecontact and have to be ruled out.
/square6Diagnosis can be confirmed by liver function tests
and viral serology. AST and ALT will be usually
elevated to above thousand IU. Viral markers suchas IgM, anti-HAV, HBsAg, anti-HCV, anti-HEV
should be sent to identify the specific virus.
Appropriate tests are done to rule out malaria,dengue, and leptospirosis. Ultrasound abdomen
usually shows hepatomegaly and can rule out other
causes of jaundice such as cholecystitis, obstructionto biliary tree, liver abscess, etc.
/square6Acute viral hepatitis is usually self-limited, and
treatment is mainly supportive with hydration,
vitamins and antipyretics. Hepatoprotective agentssuch as silymarin and vit C are particularly useful.
Liver transplantation should be considered for
patients who develop fulminant liver failure.
Q.A 35-year-old man who is a known case of
cholelithiasis presents with 5 days history of of
jaundice, right hypochondrial pain, generalized
pruritus, and passing clay-colored stool.
1. What is the likely diagnosis?
2. What investigations are helpful to confirm the
diagnosis?
3. How do you treat him?
/square6Diagnosis is obstructive jaundice probably due to
a gallstone blocking the common bile duct. Right
hypochondrial pain, clay-colored stools and genera-lized itching all support the diagnosis of obstructive
jaundice.
/square6Ultrasound abdomen is useful to confirm thediagnosis. It may visualize the stone and also show
dilated common bile duct. CT abdomen is evenmore sensitive in picking up the common bile duct
stone.
/square6Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography
(ERCP) can be used to remove stone from commonbile duct. If ERCP is not possible, laparotomy and
direct removal of stone can be attempted.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
19686 Q.A 55-year-old man who is a chronic alcoholic for
the past 25 years presents with 10 days historyof passing black-colored stools and abdominaldistension. Examination shows presence of dilatedveins over the abdomen, ascites and moderatesplenomegaly. Discuss the pathogenesis, clinical
features, investigations and treatment of the most
likely diagnosis in this patient.
/square6Diagnosis is cirrhosis of liver with portal hyper-tension. Black-colored stool indicates melena due
to esophageal varices due to portal hypertension.Presence of ascites, dilated veins over the abdomenand splenomegaly also support the diagnosis ofportal hypertension due to cirrhosis. Portal hyper-tension can also occur without liver disease such
as extrahepatic portal hypertension due to portal
vein thrombosis, portal vein fibrosis, etc. Here, inthis case scenario, there is no mention of featuressuggestive of liver parenchymal involvement suchas jaundice, bleeding tendency, gynecomastia,testicular atrophy, spider nevi, hepatic encephalo-
pathy, etc. These features should be looked for in
this patient. Since there is chronic alcohol consump-tion, probably there is cirrhosis causing portalhypertension.
/square6Refer to ‘cirrhosis’ in Chapter 7: ‘Diseases of Liverand Biliary System’ for detailed discussion.
Q.A 52-year-old man who is a known case of cirrhosis
of liver presents with 15 days history of jaundice,abdominal distension and right hypochondrial pain.Examination shows irregularly enlarged and tender
liver.
1. What is the most likely diagnosis?2. What investigations are helpful to confirm the
diagnosis?
3. How do you treat him?
/square6Diagnosis is hepatocellular carcinoma which candevelop as a complication of cirrhosis of liver.Worsening of liver function, painful irregularenlargement of liver point towards the diagnosis
of hepatocellular carcinoma. Other possibility is
acute hepatitis developing in a previously diseasedliver due to alcohol binge or viral hepatitis.
/square6Diagnosis can be confirmed by ultrasound abdomen,
serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) level and biopsy of
the lesion. Additional imaging such as CT abdomenmay also be required.
/square6Surgical resection and liver transplantation offers
the only chance of cure but is limited by the availa-
bility of donors. Local therapies (chemoemboliza-tion, ethanol ablation, radiofrequency ablation,cryoablation, and radiotherapy) can be used to reducethe tumor burden. For advanced disease systemicchemotherapy can be tried but response is poor.Q.A 30-year-old lady presents with 5 months history
of easy fatigability and palpitation. She also hashistory of geophagia and craving for ice. Examina-tion shows presence of pallor, glossitis, angularstomatitis and koilonychia. Discuss the etiology,clinical features, investigations and treatment of the
most likely diagnosis.
/square6Diagnosis is iron deficiency anemia because all theabove features are typically seen in iron deficiency.
/square6Serum iron profile (iron, ferritin, TIBC) is helpfulin confirming the diagnosis. Iron and ferritin willbe low and TIBC will be elevated. Peripheral smearshows microcytic hypochromic RBCs.
/square6She should be treated with oral iron supplements.Hemoglobin level will normalize in about 6–8 weeks
of iron therapy. However, iron therapy has to becontinued for a total of 6 months to ensure repletion
of the body iron stores. In addition, any underlying
cause of iron deficiency (such as menorrhagia,hemorrhoids, worm infestation, peptic ulcer)should be diagnosed and treated.
/square6For detailed discussion refer to ‘iron deficiencyanemia’ in Chapter 6: ‘Diseases of Blood’.
Q.A 35-year-old lady presents with 5 months history
of easy fatigability, tingling and numbness of bothfeet. She is a pure vegetarian and there is no historyof HTN/DM/IHD/asthma or COPD. Examination showspallor and signs of peripheral neuropathy. Discuss
the etiology, clinical features, investigations and
treatment of the most likely diagnosis.
/square6Diagnosis is anemia due to Vit B12 deficiency
because she has both anemia and peripheral neuro-
pathy. Fatigability and pallor are due to anemia.Tingling and numbness are due to peripheralneuropathy due to Vit B
12 deficiency. Pure vege-
tarians like this patient are prone to develop Vit B12
deficiency because Vit B12 is found only in foods of
animal origin. Vegetarians get their Vit B12 mainly
from milk and milk products.
/square6Diagnosis can be confirmed by measuring serumVit B
12 levels. B12 level <200 pg/mL is suggestive of
deficiency. Peripheral smear shows macrocytic
RBCs and hypersegmented neutrophils.
/square6Vit B12 should be replaced by parenteral route since
malabsorption is the cause most of the time. 1000 μg
should be given intramuscularly per week for
8 weeks, followed by 1000 μg every month for the
rest of the patient’s life. Oral replacement therapywith 2 mg Vit B
12 per day is also effective if mal-
absorption is not a problem. Any underlying causeof Vit B
12 deficiency should be treated (e.g. anti-
biotics for intestinal bacterial overgrowth, deworm-
ing for tapeworm infestation).
/square6Refer to ‘Vit B12 deficiency’ in Chapter  6: Diseases
of Blood for detailed discussion.

/square6Case Scenario Based Discussions687
19Q.A 25-year-old lady presents with history of feeling
tired even with routine physical activity for the last2 months. She also gives history of passing red-brown urine. Her relatives have noticed yellowishdiscoloration of her eyes. Examination shows pallor,mild icterus and mild splenomegaly.
1. What is the most likely diagnosis?
2. What investigations are helpful to confirm the
diagnosis?
3. How do you treat her?
/square6Most likely diagnosis is hemolytic anemia in viewof presence of tiredness, pallor and jaundice. Redbrown urine is due to hemoglobinuria. There aremany causes of hemolytic anemia such as heredi-tary spherocytosis, G6PD deficiency, thalassemias,
sickle cell anemia, autoimmune hemolytic anemia,
drugs, etc.
/square6Diagnosis can be confirmed by peripheral bloodsmear (may show spherocytes, sickle cells, poly-
chromasia, nucleated RBCs), reticulocyte count
(increased), Coombs’ test (to identify autoimmunehemolytic anemia), and bone marrow examination(shows erythroid hyperplasia). In addition, therewill be indirect hyperbilirubinemia and decreasedserum haptoglobin levels. Shortened RBC survival
as demonstrated by chromium-51 labeled RBCs.
/square6Treatment depends on the underlying cause—
steroids for autoimmune hemolytic anemia,splenectomy in hereditary spherocytosis and sicklecell anemia, withdrawal of offending drug, etc.
/square6For detailed discussion refer to hemolytic anemiain Chapter 6: ‘Diseases of Blood’.
Q. A 50-year-old man presents with history of easy
fatigability and left hypochondrial pain. Examinationshows pallor and massive splenomegaly. Hiscomplete blood count shows Hb of 5 gm/dL, WBCcount of 1,50,000/cu mm and platelet count of2,25000/cu mm.
1. What is the most likely diagnosis?
2. What further investigations would you like to do?
3. How do you treat him?
/square6Most likely diagnosis is chronic myeloid leukemia
in view of very high leukocyte count and massivesplenomegaly.
/square6Other causes of massive splenomegaly such as hairycell leukemia, kala-azar, tropical splenomegaly, etc.should also be considered in this case and ruledout by appropriate investigations. But the presencevery high leukocyte count argues against kala-azar,
and tropical splenomegaly.
/square6Peripheral blood smear shows presence of myelo-
cytes and metamyelocytes. Bone marrow aspirationand biopsy shows myeloid hyperplasia, increase in
reticulin fibers and vascularity. There is increase inthe myeloid-to-erythroid ratio in the bone marrow.Diagnosis of CML can be confirmed by the demons-tration of the Philadelphia chromosome or the BCR-ABL fusion gene. BCR-ABL can be detected in the
peripheral blood by polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) test, which has now supplanted cytogenetics.
/square6Conventional treatment of CML in chronic phasehas been single agent therapy with busulphan or
hydroxyurea. Alpha interferon is also helpful.
Introduction of imatinib mesylate which inhibits thetyrosine kinase activity of the BCR/ABL oncogene
has revolutionized the treatment of CML.
Q.A 36-year-old lady complains of multiple joint pain
involving bilateral ankle, knee, small joints of hands,wrist, elbow and shoulder since 6 months. Jointpain is worse in the morning and is associated withearly morning stiffness.
1. What is the most likely diagnosis?
2. What are the differential diagnoses?
3. What further investigations would you like to do?
4. How do you treat her?
This is a case of chronic symmetric inflammatory poly-
arthritis. Most likely diagnosis is rheumatoid arthritis(RA). Characteristic clinical features of RA are asfollows:
/square6Morning stiffness of at least 1 hour and present forat least six weeks.
/square6Swelling of three or more joints for at least sixweeks.
/square6Arthritis of hand joints.
/square6Symmetrical arthritis.
/square6Presence of rheumatoid subcutaneous nodules.
/square6Positive rheumatoid factors or anticyclic citrulli-nated peptide (anti-CCP) antibodies.
/square6Elevated acute phase reactants (erythrocyte sedimen-tation rate or C-reactive protein).
/square6Radiological changes (erosions or unequivocal bonydecalcification adjacent to the involved joints.
Differential diagnoses include other diseases which
can present with polyarthritis as follows:
/square6Acute viral polyarthritis (such as chikungunya,associated with acute onset polyarthritis, usuallytransient, subsides without any residual deformities)
/square6Systemic rheumatic diseases such as SLE, systemicsclerosis.
/square6Reactive arthritis (usually oligoarthritis involvinglarge joints such as knee, ankle, etc.)
/square6Lyme arthritis
/square6Psoriatic arthritis (usually oligoarthritis)
/square6Polymyalgia rheumatica (frank arthritis is unusual).

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
19688 /square6Crystalline arthritis (e.g. gout: Usually monoarthritis)
/square6Infectious arthritis (such as tuberculous arthritis,
gonococcal arthritis: Usually oligoarthritis involving
large joints)
/square6Osteoarthritis (usually involves large weightbearing joints such as knee, hip, etc., pain worse inthe evening, seen in elderly)
/square6Further investigations which are helpful arerheumatoid factor, anti-CCP antibody, CRP, ESR,ANA (a negative ANA helps to rule out SLE andother systemic rheumatic diseases), hand X-rays tolook for joint erosions.
/square6Refer to rheumatoid arthritis for detailed discussion.
Q.A 30-year-old lady presents with malar rash, photo-
sensitivity, and polyarthralgia of 5 years duration.
She also gives history of recurrent abortions andRaynaud phenomen on. Discuss the etiology, clinical
features, investigations and treatment of the most
likely diagnosis.
/square6Most likely diagnosis is systemic lupus erythe-
matosus (SLE). SLE frequently affects women intheir 20s and 30s. It affects almost all the organsand usually begins with one or several of the
following features such as fever, fatigue, malar rash
(butterfly rash), arthralgia or arthritis, Raynaudphenomenon, serositis (pleuritis, pericarditis,peritonitis), nephritis or nephrotic syndrome,seizures, alopecia, recurrent abortions, and anemia.
/square6Complete blood count shows anemia or pancyto-penia. ESR and CRP are elevated and complementlevels (C3 and C4) are decreased. Antinuclearantibodies (ANA), antiphospholipid antibodies,antibodies to double-stranded DNA and anti-Smith(Sm) antibodies may be positive. Anti-dsDNA and
anti-Sm antibodies are highly specific for the
diagnosis of SLE.
/square6Mainstay of treatment is steroids. Immuno-suppressive drugs (azathioprine, methotrexate,
ciclosporin, tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil) are
useful either alone or in combination with steroidsfor severe manifestations. Hydroxychloroquine alsois useful for cutaneous and joint symptoms.Lifelong anticoagulation is required for patientswith the antiphospholipid antibody syndrome with
thrombotic events.
/square6For detailed discussion refer to ‘SLE’ in Chapter 10:
‘Diseases of Immune System, Connective tissue andJoints’.
Q.A 25-year-old man presents with insidious onset
of low back pain and stiffness of 6 months duration.He also has pain in the ankle, knee and hip joints.Examination shows restricted spinal mobility andsacroiliac joint tenderness.
1. What is the most likely diagnosis?2. What investigations are helpful to confirm the
diagnosis?
3. How do you treat him?
/square6Most likely diagnosis is ankylosing spondylitis. Itis a type of seronegative sponyloarthropathy. Itmainly affects males and the peak incidence isbetween 20 and 30 years. Most important feature isinvolvement of lumbosacral spine with restrictionof mobility in all directions. Note that rheumatoid
arthritis also involves spine but usually cervical
spine. In addition, restriction of spine mobility isunusual in rheumatoid arthritis. Degenerative spinediseases such as spondylosis also involve spine andcause restricted mobility, but occur in old age andalso do not affect peripheral joints. Extra-articular
features are also common in seronegative sponylo-
arthropathies and include enthesitis (inflammationat tendon insertion sites), scleritis, uveitis, mucosalulcers, etc.
/square6ESR and CRP are elevated. Rheumatoid factoris usually negative. HLA-B27 is usually positive.X-ray of sacroiliac joint shows irregularity and lossof cortical margins, sclerosis, narrowing and fusion.In advanced cases, there will be fusion of vertebrawhich produces bamboo spine appearance on X-ray.
/square6Treatment involves both nonpharmacological andpharmacological therapy. Nonpharmacologicaltherapy involves smoking cessation and exercise.Pharmacological therapy involves NSAIDs, DMARDs(sulfasalazine, methotrexate), and TNF-alpha
antagonists (infliximab, etanercept, adalimumab).
However, methotrexate has been shown to be oflittle use in ankylosing spondylitis.
Q.A 60-year-old lady presents with right temporal
headache of 5 days duration. She also has blurringof vision in the right eye. Routine investigations
showed that her ESR is 100 mm/hour. Discuss the
etiology, clinical features, investigations and
treatment of the most likely diagnosis.
/square6The diagnosis is temporal arteritis. Temporalarteritis is common in elderly (above 50 years ofage). It is more common in females. Typicalpresentation is temporal headache with blurring ofvision. There will be tenderness over the temporalartery. ESR is usually high.
/square6Diagnosis can be confirmed by temporal arterybiopsy. Biopsy will show infiltration of temporalartery with lymphocytes, fragmentation of internalelastic lamina and destruction of tunica media.
/square6Treatment is with steroids. Steroids should bestarted immediately on suspicion without waitingfor confirmation of diagnosis. Dose of prednisoloneis 40 to 60 mg per day for 1 to 2 months initially,followed by slow tapering. Typical duration oftherapy is 9 to 12 months. Low dose aspirin is also

/square6Case Scenario Based Discussions689
19useful to reduce the risk of visual loss, TIA and
stroke.
/square6For detailed discussion refer to ‘temporal arteritis’
in Chapter 10: ‘Diseases of Immune System,
Connective Tissue and Joints’.
Q.A 50-year-old man who is a chronic alcoholic pre-
sents with confusion and disorientation. Examination
shows nystagmus, ophthalmoplegia and ataxia.
There are no motor or sensory deficits. CT brain is
essentially normal. Discuss the etiology, clinical
features, and treatment of the most likely diagnosis.
/square6Most likely diagnosis is Wernicke’s encephalopathy
(WE). WE typically occurs in chronic alcoholics due
to thiamine deficiency. It should be suspected in any
alcoholic presenting with the triad of encephalo-
pathy, ataxia and ophthalmoplegia.
/square6WE is mainly a clinical diagnosis. Imaging (CT or
MRI brain) is useful to rule out alternative diagnosis).
Measurement of erythrocyte transketolase activity
after adding thiamine pyrophosphate can be used
to diagnose thiamine deficiency.
/square6Patients suspected to have WE should be treatedwith intravenous thiamine immediately, without
waiting for confirmation of diagnosis. Thiamine
500 mg should be given as IV infusion three times
daily for 2 days followed by 500 mg once daily
IV or IM once daily for 5 days. This is followed by
100 mg daily orally as long as the patient is at risk
of developing deficiency. Administration of glucose
in the presence of thiamine deficiency can precipi-
tate thiamine deficiency, because thiamine is an
important coenzyme in glucose metabolism
(conversion of pyruvate to acetyl-CoA). Hence,
thiamine should be given before giving glucose.
Q.A 50-year-old chronic alcoholic presents with
confusion and memory loss. He also gives history
of diarrhea of 3 months duration. Examination
shows dark, dry and scaly skin lesions around the
neck, hands and legs.
1. What is the most likely diagnosis?
2. What investigations are helpful to confirm the
diagnosis?
3. How do you treat this patient?
/square6Most likely diagnosis is pellagra due to niacin
deficiency. Niacin deficiency is common in
alcoholics, malabsorption disorders and anorexia
nervosa. Niacin deficiency can occur in Hartnup’s
disease which is characterized by defective
absorption of several amino acids. Similarly, niacin
deficiency can also occur in carcinoid syndrome
where tryptophan is converted to 5-HT and sero-
tonin rather than niacin. Pellagra is characterized
by 3 Ds—diarrhea, dementia and dermatitis. This
patient has all these features./square6Pellagra is treated by niacin supplements 100 mg3 times daily orally or parenterally for 5 days.
/square6Refer to pellagra for more details.
Q.A 30-year-old lady presents with easy fatigability,
cold intolerance, and amenorrhea after the last child
birth. She had suffered severe postpartum hemorr-hage and also lactation failure after last child birth.Examination is otherwise normal except dry skin.
1. What is the most likely diagnosis?
2. What investigations are helpful to confirm the
diagnosis?
3. How do you treat this patient?
/square6Most likely diagnosis is hypopituitarism due toSheehan’s syndrome. Hypopituitarsim due toinfarction of the pituitary gland after postpartumhemorrhage is called Sheehan’s syndrome. Thepituitary gland is physiologically enlarged in preg-
nancy and is therefore very sensitive to the
decreased blood flow caused by massive hemorr-hage and hypovolemic shock.
/square6Failure to lactate or difficulty with lactation are
common initial symptoms of Sheehan syndrome
(due to prolactin deficiency). Many women alsoreport amenorrhea or oligomenorrhea after delivery(due to FSH and LH deficiency). Other featuresinclude fatigue, anorexia, weight loss (due todecreased ACTH), and features of hypothyroidism(due to decreased TSH).
/square6There is deficiency of all the hormones, i.e. growthhormone, prolactin, gonadotropins, TSH andACTH. CT scan or MRI shows a small pituitarywithin a sella of normal size, sometimes referred
to as “empty sella”.
/square6Treatment of hypopituitarism involves the treat-
ment of each individual target gland hormonedeficiencies. ACTH deficiency is treated by giving
hydrocortisone or other glucocorticoid. TSH defi-
ciency, which results in thyroxine deficiency, istreated with L-thyroxine.
Q.A 30-year-old woman complains of weight loss,
increased appetite, heat intolerance and palpita-
tions since 2 months. Examination shows a pulserate of 105/minute and fine tremors of hands.
1. What is your diagnosis?2. How do you confirm the diagnosis?
3. How do you treat this patient?
/square6Diagnosis is thyrotoxicosis.
/square6Diagnosis can be confirmed by thyroid function
tests. In primary hyperthyroidism, T3, T4 will beelevated and TSH will be suppressed. In centralhyperthyroidism, all three will be elevated.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
19690 /square6Treatment involves antithyroid drugs. Methimazole
is started at 5 to 10 mg OD and can be increased to
30 to 40 mg per day. Propyl thiouracil (PTU) is given
at a dose of 100 to 150 mg every 8 hours. Radioactiveiodine (
131I) is used to treat hyperthyroidism in older
patients but is contraindicated in pregnant ladies.
Subtotal thyroidectomy is another option forpatients with thyroid enlargement causing
obstructive symptoms.
/square6For more details refer to ‘hyperthyroidism’ in
Chapter 9: ‘Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus’.
Q.A 35-year-old patient presents with weight gain,
cold intolerance and hoarseness of voice since
2 months. Examination shows dry skin and bilateral
nonpitting pedal edema.
1. What is your diagnosis?2. How do you confirm the diagnosis?
3. How do you treat this patient?
/square6Diagnosis is hypothyroidism.
/square6Diagnosis can be confirmed by thyroid function
tests. In primary hypothyroidism, T3, T4 will be low
and TSH will be elevated. In central hypo-
thyroidism, all three will be low.
/square6Treatment involves thyroxine supplementation.Thyroxine should be started at a low dose and
increased every 6 to 8 weeks till thyroid function is
normalized. Initial dose should be low especially
in patients with IHD, because high initial dose of
thyroxine can precipitate angina and heart failureby increasing BMR.
/square6For more details refer to ‘hypothyroidism’ in
Chapter 9: Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus.
Q.A 40-year-old man presents with weight loss, easy
fatigability, and darkening (hyperpigmentation) of
skin of few months duration. Examination shows
BP of 90/60 mmHg. Investigations show Na+ of 130,
K+ of 5.6 and his random blood sugar is 70 mg/dL.
1. What could be the diagnosis?
2. How do you confirm the diagnosis?
3. How do you treat this patient?
/square6Diagnosis is adrenal insufficiency (Addison’s
disease). Adrenal insufficiency is of two types:
Primary (inability of the adrenals to producehormones), secondary (due to pituitary or
hypothalamic disease leading to ACTH and CRH
deficiency). Symptoms and signs are due to lowglucocorticoid, low mineralocorticoid, low adrenal
androgen levels and secondary increase in ACTH.
Glucocorticoid deficiency causes malaise, fatigue,generalized weakness, nausea, vomiting, anorexia,
weight loss, postural hypotension with postural
drop and hypoglycemia. Mineralocorticoid defi-ciency causes hyponatremia and hyperkalemia.ACTH excess in primary adrenal deficiency causes
hyperpigmentation. Hyperpigmentation is not seen
in secondary adrenal insufficiency as ACTH is low.
/square6Refer to Addison disease for detailed discussion.
Q.A-50-year-old patient presents with polyuria,
excessive thirst and increased appetite. He also hasweight loss since last 3 months and recurrent skin
infections.
1. What is your diagnosis?2. How do you confirm the diagnosis?
3. How do you treat this patient?
/square6Diagnosis is diabetes mellitus in v/o of polyuria,
polydipsia, polyphagia and recurrent skininfections. The type of diabetes is probably type 2
DM, because the patient is 50 years old. Type 1 DM
is unlikely because it usually occurs in children andyoung adults. Secondary diabetes due to pancreatic
disease is possible and should be ruled out by
appropriate investigations. Patients with chronicpancreatitis usually complains of epigastric pain
worsened by food intake, and bulky foul smelling
stools (steatorrhea).
/square6Polyuria occurs due to the osmotic diuresis causedby sugar in the urine. Polydipsia occurs secondary
to excess loss of fluid in the urine and also due to
increased osmolality of blood due to excess sugar.
Polyphagia is due to loss of calories in the urine (as
glucose) and also the inability of the body to useglucose due to lack of insulin or insulin resistance.
/square6Diagnosis can be confirmed by doing FBS and PPBS.
An FBS of more than 110 mg/dL and PPBS of more
than 200 mg/dL confirms diabetes mellitus.
/square6Treatment involves diet control, exercise, anti-diabetic drugs and insulin. Antidiabetic drugs
include sulphonylureas, biguanides, glitazones,
alpha-glucosidase inhibitors, meglitinides, PPP-4inhibitors.
Q.A 34-year-old lady who has undergone total
thyroidectomy for papillary carcinoma thyroid2 months ago presents with history of episodes of
paresthesias involving fingertips, toes, perioral area
and muscle cramps involving low back, legs and feet.
1. What is your diagnosis?2. How do you confirm the diagnosis?
3. How do you treat this patient?
/square6Diagnosis is hypoparathyroidism. This patient has
undergone total thyroidectomy, hence even the
parathyroid glands which are very close to the
thyroid glands must have been removed leadingto hypoparathyroidism. Paresthesias and muscle
cramps are due to hypocalcemia. Other causes of
hypoparathyroidism are irradiation of the neck,Type 1 autoimmune polyglandular syndrome, and

/square6Case Scenario Based Discussions691
19congenital agenesis or hypoplasia of the para-
thyroid gland.
/square6Diagnosis can be confirmed by measuring serum
calcium which will be low and serum parathormone(PTH) level which also will be low. Measurementof 25-hydroxyvitamin D is important to excludevitaminD deficiency as a cause of hypocalcemia.Serum magnesium level should also be measuredas low magnesium also causes symptoms similarto hypocalcemia. In addition, hypomagnesemia maycause PTH deficiency and subsequent hypocalcemia.
/square6Treatment involves supplementation of vit-D andcalcium. Currently parathormone use is approvedfor use only in patients with osteoporosis.
Q.A 30-year-old man is brought with 1 month history
of altered behavior. He is socially withdrawn,appears depressed, has difficulty in taking care ofhimself, reports hearing voices, and believes thatpeople are inserting thoughts into his mind. Hisroutine blood tests are normal.
1. What is your diagnosis?
2. How do you treat this patient?
/square6Diagnosis is schizophrenia.
/square6Treatment is by antipsychotics such as clozapine,
risperidone, olanzapine, and quetiapine.
/square6For detailed discussion refer to ‘schizophrenia’ inChapter 12: Psychiatric Disorders.
Q.A 25-year-old man is found unconscious at his
house. Examination shows kerosene smell in hisbreath. Patient is tachypneic with a pulse rate of35/min and BP of 90/60 mmHg. There is excesssalivation and excess sweating. His pupils areconstricted and there are fasciculations also. Discussthe etiology, clinical features, investigations and
treatment of the most likely diagnosis in this patient.
/square6Diagnosis is organophosphorus poisoning. Usuallyorganophosphorus compounds have the smell ofkerosene. Clinical features can be divided into3 phases: Acute cholinergic phase, intermediatesyndrome, and organophosphate-induced delayedpolyneuropathy (OPIDN). Acute cholinergic phaseis characterized by bradycardia, constricted pupils,increased body secretions and fasciculations.Intermediate syndrome starts 1 to 3 days after expo-sure to poison. It occurs due to receptor dysfunctionat the neuromuscular junction and is characterizedby weakness of neck muscles, decreased deeptendon reflexes, cranial nerve abnormalities,proximal and respiratory muscle weakness orparalysis. OPIDN occurs about 1–3 weeks afteracute OP exposure and is characterized by transient,painful “stocking-glove” paresthesias followed bya symmetrical motor polyneuropathy.
/square6Diagnosis can be confirmed by history and bymeasuring plasma cholinesterase levels which will
be reduced to less than 50% of normal./square6Treatment involves gastric lavage, activated
charcoal and IV fluids. Antidote is atropine which
antagonizes the muscarinic effects of acetylcholine.
Atropine does not reverse nicotinic effects such asmuscle fasciculation. Initially 2 to 5 mg is given IV.
If no effect is noted, the dose is doubled every three
to five minutes until the muscarinic signs and symp-toms are reversed. Atropine infusion is usually
required for several days after the exposure.
Intravenous glycopyrrolate is an alternative anddoes not have many CNS side effects of atropine.
Oximes such as pralidoxime (PAM) and obidoxime
are cholinesterase reactivating agents and areeffective in treating both muscarinic and nicotinic
effects of OP compound. Dose of PAM is 2 gm IV
infusion over 30 minutes. Intermediate syndromeis treated by ventilator support. There is no specific
therapy for OPIDN. Regular physiotherapy may
reduce deformities and muscle wasting.
/square6Refer to organophosphorus poisoning for moredetails.
Q.A 22-year-old student is found unconscious in his
room. Examination shows low respiratory rate
(10 breaths per minute), pulse rate of 55/min, normalBP, decreased chest movements, decreased bowel
sounds and miotic pupils. Discuss the etiology,
clinical features, investigations and treatment of the
most likely diagnosis in this patient.
/square6The diagnosis is opioid intoxication. The classicsigns of opioid intoxication include: Depressedmental status, decreased respiratory rate, decreased
tidal volume, decreased bowel sounds, and
constricted pupils. Rarely normal sized pupils canbe seen if the patient has taken meperidine or
propoxyphene or presence of sympathomimetic or
anticholinergic co-ingestants. Constricted pupilscan also be seen in organosphosphorus poisoning
and pontine hemorrhage. However, absence of
kerosene smell, decreased bowel sounds argueagainst OP poisoning. Pontine hemorrhage can
present with similar picture and should be ruled
out by CT or MRI brain.
/square6Diagnosis of opioid poisoning is made clinically.However, diagnosis can be confirmed by response
to naloxone which is an opioid antagonist.
/square6Initial management involves support of patient’s
airway and breathing. Naloxone (opioid antagonist)is given intravenously. Activated charcoal and gastric
emptying are usually not necessary and may increase
the chances of aspiration in an unconscious patient.
Q.A 44-year-old man presents with history of
ingestion of illicit liquor followed by nausea,vomiting, abdominal pain, and severe watery
diarrhea. There is garlic odor of the breath and
stool. Discuss about the most likely diagnosis in
this patient.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
19692 /square6The diagnosis is acute arsenic poisoning. Arsenic
poisoning can occur in people working in industries
dealing with semiconductors (gallium arsenide),
smelting/refining, mining, metallurgy, and decora-tive glass-making. It can also occur after ingestion
of arsenic-containing pesticides, herbicides and
some “moonshine” (illegally distilled alcohol).Symptoms start in the gastrointestinal system and
include nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain, and
watery diarrhea which can lead to dehydration andhypotension. Garlic odor of breath and stool is
typically found in severe poisoning. Other features
are cardiac arrhythmias, shock, ARDS, acuteencephalopathy, and sometimes death.
/square6Another consideration is methanol poisoning. But
it is associated with blurring of vision or blindness,
features of metabolic acidosis, etc.
/square6Diagnosis of arsenic poisoning can be establishedby taking an X-ray of the abdomen which may show
radiopaque material soon after ingestion. ECG may
show QT prolongation. Blood arsenic levels areusually raised but since blood arsenic is cleared
rapidly, measurement of urine arsenic levels can
confirm the diagnosis. In acute poisoning, urinearsenic levels are usually in the thousands of
micrograms per liter.
/square6Refer to arsenic poisoning for more details.
Q.A 35-year-old man who works in a battery manu-
facturing unit has come with colicky abdominalpain, constipation, joint pains, decreased libido,
and difficulty concentrating. Examination shows
impaired short-term memory, anemia, a bluishpigmentation at the gum-tooth line, and bilateral
weakness of extensors of ankle and wrist. Discuss
about the most likely diagnosis in this patient.
/square6Diagnosis is lead poisoning. Lead exposure canoccur in places involved in manufacturing or use
of batteries, pigments, solder, ammunitions, paint,car radiators, cable and wires, and some cosmetics.
Leaded fuel was another source of lead exposure,
but now lead is not being added to fuels.
/square6Diagnosis can be confirmed by measuring bloodlead levels. Chelation is indicated for individuals
with blood lead levels greater than 80 μg/dL. Other
useful tests are free erythrocyte protoporphyrin(FEP) or zinc protoporphyrin (ZPP). These two
tests measure the effect of lead on hemoglobin
synthesis, and can be used as an indicator of leadexposure.
Q.A 25-year-old lady presents with history of fever,
increased frequency and burning micturition of
2 days duration. Discuss briefly the most likely
diagnosis in this patient.
/square6This patient has urinary tract infection (UTI). Fever,
increased frequency and burning micturition are
all pointing towards urinary tract infection. Usuallyfemales are more likely to get UTI than males
because of short urethra (4 cm) and E. coli  is the
common organism causing UTI. More than 5 WBCs
in the urine per high power field will confirm thediagnosis of UTI.
/square6Other helpful investigations in this patient are urine
culture and sensitivity. Rarely ultrasound abdomen
may be required in cases of recurrent UTI to ruleout any urinary tract abnormality.
/square6A 5-day course of antibiotics should be given to this
patient. Antibiotic choices include quinolones
(ciprofloxacin or levofloxacin), amoxicillin-clavulinic acid, cotrimoxazole, azithromycin or
cephalosporins. Recurrent UTI can be prevented by
maintaining good hygiene in the perinial andgenitourinary area, passing urine after sexual
intercourse. Cranberry juice has been shown to
reduce the incidence of UTI by preventing theattachment of E. coli  fimbriae to urothelium.
Q.A 30-year-old lady has presented with facial puffi-
ness, leg swelling and passing frothy urine. BP is
130/80 mmHg. Her LFT and RFT reports are normal.Her urine analysis report shows 4+ proteinuria. Discuss
the etiology, clinical features, investigations and
treatment of the most likely diagnosis in this patient.
/square6Diagnosis is nephrotic syndrome. Nephrotic
syndrome is defined as proteinuria of more than
3.5 gm/day accompanied by hypoalbuminemia,
edema, and hyperlipidemia. Normal BP also goes
in favor of nephrotic syndrome as hypertension is
a feature of nephritic syndrome. Etiology includesminimal change disease (in children), focal
segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS), membranous
nephropathy, diabetes mellitus, SLE and othercollagen diseases, amyloidosis, vasculitis, infections
(poststreptococcal, hepatitis B, hepatitis C, HIV),
and drugs (penicillamine, NSAIDs).
/square6Other useful investigations are measurement of24-hour urinary protein excretion, lipid profile andinvestigations to find out the cause of nephrotic
syndrome (such as blood sugar, ANA, cANCA,
hepatitis B and C serology, ASO titer, HIV, ELISA,etc.). Renal biopsy is required if the cause is not
clear especially in an adult patient.
/square6Management:  Edema is managed by dietary salt
restriction and diuretics. Hyperlipidemia is treatedby dietary modification and statins. Minimal change
disease responds to steroids. Membranous nephro-
pathy responds to alternating monthly corticosteroidsand monthly oral chlorambucil over 6 months.
Membranous nephropathy with progressive renal
failure may benefit from cyclophosphamide pluscorticosteroids. Underlying cause should also be
addressed. Anticoagulation may be required if
there is evidence of thrombosis because nephroticsyndrome is a hypercoagulable state due to loss of
antithrombin III in urine.

/square6Case Scenario Based Discussions693
19Q.A 20-year-old boy presents with hematuria, oliguria
and generalized edema. His BP is 160/100 mmHg.
His urine analysis shows presence of 1+ proteinuria,
WBCs, RBCs and RBC casts. Urea and creatinine are
elevated.
/square6Diagnosis is acute glomerulonephritis. Glomerulo-
nephritis typically presents with hypertension,
hematuria, RBC casts, pyuria (WBCs) and mild tomoderate proteinuria. Causes of acute glomerulo-
nephritis include primary glomerular diseases
(diffuse proliferative glomerulonephritis, focalsegmental glomerulosclerosis, membranous
glomerulonephritis, crescentic glomerulonephritis,
IgA nephropathy), systemic diseases (SLE, Wegener’sgranulomatosis, polyarteritis, Goodpasture’s
syndrome), infections (poststreptococcal, syphilis,
hepatitis B and C), serum sickness, etc.
/square6Treatment usually requires high dose steroids andcytotoxic agents such as cyclophosphamide. Plasma-
pheresis can be used in Goodpasture’s disease.
Underlying disease requires specific treatment.
/square6Refer to ‘acute glomerulonephritis’ for detaileddiscussion.
Q.A 30-year-old man who is a known case of type 1
diabetes mellitus has come to emergency with
fatigue, diffuse abdominal pain, vomiting and drowsi-ness. He was taking insulin daily (total 60 units per
day), but has skipped the insulin for the past
4 days. On examination, he is tachypneic, has pulse
rate of 110 beats per minute, respiratory rate of
28 breaths per minute (deep and sighing typebreaths), blood pressure of 100/70 mmHg. He also
has dry mucous membranes, poor skin turgor and
is slightly confused. His blood sugar is 450 mg/dl.An ABG done at the bedside shows arterial pH of
6.9, PO
2 of 95 mmHg, PCO2 of 28 mmHg, and HCO
of 9 mEq/L. Urine shows presence of large amountof ketone bodies.
Discuss in detail the most likely diagnosis in this
patient.
/square6Diagnosis is diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA). DKA is
common in type 1 DM. it is precipitated by acute
illness or skipping of insulin. Blood sugar is usually
more than 250 mg/dL. Patients present with fatigue,
diffuse abdominal pain due to acidosis and altered
sensorium. Patients usually have severe dehydra-
tion due to osmotic diuresis caused by hyper-glycemia. This patient has dry mucous membranes,
poor skin turgor and low normal BP, all of which
suggest dehydration. Tachypnea and deep sighingbreathing is due to metabolic acidosis. ABG shows
metabolic acidosis (low pH and low bicarbonate)
and urine shows large amount of ketone bodiesconfirming the diagnosis of DKA.
/square6For detailed discussion refer to ‘DKA’ in Chapter 9:
Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus.Q.A 52-year-old male presents with increasing fatigue
and weakness for the past few days. He is a knowncase of type 2 diabetes mellitus on glimepiride andinsulin. He also complains of excessive thirst andpassing large amount of urine for the past few days.
Examination shows BP of 70/40 mm Hg; pulse of
115/min; respiratory rate of 22/min; and temperature
of 36.9°C. The patient is awake and responsive butdisoriented. Mucous membranes are dry andskin turgor is poor. Lab data show blood sugar of950 mg/dL, and negative ketone bodies in the urine.
ABG shows normal pH and normal PO
2 and CO2.
Discuss the most likely diagnosis in this patient.
/square6Most likely diagnosis in this patient is hypergly-cemic hyperosmolar state (HHS). It is common intype 2 DM. In type 2DM, there is some residualinsulin secretion in the body which prevents forma-tion of ketone bodies. If DKA develops due toketone bodies, patient becomes sick and seeksmedical attention early. However, in type 2 DMresidual insulin prevents ketone body formationand there is rise of blood glucose to very high level(>800 mg/dl) which causes hyperosmolality ofblood. Hyperosmolality leads to dehydration ofneurons producing altered sensorium and some-times seizures. Severe hyperglycemia also leads toosmotic diuresis, dehydration and excessive thirst.Low BP and increased pulse rate in this patient aredue to dehydration. Another consideration in apatient presenting with hyperglycemia, weaknessand dehydration is DKA. But absence of ketonebodies in the urine and normal pH in this patientsuggest that it is not DKA.
/square6For detailed discussion refer to ‘HHS’ in Ch apter 9:
Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus.
Q.A 55-year-old man presents with fever, breathless-
ness, cough with purulent sputum and right-sidedchest pain of 3 days duration. Chest pain is sharp,stabbing type and increases on deep breathing andcoughing. Examination shows pulse rate of 110/min,respiratory rate of 30/min and BP of 130/80 mmHg.Chest examination shows crepitations and bronchialbreath sounds in right infrascapular area.
Discuss the most likely diagnosis in this patient.
/square6The most likely diagnosis is lobar pneumonia.Lobar pneumonia usually produces pleuritic typechest pain which this patient has. Bronchopneu-monia usually affects both lung and there will befindings in both the lungs which is not the case here.Another consideration is lung abscess, but itpresents with significant amount of foul smellingsputum. In addition, pleuritic type chest pain isunusual in lung abscess unless it is closer to theperiphery of the lung.
/square6For detailed discussion refer to ‘pneumonia’ inChapter 2: Diseases of Respiratory System.

20
694Q.Enumerate and describe professional qualities of
a Physician.
Professional Qualities Expected in a Doctor
Sense of Responsibility
/square6Breeds dedication and motivates to do what is right,
going beyond the call of duty.
/square6Keeps you going even when you are tired; go tothe extra mile for the sake of the patients.
/square6Do the right things, sacrifice without ulteriormotives, even when no one else is looking.
Compassion and Empathy
/square6This quality brings out dedication to the patientfrom a genuine sense of concern.
/square6Quality that keeps the doctor going even when heis tired.
/square6Quality that ward off cynicism when dealing witha ‘difficult’ patient.
Professionalism
/square6Quality that ensures patient’s rights, autonomy,
modesty and privacy is respected at all times.
Updated in Knowledge
/square6Doctor must have adequate knowledge and keep
abreast with development in medicine.
/square6Honest enough to know limitation and refer patientfor consultation.
Humility
/square6Arrogance, pride and overconfidence are dange-rous qualities for a doctor.
/square6Open up to medical errors and misdiagnoses.
/square6Humility helps to recognize not just their strengths
but also their weaknesses.Role of Physician in the
Community, Medicolegal and
Ethical Issues in Health Care
/square6Understands limitations and is humble enough to
ask for help.
Clinical Acumen and Judgement
/square6Ability to differentiate between ‘sick’ and ‘less sick’is crucial.
/square6Ability to sort out patients’ history, picking uppatients details, obtaining appropriate test to come
to a diagnosis.
/square6Knowing when to intervene.
/square6It is an art developed over years of experience.
Communication Skills and Bedside Manners
/square6Communication plays an important role between
doctor and patients, colleagues or public.
/square6The ability to give bad news, counsel, comfort,discuss treatment options and alternatives isimportant Good communication prevent ‘doctor-shopping’ or non-compliant with their medications.
Summary
/square6Being a good doctor is more than academicexcellence. It involves a right attitude, aptitude,character, commitment, demeanor and above all, a
heart of service.
Q.Describe and discuss the role of a physician in
healthcare system.
/square6The GMR envisages the following roles that a doctor
must perform in-order to achieve the goal of theUG Medical Education Program.
/square6Clinician:  Who understands and provides preven-
tive, promotive, curative, palliative and holistic care
with compassion.
/square6Leader and member of the healthcare team and system:With capabilities to collect analyze, synthesize and
communicate health data appropriately.

/square6Role of Physician in the Community, Medicolegal and Ethical Issues in Health Care695
20/square6Communicator:  With patients, families, colleagues
and community.
/square6Lifelong learner:  Committed to continuous improve-
ment of skills and knowledge.
/square6Professional:  Who is committed to excellence, is
ethical, responsive and accountable to patients,community and profession.
Q.Describe the commitment to lifelong learning as
an important part of physician growth.
/square6Medical science is an ever-changing field of practice
with advances in medicine, expanded evidencesources, new treatment options, and changinggovernmental regulations and models of care. Mostdoctors are aware of the aphorism that learning
should continue from the cradle to the grave.
/square6Lifelong learning offers individuals the opportunity
to keep their knowledge current, learn new skills,
and pursue a wide variety of interests through
intellectual growth and expansion. We must conti-nuously read and evaluate the literature, discuss itwith colleagues, and formulate opinions that impactour practice.
/square6Lifelong learning is not an option in healthcare, itsrequired by healthcare workers to remain relevantand continue providing safe, effective patient care.The lifelong learning movement in healthcareprovides benefit and welfare for everyone in
society.
/square6Opportunities for lifelong learning can take place
in the following ways:
– E-learning.– Attending CME and conferences.
– Reading journals and latest textbooks.
– Discussion with colleagues.
Q.Describe and discuss the role of non-maleficence
as a guiding principle in patient care.
/square6Nonmaleficence means doing no harm. There is an
obligation not to inflict harm on others either by
omission or commission of an act. The guidingprinciple of primum non nocere, “First of all, dono harm,” is found in the Hippocratic Oath. Actionsor practices of a healthcare provider are “right” aslong as they are in the interest of the patient and
avoid negative consequences.
/square6Harm by an act of omission means that some action
could have been done to avoid harm but was notdone. Example of an act of omission would be
failing to give adrenaline injection in case a case
of anaphylactic shock. An act of commission issomething actually done that resulted in harm.An example of an act of commission would bedelivering a medication in the wrong dose or to thewrong patient.Q.Describe the role of autonomy and shared responsi-
bility as a guiding principle in patient care.
/square6Autonomy is the ability to make decisions for oneself.
Principle of autonomy upholds the right of indivi-
duals to make decisions about their own healthcare.
/square6Respect for autonomy requires that patients be told
the truth about their condition and be informed
about the risks and benefits of treatment in orderfor them to make informed decisions. Under thelaw, they are permitted to refuse treatment even ifthe best and most reliable information indicates thattreatment would be beneficial, unless their action
may have a negative impact on the well-being of
another individual. These conflicts set the stage forethical dilemmas. Nowadays, patients are wellinformed and able to make decisions about theirown care. Doctor should give all the options ofdiagnostic methods, treatment options, etc. and
help make the patient make a decision.
/square6Autonomy, however, does not negate responsibility.Healthcare is a partnership between the provider
and patient. Each owes the other a position ofpartner and respect in healthcare decision-making.Physician needs to guide the patient to make correctdecisions which are beneficial and not harmful.
/square6The principle of autonomy does not extend topersons who lack the capacity (competence) to actautonomously; examples include infants andchildren and incompetence due to developmental,
mental or physical disorder.
Q.Describe the role of beneficence of a guiding
principle in patient care.
/square6The principle of beneficence is the obligation of
physician to act for the benefit of the patient. Thisprinciple states that healthcare providers must doall they can to benefit the patient in each situation.To ensure beneficence, medical practitioners must
develop and maintain a high level of skill and
knowledge, make sure that they are trained in themost current and best medical practices, and mustconsider their patients’ individual circumstances.
/square6The principle calls for not just avoiding harm, butalso to benefit patients and to promote their welfare.While physicians’ beneficence conforms to moralrules, and is altruistic, it is also true that in manyinstances it can be considered a payback for thedebt to society for education (often subsidized by
governments), ranks and privileges, and to the
patients themselves (learning and research).
Q.Describe the role of justice as a guiding principle
in patient care.
/square6The principle of justice speaks to equity and fairness
in treatment to all. It also implies equal distribution

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
20696 of healthcare resources to all. The right to be treated
equally, and in some cases equal access to treat-ment, can be found in many constitutions, but inactual practice, a number of different factors mayinfluence the application of this principle of justiceespecially when there are limited resources. When
there are scarce resources, equality of distribution
cannot be implemented and patients have to beprioritized. An example is younger patients getpriority over old patients for kidney transplanta-tion.
Q.Discuss the medicolegal, socioeconomic and ethical
issues as it pertains to organ donation.
/square6Organ transplantation is done to replace the recipient’s
damaged organ with the working organ of thedonor so that the recipient could function normally.
Ethical Issues
/square6The following ethical criteria should be addressedin cases of living donor transplantation.
/square6The removal of the tissue or organ does not impairthe health or functional integrity of the donor.
/square6The benefits expected to be given to the recipientbear an acceptable proportion to the harm likely to
the donor.
/square6The donation should be altruistic and is given
without any coercion or any other form of externalpressure.
/square6The donor must be fully informed of the nature ofthe procedure and the possible even if rarecomplications. This entails the need for follow-upof the donor’s health in the future.
/square6The views of close relatives such as the spouse oradult children are taken into account.
/square6There must be no element of commercialization or
exploitation in the donation.
Legal and Social Issues
/square6Because there is high demand for organs especially
kidneys, many illegal activities have been taking
place in this field. These include brokers who coerce
donors to sell organs for money, and other peoplewho are involved in illegal trafficking of theseorgans.
/square6The abuse, fraud and coercion of paid kidneydonors are frequently reported. Many recipients ofthese sold organs have died raising serious concernsabout the consequences of the illegal organ trade,both for recipients and donors.
/square6Many studies have shown that the underlyingmotivation of most paid kidney donors is poverty,and that lasting economic benefit after donation islimited or even negative because of the limitedemployability of such patients and the perceived
deterioration of their health. Paid kidney donationis also associated with depression, regret and dis-
crimination. Paid kidney donors do not receivefollow-up care, due to financial and other reasons.
/square6Considering all these Indian Government has come
up with The Human Organs Transplant Act, 1994
which lays down certain rules and regulations thatare to be followed while conducting organ trans-plant.
Q.Discuss the medicolegal, sociocultural and ethical
issues as it pertains to confidentiality in patient
care.
/square6All information about one’s patient is confidential.It includes any information about the patient’sidentity, condition, diagnosis, investigations’ results,treatment, and/or prognosis (whether chances of
cure, disability, or death).
/square6Patients put their trust on doctors and other health-
care professionals during the course of treatmentand share lot of information regarding their health
and personal matters. It is important that informa-
tion shared during this time is not shared withanyone who is not directly involved in the care ofthat patient. This unnecessary sharing of informa-tion may lead to problems for the patient. Forexample, if the patient is positive for HIV and his
friends to come to know it, then the patient may
face social stigma.
/square6A breach of confidentiality is a disclosure of privateinformation to a third party not involved with thepatient’s care, without patient consent or court order.
Disclosure can be oral or written, by telephone or
fax, or electronically, for example, via e-mail orhealth information networks. Accessing the medicalrecords of patient’s without legitimate reason is alsoconsidered a breach of confidentiality.
/square6Tips for maintaining confidentiality:  Discuss patient
related matters with the authorized persons only.Avoid discussing about patient in non-private areas(e.g. elevator, hallway or cafeteria). Limit theaccessibility to the medical records. Do not discuss
the patient’s medical information with unautho-
rized family members. Do not disclose patient’sinformation without his/her consent except inestablished exceptions.
Q.Patient rights in health care.
/square6Right to information:  Physicians or their qualified assis-
tants are required to provide adequate information
about the illness, its diagnosis, proposed investiga-tion and possible complications to the patient.
/square6Right to records and reports.
/square6Right to emergency medical care:  Patient has the right
to prompt emergency care by doctors without com-promise on quality or safety and without havingto pay full or an advanced fee to the hospital.

/square6Role of Physician in the Community, Medicolegal and Ethical Issues in Health Care697
20/square6Right to informed consent:  The doctor primarily in
charge of a patient has to explain the risks, conse-quences and procedure of the investigation orsurgery in simple language before providing theprotocol consent form to the patient or to theresponsible caretaker.
/square6Right to confidentiality, human dignity and privacy:Unless it is an exceptional case where sharing thisinformation is “in the interest of protecting otheror due to public health considerations.”
/square6Right to non-discrimination.
/square6Right to safety and quality care according tostandards.
/square6Right to choose alternative treatment options if
available.
/square6Right to a second opinion.
/square6Right to transparency in rates, and care according
to prescribed rates wherever relevant.
/square6Right to choose the source for obtaining medicinesor tests.
/square6Right to proper referral and transfer, which is freefrom perverse commercial influences.
/square6Right to protection for patients involved in clinicaltrials.
/square6Right to protection of participants involved inbiomedical and health research.
/square6Right to be discharged.
/square6Right to receive the body of a deceased person fromthe hospital.
/square6Right to patient education.
Q.Advanced directives and surrogate decision-making
in health care.
/square6Advance directives document patients’ wishes with
respect to life-sustaining treatment (in a living will),
their choice of a surrogate decision maker, or both.Advance directives are designed to protect patientautonomy under the belief that patients who losedecision-making capacity are more likely to receivethe care they want if they choose a surrogate
decision maker, document their wishes in advance,
or both. Most of the time the surrogate decisionmaker chosen will be a close family member.
/square6In the absence of any advance directive or surrogatedecision maker, when the patient cannot makedecisions, the healthcare provider needs to identify
an appropriate surrogate decision maker to discuss
end-of-life issues. Most commonly, this is the spouse,adult children, or parents.
/square6Effective communication between healthcare provi-ders, individuals, and their surrogates is needed toensure that individuals’ wishes at the end of life
are honoured.Q.Discuss the medicolegal, socio-cultural and ethical
issues as it pertains to decision-making in emer-gency care including situations where patients do
not have the capability or capacity to give consent.
/square6Normally informed consent should be obtainedfrom patients or their relatives. But there are fewexceptions to the need for consent to medical treat-ment. Many patients may not be able to judge whatis right or wrong and may not be in a position to
give informed consent. Such patients include
children/adolescents, intellectually impaired,mentally ill, drug and alcohol affected, and patientin the emergency department.
/square6Medical emergency is one of the well-knownreasons not to obtain informed consent. In thesetting of acute or traumatic injury, patient under-standing is easily jeopardized by fear, anxiety,pain, medications, and physiological derangement,resulting in unreliable decision making. Delirious
or unconscious patients lack capacity and cannot
provide consent. In these cases, it is a physician’sduty to seek consent from a suitable surrogate.However, in some cases, even getting consent froma surrogate is excused if the surrogate is not imme-diately available and waiting to find the surrogate
would cause harm to the patient by delaying care.
Thus, responsibility is placed upon the physician inthese cases to act in the patient’s best interest andproceed with the appropriate medical interventions.
Q.Discuss the medicolegal, sociocultural and ethical
issues as it pertains to research on human subjects.
/square6Legal and ethical issues form an important
component of modern research, related to the
subject and researcher.
Legal Requirements Related to the Subject
/square6Informed consent:  Informed consent is documented
by means of written, signed and dated informedconsent form. Informed consent may be soughtfrom a legally authorised representative if a poten-tial research subject is incapable of giving informedconsent (e.g. children, intellectual impairment).
/square6While publishing the research findings identity ofthe subjects should not be revealed. If necessary,prior permission should be obtained beforerevealing the identity.
/square6Cash or other benefits (financial, medical, educa-tional, community benefits) should be made knownto subjects when obtaining informed consent withoutemphasising too much on it. Undue inducement to
encourage participation in research raises ethical
questions. The amount and nature of remunerationshould be compared to norms, cultural traditionsand are subjected to the Ethical Committee Review.On the contrary, paying human subjects a verysmall amount of money may lead to exploitation.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
20698 /square6Research participants who suffer physical injury as
a result of their participation are entitled to financialor other assistance to compensate them equitablyfor any temporary or permanent impairment ordisability. In case of death, their dependents areentitled to material compensation
Issues Related to the Researcher
/square6Various regulatory bodies have been constituted to
uphold the safety of subjects involved in research
(e.g. ethics committee). The researchers need toobtain necessary clearances from these committees.
/square6Researcher should avoid bias, inappropriate research
methodology, incorrect reporting and inappro-
priate use of information.
/square6Plagiarism should be avoided. Plagiarism is the useof others’ published and unpublished ideas or
intellectual property without permission.
Q.Discuss the medicolegal, sociocultural and ethical
issues as they pertain to consent for surgical proce-
dures.
/square6Informed consent should be obtained prior to anysurgery wherever possible. Patient should beexplained about the benefits, risks, and possible
complications of surgery in his understandable
language.
/square6Unexpected findings in operation theatre:  If the finding
does not need emergency surgery, then patientmust be given opportunity to provide informed
consent. If it is emergency and it is impossible to
obtain consent then procedure can be done withoutobtaining consent.
/square6Children are considered a ‘minor’ until the age of
18 years. Parents or legal guardian is required to
give consent. In case emergency situation whenparents are not available the consent can be takenform school teacher/principal or any other personin charge. A court order can be obtained if parentor guardian refuses to consent to an established
medical procedure for religious and other reason.
/square6Consent for procedures involving marital rights
such as sterilizations, termination of pregnancy theconsent of the spouse is obtained to preserve family
harmony even though it is not legally required.
/square6Consent is not necessary in  emergencies where a
patient is not in a position to give consent, and courtordered care.
Q.Discuss the medicolegal, sociocultural, professional
and ethical issues as it pertains to the physician
patient relationship (including fiduciary duty).
/square6Patient is a human being seeking help to improvehis health or prevent disease. He always carriesa degree of fear or anxiety. Doctor is a skilledprofessional with leadership, emotional intelligenceand strong communication skills. The relationship
between these two is unique with the ultimate objec-tive of assisting the patient to achieve treatmentgoals. A good patient-physician relationship isessential for the delivery of high-quality healthcarein the diagnosis and treatment of disease. Relation-
ship between patients and medical professionals as
contractual and not a master–servant relationship.
/square6Doctor role:  Doctor should apply a high degree of
skill and knowledge to the problems of illness. Act
for welfare of patient and community rather than
for own self interest, desire for money, advance-ment, etc. Be objective and emotionally detached.Be guided by rules of professional practice. Doctoris expected to take the fiduciary role while treatingpatients. A fiduciary is a person or organization that
acts on behalf of another person or persons, putting
their clients’ interest ahead of their own, with a dutyto preserve good faith and trust.
/square6Doctor’s rights:  Granted right to examine patients
physically and to enquire into intimate areas of
physical and personal life. Granted considerableautonomy in professional practice. Occupies positionof authority in relation to the patient. Doctor canrefuse to treat a patient if he feels that patient is notcooperating with the treatment.
/square6Patient responsibilities:  Seek help and cooperate with
a doctor. Patients need to define their problems inan open and full manner. Patient has the right toseek care elsewhere when demands are not satis-
factorily met.
/square6Shared decision-making: Both doctor and patient are
involved in the decision-making process. Bothparties share information. Both parties take steps
to build a consensus about the preferred treatment.
An agreement (consensus) is reached on the treat-ment to implement.
Q.Discuss physician’s role and responsibility to society
and the community that she/he serves.
/square6‘Some heroes donot wear capes, we call them
doctors’. This saying summarises what the society
expects from a doctor and what the doctor owes to
society. The absolute first and the last event of ahuman are both certified by doctors, in maternityhospitals and morgue.
/square6It is the professional responsibility of physicians touse the medical knowledge, scientific expertise, andethical training to work for better public health. Thedoctor is expected to play following roles in thesociety.
/square6Medical expert at a societal level:  Physicians acts as
consultants by advising as per their expertise toidentify healthcare problems in the society andsolutions. Physicians should strive to save lives,extend lifespan, improve quality of life, and prevent
epidemics.

/square6Role of Physician in the Community, Medicolegal and Ethical Issues in Health Care699
20/square6Organiser/administrator at the community level:
Physicians should also take the responsibility asadministrator to supervise and implement healthrelated policies. Physicians must have insights intomanagement tasks at departmental and organisa-tions level. It is also expected to have this know-
ledge in regional, national and international level
/square6Teacher/communicator at the community levels:
Physicians must educate the community to on howto prevent diseases and improve health.
/square6Researcher:  Research is one of the ways to contribute
to medical field and also to society. This can beimproved or new diagnostic technique, new treat-ment, or development of vaccines which benefit
society.
Q.Discuss the medicolegal, sociocultural, professional
and ethical issues in physician–industry relation-
ships.
/square6In medicine generally, “the primary interests arethe health of the patient,” whereas financial gain,prestige, or preferences are not illegitimate butsecondary interests. The physician’s primaryobligation is toward the patient. Relationships with
industry are appropriate only insofar as they do
not affect the fiduciary nature of the patient/physician relationship.
/square6In any relationship between a physician and theindustry, the physician should always maintain
professional autonomy, independence and commit-
ment to the scientific method. The physician shouldbe prepared to disclose the nature of such relation-ships to his or her patients, to the organizers andaudience of a continuing medical education (CME)event at which he/she is a speaker, and in compar-
able situations.
Research
/square6Pharmaceutical funding plays an important role inmedical research. There are data to suggest that eco-
nomic interest from industry may have a negativeinfluence on the objectivity of science, researchpublication, and even patient management.Industry-sponsored reports are up to four times aslikely to favour a pharmaceutical company’s
product compared to independently published
data. In industry sponsored research, a prerequisitefor physician participation is that these activitiesare ethically defensible, socially responsible andscientifically valid. The participation of physiciansin industry-sponsored research activities should be
approved by the ethics committee.
Continuing Medical Education (CME)
/square6CME activities should not be influenced by the
industry requirements. It should address the
educational needs of the targeted medical audience.The ultimate decision on the organization, content
and choice of CME activities shall lie in the handsof the physician organizers.
/square6Whenever possible, generic names should be used
rather than trade names in the course of CME
activities. If specific products or services arementioned, there should be a balanced presentationof the prevailing body of scientific information onthe product or service and of reasonable, alternativetreatment options. However, faculty at CME events
may accept reasonable honoraria and reimburse-
ment for travel, lodging and meal expenses. Scholar-
ships or other special funds to permit medicalstudents, residents and fellows to attend educa-tional events are permissible as long as the selectionof participants for these funds is made by their
academic institution.
Other Considerations
/square6Physicians should not invest in pharmaceutical
manufacturing companies or related undertakings
if knowledge about the success of the company or
undertaking might inappropriately affect themanner of their practice or their prescribing beha-viour.
/square6Practising physicians affiliated with pharmaceuticalcompanies should not allow their affiliation toinfluence their medical practice inappropriately.
/square6There is evidence that gifts and other forms of
industry support to physicians affect their beha-
viour. Practising physicians should not acceptpersonal gifts from the pharmaceutical industry orsimilar bodies.
/square6Practising physicians may accept patient-teachingaids appropriate to their area of practice providedthese aids carry only the logo of the donor companyand do not refer to specific therapeutic agents,services or other products.
Q.Discuss the medicolegal, sociocultural, economic
and ethical issues as they pertain to surrogate
motherhood.
/square6Surrogacy as a practice in which a woman bears achild for a couple unable to produce children in theusual way.
/square6There are two types of surrogacy arrangements.Altruistic surrogacy: Here the surrogate motherreceives no financial rewards for her pregnancyexcept necessary medical expenses. Commercialsurrogacy: Where the surrogate mother is paid overand above the necessary medical expenses.
Commercial surrogacy is legal in India.
/square6Surrogacy leads to a win-win situation for both the
infertile couple and the surrogate mother. Theinfertile couple is able to fulfill their most importantdesire and the surrogate mother receives the
suitable reward.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
20700 /square6To give a womb for rent means to nurture the
fertilized egg of another couple in your womb andgive birth to the child with a specific intention, theintention here being either money, or service, orbecause of altruistic reasons.
Sociocultural Issues
/square6Surrogate mother is not the genetic mother of thechild whom she nurtures and gives birth to.
/square6She is not the wife of the father of the child to whomshe gives birth.
/square6She is not an asocial woman.
/square6She is not a woman who sells children.
/square6It does not matter as to which religion the surrogatemother belongs, the child is genetically of thecouple.
Legal Considerations
/square6Surrogacy is not an illegal practice.
/square6Woman is not forced into surrogate motherhood.
She herself decides whether she wants to become a
surrogate mother or not.
/square6She has no claim or rights over the child that is born.
/square6She is not responsible for the child once it is born.
/square6Many people come from abroad to get a surrogatemother. This cross border surrogacy leads to
problems in citizenship, nationality, motherhood,
parentage, and rights of a child. There are occasionswhere children are denied nationality of the countryof intended parents and this results in either a longlegal battle. There are incidences where the childgiven to couple after surrogacy is not genetically
related to them and in turn, is disowned by the
intended parent and has to spend his life in anorphanage.
/square6There are many problems related to women who
act as surrogate mothers. The poor, illiterate women
of rural background are often persuaded in suchdeals by their spouse or middlemen for earning easymoney. These women have no right on decisionregarding their own body and life. After recruit-ment by commercial agencies, these women are
shifted into hostels for the whole duration of
pregnancy on the pretext of taking antenatal care.These women spend the whole tenure of pregnancyworrying about their household and children. Theyare allowed to go out only for antenatal visits andare allowed to meet their family only on Sundays.
The worst part is that in case of unfavorable
outcome of pregnancy, they are unlikely to be paid,and there is no provision of insurance or post-pregnancy medical and psychiatric support forthem. Rich career women who do not want to takethe trouble of carrying their own pregnancy are
resorting to hiring surrogate mothers. There are a
number of moral and ethical issues regardingsurrogacy, which has become more of a commercialracket, and there is an urgent need for framing and
implementation of laws for the parents and thesurrogate mother.
Q.Discuss the medicolegal, sociocultural, economic
and ethical issues as they pertain to donor
insemination.
Legal Issues
/square6Consent of the donor and his wife should be
obtained.
/square6Artificial insemination should be done only afterobtaining the informed consent of female client andher spouse.
/square6Identity of the husband and wife should not be
disclosed.
/square6Donor should not be known to the recipient and
the result of insemination.
/square6Donor must be mentally and physically sound.
/square6Donor must not be a relative of either spouse, andhe should have had children of his own.
/square6It is usually wise to use “pooled semen”, i.e.husband’s semen is mixed with that of a donor,there is technical possibility that the husband may,in fact be ‘the biological father’ of the child.
/square6The donor and recipient cannot be held guilty ofadultery in India, as this often requires sexualintercourse as necessary ingredient for charge ofadultery.
/square6Issue of legitimacy:  Sometimes question may arise
about the legitimacy of the child born after artificialinsemination (e.g. a widow having a child afterartificial insemination). Such problems can besolved by adopting the child legally.
Legal Requirement for Medical Practitioner
/square6Should not indulge in segregation of the XX or XYchromosomes for artificial insemination.
/square6Sex determination test should not be undertakenwith the intent to terminate the life of a female foetus.
/square6Should not disclose the identity of the donor orrecipient.
Q.Discuss the medicolegal, sociocultural professional
and ethical issues pertaining to medical negligence.
/square6Negligence is the breach of a legal duty to care. It
means carelessness in a matter in which the law
mandates carefulness. A breach of this duty gives apatient the right to initiate action against negligence.
/square6Medical malpractice occurs when a healthcare
provider deviates from the recognized “standard
of care” in the treatment of a patient. The “standardof care” is defined as what a reasonably prudentmedical provider would or would not have doneunder the same or similar circumstances. In essence,it boils down to whether the provider was negligent.

/square6Role of Physician in the Community, Medicolegal and Ethical Issues in Health Care701
20/square6After consumer protection act has come into force,
many patients have filed legal cases against doctors,have established that the doctors were negligent in
their medical service, and have claimed and
received compensation.
/square6In medical negligence cases it is the duty of thepatient or his/her relatives to establish that: (1) Therewas a duty which the medical practitioner owed to
the patient; (2) There was a breach of duty; (3) The
breach resulted in injury to the patient; (4) Theinjury resulted in causing damages.
/square6A doctor is not guilty of negligence if he has actedin accordance with practice accepted as proper by
reasonable body of medical man skilled in that
particular art
/square6Contract act;  no legal duty to treat the patient except
contract. Advice and consultation through TV andnewspaper not contract. No Assurance of success
of treatment. Discretionary power to choose mode
of treatment.
Contributory Negligence
/square6These are negligence from patient side which leadto failure of treatment. These are failure to take care
about himself, choosing wrongful doctor which is
apparent, failure to furnish necessary information,refusal to submit for further test, and failure to
follow doctor instructions.
/square6Contributory negligence is not absolute defense.Contributory negligence is applicable to conscious
patient. In case of unconscious patient, duty is ondoctor or guardian. Contributory negligence of
guardian is attributed to patient.
Defences for Doctor
/square6Most of the time potential civil actions against
healthcare providers are for the following reasons:(1) Lack of informed consent, and (2) violation of
the standard of care. To avoid this doctor should
obtain informed consent as per the prescribedguidelines and keep his knowledge updated in the
field of his practice. The standard of care emerges
from a variety of sources, including professionalpublications, interactions of professional leaders,
presentations and exchanges at professional
meetings, and among networks of colleagues.
/square6Defense of consent: Obtaining informed consentgoes a long way in protecting the doctor againstlegal cases. Inherent risks involved in the treatment,
inevitable accident in the course of operation,
unexpected response which requires higher carethan prescribed by law are all defenses against the
patient who files case against doctor. In emergency
situation, doctor need not have necessary qualifica-tion and specialization.Remember
/square6Things can go wrong when you do not followethics.
/square6Too many doctors increases confusion andlitigations.
/square6We cannot hide our negligence for long.
/square6Tender, loving care reduces many conflicts.
Q.Discuss the medicolegal, sociocultural, professional,
and ethical issues pertaining to malpractice.
/square6Medical malpractice and medical negligence are
related to each other though there is difference
between the two. The main difference between the
two is intent. In medical negligence a mistake from
the medical professional causes a patient un-
intended harm. Medical malpractice, on the other
hand, is when a medical professional knowingly
did not follow the proper standard of care. It does
not mean that there was malicious intent to cause
harm, but the harm could have been avoided if the
medical professional had taken alternative
measures. In malpractice, the healthcare provider
knew something that could either help or harm the
patient and consciously chose the option that
harmed them. While all medical malpractice is
negligence, not every instance of negligence is
malpractice.
/square6Some examples of medical malpractice include the
wrong procedure being performed, surgery
performed on the wrong body part.
/square6If a medical professional’s recklessness did notresult in any harm, then the patient cannot sue for
negligence or malpractice.
Q.Discuss the medicolegal, sociocultural professional
and ethical issues in dealing with impaired physi-
cians.
/square6The impaired physician is a medical doctor whosuffers from alcoholism, drug addiction, physical,
or mental illness. Impairment affects the physician’s
life both personally and professionally. The
physician’s personal life is usually affected first,
then his professional interactions with colleagues,
and the last area to be affected is the physician’s
patient care skills.
/square6Physicians have a higher prevalence of impairment.The high rate of impairment is generally attributed
to two sources: The high stress inherent in medical
practice and the access to chemical substances.
Impairment, particularly in the form of alcoholism
and depression, inhibits the impaired physician’s
insight. Hence, there is a high chance of medical
malpractice and medical negligence.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
20702 Sociocultural Issues
Many physicians do not reveal or seek treatment for
their impairment because of many reasons. Fear ofbeing looked down upon and loss of respect prevent
the physician from revealing and seeking help for his
impairment. In addition, fear of losing practice, anddisciplinary actions by law enforcing agencies, andfear of losing license to practice are all reasons behindimpaired physician not seeking help.
Ethical Issues
/square6In the framework of physician impairment, thepatient’s autonomy and the physician’s autonomycome into conflict. Patient autonomy takes priorityover physician autonomy. The physician may have
the autonomy to self-destruct, namely to leave
addiction untreated, but this right cannot beextended to be a right to damage a patient.
/square6The application of the principle of nonmaleficence
in case of physician impairment implies the need
to protect the patient from the impaired physicianwho would likely do harm.
/square6The principle of justice places the needs of the
patients above the physician’s needs, resulting in
regulation of medical practice while impaired. Policyresulting from the principle of justice would empha-size its primary focus on removal of the impairedphysician from practice, and secondarily address thetreatment programs to benefit physicians.
Identification of the Impaired Physician
/square6An impaired physician can be identified if hisaddiction leads to an interaction with law enforce-ment authorities. For physicians still in training, a
supervisor may identify their impairment based on
work performance.
/square6In most cases, the first people to become aware of thephysician’s impairment are family and close friends.
Intervention and Treatment of the Impaired Physician
/square6It is important to identify and treat the impaired
physician earlier in the course of their impairment.
Early identification and intervention result in thebest outcome.
/square6The professionals who intervene and treat the
impaired physician must exude hope and potential
for recovery or the impaired physician may viewcontinued substance abuse or suicide as better options.
/square6Confidentiality is another key element to successful
intervention and treatment. The impaired physician
is likely to fear exposure to colleagues and thusdeny addiction or refuse treatment. In general, theimpaired physician does best when treated in anin-patient unit particularly, if the unit is dedicatedspecifically to the treatment of medical professionals
so that the impaired physician is not being treated
alongside non-medical professionals.Q.Discuss the medicolegal, sociocultural and ethical
issues as they pertain to refusal of medical care.
A patient’s right to the refusal of care is founded upon
one of the basic ethical principles of medicine,
autonomy. Competent patients have a right to refusetreatment. Competent adults can refuse care even ifthe care would likely save or prolong the patient’s life.However, this respect for patient autonomy maysometimes conflict with other ethical principles of
beneficence and nonmaleficence, because patient may
wrongly refuse treatment and harm himself. In suchsituations whether the doctor should respect thepatient’s decision of refusing treatment (as per theprinciple of autonomy) or force the patient to undergotreatment for patients benefit becomes a dilemma.
Procedure to follow when Patient Refuses Treatment
/square6Explain the patient in detail about the benefits of
treatment and the risks of no treatment.
/square6Try to discover the patient’s reasons for refusing
care and discuss these with the patient to see if thereare ways to overcome these so that the patient canreceive care that is in his/her best interests.
/square6With the patient’s permission, speak with family,
clergy or another mediator if you think this might
help the patient reconsider his/her refusal.
/square6Determine the patient’s capacity to refuse. Capacityis defined as a person’s ability to process informa-tion and make an informed decision about their carein a way that is in line with their beliefs, values, and
preferences. If the patient does not have the capa-
city to make right decisions because of influence of
alcohol, drugs, or mental illness, then the physicianneeds to identify another person who can decideon behalf of patient, or if no one is available, thenphysician himself can decide about treatment in thebest interest of patient.
/square6Consider a mental health referral if the patient hasoverwhelming anxieties about receiving care orshows psychiatric comorbidities and is willing tobe evaluated.
/square6Document your efforts to educate the patient, therationale for your recommended treatment, and the
patient’s refusal of care.
/square6Ask the patient to sign a refusal of care form.
Exceptions to the Rule of Autonomy when Patient
Refuses Treatment
/square6Emergency situation : Informed consent may be
bypassed if immediate treatment is necessary forthe patient’s life or safety.
/square6Altered mental status : Patients may not have the right
to refuse treatment if they have an altered mentalstatus due to alcohol and drugs, brain injury, or
psychiatric illness.

/square6Role of Physician in the Community, Medicolegal and Ethical Issues in Health Care703
20/square6Children:  A parent or guardian cannot refuse life-
sustaining treatment or deny medical care from achild. This includes those with religious beliefs thatdiscourage certain medical treatments. Parentscannot invoke their right to religious freedom torefuse treatment for a child.
/square6Threat to the community : If a patient is a threat to the
community (e.g. communicable diseases, violentmentally ill patient), then informed consent is not
necessary for treatment as the safety of public takes
priority here.
Q.Advance directives in healthcare.
/square6Some patients may have made plans with medical
and/or legal professionals to determine their futurepreferences of medical care in case they are unableto communicate those preferences in the future.These are called advanced directives. Some of the
common advance directives are Do Not Resuscitate
(DNR) or Do Not Intubate (DNI) orders. These deci-sions may or may not have been made in discussionwith and including input from their family.
/square6Patients with these advanced directives shouldhave no difficulties fulfilling their preferred medicaldecisions; however, there are situations where thismay present a problem. Sometimes these advanceddirectives are not readily available, or the doctormay not know if a patient has a directive, especially
if the patient is unable to give this information. In
these cases, it is prudent to provide appropriatemedical care whenever there is doubt regarding apatient’s medical directive. Another potential issueis when family members of a patient with anadvanced directive are not aware of a patient’s
wishes, or perhaps do not agree with them, and
may attempt to intervene in the medical decisionmaking. All healthcare providers need to keep thepatient and the patient’s wishes as their primaryfocus, and the medical decision should be guidedby the information that is readily available. In the
setting of an impaired elderly patient, healthcare
professionals should see whether the patient haslegally appointed anybody as the patient’s medicaldecision-maker, such as medical power of attorneywho can make decisions on behalf of patient.
/square6If the patient does not have such a legally appointedindividual, medical professionals should determineif a living will or other documented medical direc-tive is available. If no directive or medical powerof attorney exists, and the patient is unable to
communicate their directive, discussion with family
members is appropriate and expected for decisionmaking. This shared decision-making will avoidconflict between the medical team and the familymembers of the patient. Remember that a patientwith any advanced directive always retains the
right to change their mind and accept further care.Q.Do not resuscitate (DNR) order and do not intubate
order.
/square6In the event of a cardiopulmonary arrest, cardio-
pulmonary resuscitation is done for every patientunless a do not attempt resuscitation (DNAR) alsoknown as do not resuscitate (DNR) order has beenrequested by the patient or is written in the medicalrecord by the physician. DNR order may be in theform of advanced directive by the patient. Whenadvanced directives exist and qualifying conditionsare present, these directives are followed by thephysician. The attending physician discusses thedecision with the patient, family members, or othersinvolved in the care of the patient.
/square6If the doctor feels that CPR is futile, then he canwrite a DNR order, but this should be afterdiscussion with the patient and family members.
/square6If patient wants a DNR order in spite him knowingthat CPR may benefit him, patient’s decision shouldbe respected and honored. This is respectingpatient’s autonomy and is supported by law in mostcountries that recognize a competent patient’s rightto refuse treatment. Consent of the family is notnecessary if the decision is made by the patient—family disagreement is not sufficient to override thepatient’s choice. If the patient is mentally incompe-tent, decisions not covered by advance directivesare taken after discussion with family members orappropriate surrogate decision makers. If conflictor dilemmas arise, the Ethics Committee assistsin clarifying available options and improvingcommunications.
/square6Nurses and the entire medical team should beaware of this DNR order. When a DNR is writtenon the medical record no resuscitative treatment isdone such as CPR or ACLS. All other care shouldbe continued for patient.
Q.Withdrawal of treatment.
/square6Modern medicine has progressed so much that
patients can often be kept alive almost indefinitelywith the aid of mechanical ventilators, artificialfeeds and organ support strategies. However, interminally ill patients and permanently uncon-scious patients, it is futile to do so. In such situations,
end of life decisions become important.
/square6End-of-life decisions are of two types: Withdrawalof therapy and withholding of therapy. Withdrawalis removal of a therapy that has been started in anattempt to sustain life but is not, or is no longer effec-tive. Examples are stopping mechanical ventilation
and inotropic agents. Withholding means not tomake any further therapeutic interventions.Examples are do not resuscitate (DNR) order,withholding dialysis in renal failure, etc.

/square6Manipal Prep Manual of Medicine
20704 /square6Although these two actions are considered ethically
equivalent, withdrawing life-sustaining therapymay be preferable to withholding.
Why the Decision on Withdrawal of Therapy is Important?
/square6If withdrawal of therapy were not permitted, thenICUs would be full of hopelessly ill patients receiv-ing (often expensive) therapies that no longer benefit
them and only prolongs suffering. Such futile
therapy also puts lot of burden to patient’s relatives.
/square6By continuing ineffective therapy, an ICU bed may
be blocked and not available for another patient whomay benefit from ICU care. In addition, the costs of
the futile care could be better employed elsewhere.
Withdrawal may be better than Withholding
/square6In case of withholding a therapy, where a treatment
is not started in the first place deprives the patientfrom possible benefit from that therapy. Forexample, consider an elderly, frail patient whodevelops severe pneumonia. The prognosis in thiscase is not sure. Should the patient be put on
mechanical ventilation and put on antibiotics or
should he be left alone without mechanicalventilation. In this case it is better to put him onmechanical ventilation and later withdraw it if nothelping. Hence in many places withdrawal oftherapy is more common than withholding.
When to Withdraw Treatment
/square6In general, treatment is withdrawn when death is felt
to be inevitable despite continued treatment. This
would typically be when dysfunction in three or moreorgan systems persists or worsens despite activetreatment or in cases such as multiple organ failurein patients with failed bone marrow transplantation.
Essentials when Withdrawing Therapy
/square6End-of-life decisions should be made in advancewhenever possible. This is particularly true for
decisions to withhold therapy because there is often
less time to think in emergencies./square6It is also important that end-of-life decisions are
made by consensus, after open discussion involving
patient, relatives and doctor. However, such
decisions should not be left to the relatives alone
because it is difficult for them to decide, and
ultimately it is the physician who is responsible for
administering or discontinuing any treatment. Any
such discussions and decisions should be docu-
mented clearly in the patient notes.
Problems
Problems arising from decisions to withdraw treatmentcan be divided into four types:
/square6The referring team request continued futile therapy:This can usually be resolved by explaining the
rationale and offering a second opinion. If conflict
still remains, treatment cannot be withdrawn.
/square6The patient’s family requests continued futiletherapy: Guilt usually plays a part in the family’s
request to continue treatment. Agreement can
usually be obtained by explaining the rationale
again and offering a second opinion from within
or outside the intensive care team. It is best not to
withdraw treatment if there is conflict. However,
the final decision rests with the intensive care team.
This underlines the need for good communication.
/square6The family requests inappropriate discontinuationof therapy: The rationale behind the therapy and
the reasons why continuing treatment is thought
appropriate should be explained. The duty of care
is to the patient, not the family. Again, a second
opinion can be offered.
/square6The patient requests discontinuation of therapy:Explain to the patient the rationale for the treatment
and that, in the opinion of the intensive care team,
a chance of recovery exists. It may be appropriate
to offer a short term contract for treatment (for
example, 48 hours then review). Ultimately, the
competent patient has the right to refuse treatment
even if that treatment is life saving.

