CHAPTER
1
VITAMIN A
Q. Write a short essay/note on clinical features, diagnosis, and
treatment of vitamin A deficiency.
Vitamin A is the name given to a group of fat-soluble vitamin and includes
retinoids and carotenoids.
Retinoids/Retinol (vitamin A alcohol): Retinoid  is the generic term used
for vitamin A in its various forms. It includes both natural and synthetic
chemicals that are structurally related to vitamin A. Its oxidized
metabolites, namely retinaldehyde and retinoic acid (vitamin A acid) are
biologically active compounds. It is the chemical name of vitamin A. It is
the transport form and, as retinol ester is also the storage form.Carotenoids: The most common carotenoid in the food having provitamin
A activity is β-Carotene. Major portions of carotenoids are absorbed as
such and are stored in liver and fat.
Sources of vitamin A: These include:Animal-derived foods: Preformed retinol is found only in foods of animal
origin. Food sources include liver, fish, milk, eggs, butter, and cheese.
Yellow and green leafy vegetables: Dark green and deeply colored fruits
and vegetables are the vegetable sources of provitamins A carotenoids.
Moderate cooking of vegetables increases the release of carotenoid,
thereby improves absorption in the gut.Fatty mean facilitates the absorption of carotenoids.
Functions of vitamin A: Vitamin A has several metabolic roles. The main
functions of vitamin A in humans are as follows:
Maintenance of normal vision: Vitamin A is essential for dark

adaptation  and its deficiency causes nyctalopia.
Host resistance to infections:  Vitamin A deficiency causes keratinization
of mucous membranes and thereby increases the risk of infections. Retinol
binding protein (RBP) is a negative ‘acute phase protein’.
Immune function: Vitamin A has the ability to stimulate the immune
system. Retinoids are required for normal growth, fetal development,
fertility, hematopoiesis and immune function.Control of cell growth and differentiation: Vitamin A is needed for the
maintenance of the surface linings of the eyes, growth and repair of
epithelial cells, and integrity of the epithelial cells of the respiratory,
urinary, and intestinal tracts. In vitamin A deficiency, mucus-secreting
cells are replaced by keratin-producing cells and this process is known as
squamous metaplasia.Regulation of lipid metabolism: Fatty acid metabolism, including fatty
acid oxidation in fat tissue and muscle, adipogenesis, and lipoprotein
metabolism require vitamin A.Antioxidant: Retinoids, β-carotene, and some related carotenoids act as
photoprotective and act as antioxidants.
Other functions: Vitamin A is involved in growth of bone, reproduction,
embryonic development and the regulation of adult genes.
Tretinoin, i.e. all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) is also used to treat acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL), isotretinoin, is used to treat psoriasis and
13-cis-retinoic acid is used in the treatment of acne.
Vitamin A Deficiency (Table 1.1)
Clinical Features/Manifestations
Effects in the eye:
Bitot’s spots (Fig. 1.1): In young children with vitamin A deficiency,
areas of abnormal squamous cell proliferation and keratinization of the
conjunctiva known as Bitot’s spots can be seen.
Blindness due to retinal injury: Vitamin A has an important role in
phototransduction. Vitamin A deficiency leads to a absence of visual
pigments. This reduces the absorption of various wavelengths of light and
results in blindness. 

Fig. 1.1:  Bitot’s spot.
Fig. 1.2:  Xerosis of skin in vitamin A deficiency.
Poor adaptation to darkness (nyctalopia): Night blindness is an early
symptom of vitamin A deficiency.

Xerophthalmia (dry eye): It is caused due to keratinization of the
conjunctiva.
Keratomalacia: In advanced disease; the cornea becomes hazy and
erosions can develop, finally leading to its destruction (keratomalacia).
Increased susceptibility to infections:
Vitamin A deficiency can produce keratinization of the mucous membranes
of respiratory tracts and urinary tract. This increases the susceptibility to
infections (e.g. respiratory infections) and xerosis of skin (Fig. 1.2).
Other features: Fatigue, anemia, diarrhea, decreased growth rate, decreased
bone development and infertility.
Table 1.1: Causes of vitamin A deficiency.
Primary causes Secondary causesProlonged dietary deprivation Sprue
Vegetarians Cystic fibrosis
Refugees Pancreatic insufficiency
Chronic alcoholics Duodenal bypass
Toddlers Chronic diarrhea
Preschool children Bile duct obstruction
 Giardiasis, and cirrhosis
Laboratory Investigations
Serum retinol level: Normal range is 28–86 μg/dL (1–3 μmol/L). The
level decreases in vitamin A deficiency.
Albumin levels are indirect measures of vitamin A levels.
Complete blood count (CBC) with differential count to be done, if there
is a possibility of anemia, infection, or sepsis.
Diagnosis
It is mainly on the basis of the clinical features. Response to replacement
therapy is the best way for the diagnosis.
Serum retinol levels less than 20 μg/dL suggest deficiency, or the ratio of
retinol: Retinol binding protein (RBP) <0.8 suggests deficiency.

Treatment
Xerophthalmia (irrespective of stage) should be treated with 60 mg of vitamin A in oily solution,
usually contained in a soft-gel capsule. 3 doses: day 0, day 1 and day 14.
If child is suffering from measles give two capsules of 60 mg for two consecutive days.
Prophylactic vitamin A at a dose of 60 mg every 6 months is to be given to
all high-risk individuals. Patients with malabsorption syndrome need vitamin
A supplements.
Prevention
Prophylactic supplements of vitamin A palmitate in oil
Children between 1 and 5 years of age:  60,000 retinol activity equivalent
(RAE) (200,000 IU) per oral every 6 month
Infants <6 months: It can be given a one-time dose of 15,000 RAE
(50,000 IU).
6–12 months of age: It can be given a one-time dose of 30,000 RAE
(100,000 IU).
Vitamin A Toxicity
Q. Write short essay/note on hypervitaminosis A and its signs.
Types of toxicity: Vitamin A toxicity can be acute (usually due to
accidental ingestion by children) or chronic. Both types of toxicity cause
headache and increased intracranial pressure (pseudotumor cerebri).
–   Acute toxicity also produces nausea and vomiting. Single doses of
300 mg in adults or 100 mg in children can be harmful.
–   Chronic toxicity also causes changes in skin, hair (loss), and nails;
liver and bone damage; double vision, ataxia, hyperlipidemia and
vomiting.
–   Retinol is teratogenic and incidence of birth defects in infants is high
with vitamin A intakes of >3 mg a day during pregnancy.
Diagnosis is usually clinical . Unless birth defects are present, adjusting
the dose almost always leads to complete recovery.
Recommended dietary allowances (RDAs)/adequate intake of fat soluble
vitamins for individuals (Table 1.2).

Table 1.2: Recommended dietary allowances (RDAs)/adequate
intake of fat-soluble vitamins for different age group.
Age group Vitamin A(RAE*) Vitamin D (μg/d) Vitamin E (μg/d) Vitamin K (μg/d)
Infants 400–500 5 4–5 2–2.5
Children (1–13 yr) 300–600 6–11 30–60
>14 yr
• Males 9005–1515 75–120
• Females 600–700 11–15
75–90 Pregnancy 750–770 5 15
Lactation 1200–1300 19
*1 RAE (retinol activity equivalents) = 1 μg retinol, 12 μg β-carotene; 1 μg calciferol = 40 IU vitaminD.
Carotenemia is common among infants and toddlers who eat large
amounts of carrots and green leafy vegetables. It can be confused with
jaundice, but discoloration of skin spontaneously resolves once the intake of
carotenoid rich food is reduced.
VITAMIN B COMPLEX
Thiamine (B 1)
Functions: Thiamine is an important water-soluble vitamin.
Involved in carbohydrate, fat, amino acid, glucose, and alcohol
metabolism.
Vitamin B1 is essential  for the coenzyme, thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP).
It is required for the following reactions:
–   Decarboxylation of pyruvate (glycolytic pathway) to acetyl CoA
(Krebs cycle)
–   Transketolase in the hexose monophosphate (HMP/pentose) shunt
pathway
–   Decarboxylation of α-ketoglutarate to succinate (Krebs cycle).
Has an additional role in neuronal conduction.
Sources: These vitamins can be produced by plants and some
microorganisms. However, animals cannot synthesize them.

Source of thiamine for humans is diet, though small amounts may be
synthesized by intestinal bacteria.
Dietary sources: Good dietary sources of thiamine are whole wheat
flour, unpolished rice, cereals, grains, beans, nuts and yeast. There is
little or no thiamine in milled rice and grains. Thus, thiamine deficiency is
more common in individuals who consume mainly a rice-based diet.It is also present in liver, meat and eggs.
Requirement: Up to 30 mg of thiamine can be stored in body tissues.
Required daily allowance (RDA) is 1–1.5 mg/day. Requirement increases
with increased carbohydrate intake, pregnancy and lactation, smoking,
alcoholism, prolonged antibiotic intake, serious or prolonged illness.
Causes of thiamine deficiency are listed in Box 1.1 and clinical syndromes
of thiamine deficiency are mentioned in Box 1.2.
Box 1.1:  Causes of thiamine deficiency.
Lack of thiamine intakeFood items like milled rice, raw freshwater fish, raw shellfish, and ferns that have a high level of
thiaminase.
Food high in antithiamine factor, such as tea, coffee, and betel nuts
Alcoholic state
Starvation state
Increased consumption states
Diets high in carbohydrate or saturated fat intake
Pregnancy and lactation
Hyperthyroidism
Fever―severe infection
Increased physical exercise
Increased depletion
Diarrhea
Peritoneal dialysis, hemodialysis, diuretic therapies
Hyperemesis gravidarum
Decreased absorption
Chronic intestinal disease
Alcoholism
Malnutrition
Gastric bypass surgery
Malabsorption syndrome―celiac and tropical sprue
Consequences of Thiamine Deficiency

Consequence of thiamine deficiency is impaired glucose oxidation.
Cells cannot metabolize glucose aerobically to generate energy as ATP.
Neuronal cells are most susceptible, because they depend almost
exclusively on glucose for energy requirements.
Causes an accumulation of pyruvic and lactic acids. This in turn
produces vasodilatation  and increased cardiac output.
Beriberi (Box 1.2)
Q. Write short essay/note on clinical features of beriberi/vitamin B1
(thiamine) deficiency.
Box 1.2:  Clinical syndromes of thiamine deficiency.
1. Wet beriberi―high cardiac output failure
2. Dry beriberi―peripheral neuropathy
3. Wernicke’s encephalopathy
4. Korsakoff’s psychosis
5. Leigh syndrome (progressive subacute necrotizing encephalomyopathy)
1. Wet (cardiovascular) beriberi: Wet beriberi is the term used for the
cardiovascular involvement of thiamine deficiency.
First effects are vasodilatation, tachycardia, a wide pulse pressure,
sweating, warm skin, and lactic acidosis.
Later, congestive heart failure develops, causing orthopnea and
pulmonary and peripheral edema. Marked cardiomegaly is present.
Infantile beriberi  occurs in infants (usually by age 3 to 4 weeks) who
are breastfed by thiamine-deficient mothers. Heart failure can suddenly
develop and present with edema, aphonia, tachycardia, tachypnea and
absent deep tendon reflexes. If prompt treatment is not given, death
occurs quickly.
Shoshin beriberi: A more rapid form of wet beriberi is termed acute
fulminant cardiovascular beriberi.2. Dry beriberi: Dry beriberi usually manifests insidiously with
symmetrical peripheral neuropathy.
Early symptoms: There is bilateral and roughly symmetrical heaviness
and stiffness of the legs.
Later symptoms: These include weakness, numbness, and pins and

needles (occurring in a stocking-glove distribution).
Distribution of neuropathy: They affect predominantly the lower
limbs. They begin with paresthesias in the toes, burning in the feet
(severe at night), muscle cramps in the calves, pains in the legs, and
plantar dysesthesias.Physical signs: Calf muscle tenderness, difficulty rising from a
squatting position, and decreased vibratory sensation in the toes. The
ankle jerk reflexes are lost.Deficiency may also cause degeneration of thalamus, mammillary
bodies, and cerebellum.
Biochemical tests:
Measurement of thiamine, pyruvate and lactate levels in blood or
urine.
Erythrocyte thiamine transketolase activity.
Q. Write short essay/note on management/treatment of beriberi/vitamin
B1 (thiamine) deficiency.
Management
Complete bed rest.
Thiamine 100 mg IM/IV for the first 7 days, followed by 10 mg/day orally for several months.
Severe cases may need 400–600 mg/day. Parenteral thiamine produces marked diuresis (in wet
beriberi), resulting in dramatic improvement in the symptoms.
Q. Write short essay/note on Wernicke’s encephalopathy.
3.  Wernicke’s encephalopathy: It is an acute neuropsychiatric condition.
Initially, it is reversible biochemical brain lesion caused by depletion of
vitamin B1 (thiamine). Its causes are listed in Box 1.1.
Clinical features:
Wernicke’s encephalopathy (WE) is a triad of global confusion,
ophthalmoplegia, and ataxia, along with confusion. Impairment in
the synthesis of one of the important enzymes of the pentose phosphate
pathway (erythrocyte transketolase) may explain such a predisposition.Encephalopathy: It is characterized by confusion, severe
disorientation, indifference, and inattentiveness. There is also impaired
memory and learning. If untreated patients will progress through stupor

and coma to death.
Oculomotor dysfunction: Nystagmus, lateral rectus palsy, and lesions
of the oculomotor, abducens, and vestibular nuclei resulting in
conjugate gaze palsy.
Gait ataxia: Ataxia mainly involves stance and gait. It is probably due
to a combination of polyneuropathy, cerebellar involvement, and
vestibular dysfunction.
Diagnosis: For confirmation of the diagnosis measure the circulating
thiamine concentration or transketolase activity in red cells using fresh
heparinized blood.
ManagementWernicke’s disease is a medical emergency and requires immediate administration of thiamine.
Dosage:  500 mg of thiamine intravenously, infused over 30 minutes, three times daily for two
consecutive days and 250 mg intravenously or intramuscularly once daily for an additional five
days, in combination with other B vitamins.
Magnesium is often needed because it is a cofactor required for normal functioning of thiamine-
dependent enzymes.
Wernicke encephalopathy may be precipitated by administration of intravenous glucose solutions
to individuals with thiamine deficiency. In susceptible individuals glucose administration should
be preceded or accompanied by thiamine 100 mg IV.
4.  Korsakoff’s psychosis/syndrome
Q. Write short note on Korsakoff’s psychosis/syndrome.
Korsakoff’s psychosis is caused by deficiency of thiamine with
involvement of central nervous system.
Memory disturbances: It is predominantly associated with defect in
retentive memory (severe defect in storing new information and
learning). Thus, there are disturbances of short-term memory. There
is marked deficits in anterograde and retrograde memory, apathy, an
intact sensorium and relative preservation of long-term memory and
other cognitive skills.Confabulation: It is a memory disturbance, characterized by the
production of fabricated, distorted or misinterpreted memories about
oneself or the world, without the conscious intention to deceive.
Attention and social behavior are relatively maintained. Affected
individuals can perform conversation that may seem normal to an
unsuspecting spectator.

The syndrome is common in chronic alcoholics. It may also be seen
with thiamine deficiency due to gastric disorders (e.g. carcinoma,
chronic gastritis, or persistent vomiting).
Treatment:  Parenteral thiamine (100 mg IM daily for 7 days).
Vitamin B 2 (Riboflavin)
Features of riboflavin deficiency include cheilitis, stomatitis, glossitis,
normochromic anemia, and seborrheic dermatitis.
Pellagra
Q. Write short essay/note on clinical features and management of niacin
deficiency (pellagra).
Vitamin B3 niacin (nicotinamide) deficiency causes a metabolic
encephalopathy called pellagra. It is found mostly in populations in which
corn is the major source of energy in parts of China, Africa, and India.
Pellagra means raw skin.
Causes
Inadequate intake:  Maize or jowar (sorghum) diet, malnutrition, chronic alcoholism (who eat
little), anorexia nervosa.
Generalized malabsorption  (rare).
Drug-induced:  Prolonged isoniazid therapy, pyrazinamide, 6-mercaptopurine, 5-fluouracil,
azathioprine, ethionamide, carbamazepine, phenytoin, and phenobarbitone.
Other disorders:
–  Hartnup’s disease:  It is a rare genetic disorder, in which there is reduced absorption of basic
amino acids including tryptophan by the gut.
–   Carcinoid syndrome and pheochromocytoma: In these conditions, tryptophan metabolism is
diverted away from the formation of nicotinamide to form amines producing pellagra-like
symptoms.
Clinical Features
Pellagra has been easily remembered a disease of four Ds namely: (1)
dermatitis; (2) diarrhea; (3) dementia (depression); and (4) death .
However, these features are not always observed and the mental changes are
not a true dementia.
1. Skin manifestations:
Casal’s necklace or collar rash: Characteristic skin rash develops that
is hyperpigmented and scaling that develops in skin areas exposed to

sunlight. This rash forms a ring around the neck and is termed Casal’s
necklace (Fig. 1.3).
Dermatitis: Lesions of the skin may progress to vesiculation, cracking
(ulceration), exudation and secondary infection. Symmetrical chronic
thickening, dryness and pigmentation may be seen on the dorsal
surfaces of the hands.2. GI tract:
Diarrhea: It may be in part due to proctitis and in part due to
malabsorption. It is often a feature accompanied by anorexia, nausea,
glossitis and dysphagia indicating noninfective inflammation of the
entire gastrointestinal tract.Other features include raw, painful, bright red tongue (glossitis),
angular stomatitis, vaginitis, esophagitis, vertigo, and burning
dysesthesias.
Fig. 1.3:  Casal’s necklace and dermatitis.
3. Dementia: This occurs in chronic severe deficiency and may also develop

hallucinations and acute psychosis. Milder deficiency may present with
depression, apathy and sometimes thought disorders. Other neurologic
symptoms include insomnia, anxiety, disorientation, tremor, delusions,
dementia, and encephalopathy.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis in endemic region depends on the clinical features. Other
vitamin deficiencies can also produce similar changes (e.g. angular
stomatitis).Dramatic improvement: The response is usually rapid in the skin (within
24 hours), diarrhea and a striking improvement occurs in the patient’s
mental state with nicotinamide treatment.
Management/TreatmentNicotinamide:  100 mg 3 times daily orally (approximately 300 mg daily) with a maintenance
dose of 50 mg daily.
High-protein diet with adequate nutrients and treatment of malnutrition.
Supplementation of other vitamin B complex with iron and folic acid is also given, as other
deficiencies are often likely to be present.
In moderate-to-high doses (1–3 g a day) niacin is a well-established antihyperlipidemic agent.
Vitamin B12 and Folic acid discussed on pages 562-70.
Vitamin C
Q. Write short essay/note on vitamin C and clinical features of scurvy.
Vitamin C (ascorbic acid) is a water-soluble vitamin.
Functions: These include:
Formation of collagen  from procollagen. It is essential for wound healing
and facilitates recovery from burns. It is needed for hydroxylation of
proline to hydroxyproline (in protocollagen) and lysine to hydroxylysine
(in mature collagen).
Antioxidant properties: Ascorbic acid is the most active powerful
reducing agent controlling the redox potential within cells.
It is involved in intracellular electron transfer and supports immune
function.
Promotes absorption of nonheme iron .
It is needed for the formation of carnitine, hormones, and amino acids.

Formation of intercellular cement substances in connective tissues, bones,
and dentin, when defective, resulting in weakened capillaries with
subsequent hemorrhage and defects in bone and related structures.
Causes of vitamin C deficiency: These include:
Infants fed only on boiled cow’s milk during the first year of life are at
risk.
Individuals, who do not eat vegetables such as elderly, people who live
alone (singly) and chronic alcoholics.
Pregnant and lactating women and those with thyrotoxicosis require more
vitamin C because of increased utilization.
Individuals at risk of deficiency:
–   Anorexia nervosa or anorexia from other diseases such as AIDS or
cancer
–   Type 1 diabetes require increased vitamin C
–   Patients undergoing peritoneal dialysis and hemodialysis
–   Diseases of small intestine such as Crohn’s, Whipple, and celiac
disease.
Deficiency of Vitamin C-Scurvy
Scurvy is caused by deficiency of vitamin C.
Types of scurvy: Adult scurvy and infantile scurvy.
Clinical features of adult scurvy: Early symptoms may be nonspecific, with
malaise, weakness, lethargy and muscle pain (myalgias may be due to
reduced production of carnitine).Bone disease: More common in growing children and manifests after 1–3
months. It is characterized by deranged formation of osteoid matrix and
bone pain. Fractures, dislocations, and tenderness of bones are common
in children.Hemorrhages: Hemorrhaging is a hallmark  feature of scurvy and can
occur in any organ. Hair follicles are one of the common sites of
cutaneous bleeding. Marked tendency to bleed into the skin (easy
bruising, petechiae, ecchymosis, perifollicular hemorrhages), bleeding
into muscles, joints and underneath peritoneum. Bruising and hemorrhage
may be spontaneous. Most commonly on the legs and buttocks where
hydrostatic pressure is the greatest.

Delayed/poor wound healing and breakdown of old scars.
Anemia: It may cause high-output heart failure.
Gums: Inflamed spongy gums (gum swelling) friability, bleeding and
infection with loosening of teeth; mucosal petichiae are common.
Skin changes: Roughness, keratosis of hair follicles with ‘corkscrew’
hair, perifollicular hemorrhages.
Nails: Splinter hemorrhages.
Other features: Emotional changes, shortness of breath.
Clinical features of infantile scurvy (Barlow’s disease):
Subperiosteal hemorrhage into shafts of long bones.
Scorbutic rosary denotes enlargement of costochondral junctions, which
are tender. May be associated with pectus excavatum.
Retrobulbar, subarachnoid and intracerebral hemorrhages.
Painful limbs giving rise to ‘pseudoparalysis’.
Laboratory Investigations and Diagnosis
Diagnosis is usually made clinically in a patient who has skin or gingival
signs and is at risk of vitamin C deficiency.
Vitamin C level  of <11 μmol/L (0.2 mg/100 mL).
Anemia: It may be normochromic, normocytic (due to bleeding),
megaloblastic (due to reduced erythropoiesis) and microcytic
hypochromic anemia (due to impaired iron absorption and impaired heme
synthesis).Capillary fragility test can be checked by inflating a blood pressure cuff
and looking for petechiae on the forearm.
Bleeding time, clotting time and Prothrombin time: To rule out other
bleeding disorders.
Imaging Studies: The findings include: (1) loss of trabeculae results in a
ground-glass appearance; (2) thinning of cortex; (3) a line of calcified,
irregular cartilage (white line of Frankel) may be visible at the
metaphysis; and (4) the epiphysis may be compressed and circular
calcification surrounding epiphyseal center of ossification (Wimberger
ring sign) (Fig. 1.4).

Fig. 1.4:  X-ray of scurvy showing Frenkel line and Wimburger ring sign.
Management/Treatment
Ascorbic acid at 100 mg 3–5 times a day until total of 4 g is reached, and then reduce the dose to

100 mg daily.
Encourage consumption of foods with high vitamin C.
–   Citrus fruits, especially grapefruits and lemons. Vegetables, including broccoli, green peppers,
tomatoes, potatoes, and cabbage.
–   The recommended dose for adults is 120 mg daily, although a dose of 60 mg daily is all that is
required to prevent scurvy.
–   Diets high in vitamin C may lower the incidence of certain cancers, particularly esophageal and
gastric cancers.
VITAMIN D
Q. Write short note on vitamin D.
Vitamin D is a fat-soluble secosteroids responsible for enhancing intestinal
absorption of calcium, iron, magnesium, phosphate and zinc.
Physiology (Fig. 1.5)
Vitamin D3 (Cholecalciferol)
–   Produced in skin with direct sunlight, cod liver oil
–   Preferred from of supplementation
Vitamin D2 (Ergocalciferol)
Less effective as precursor to 1, 25(OH)2-vitamin D
Hepatic conversion of vitamin D3 to 25-OH-vitamin D (calcidiol)
Conversion of 25-OH-vitamin D to 1, 25(OH)2-vitamin D (calcitriol)
Functions: Vitamin D exists in two activated sterol forms (Box 1.3). Its
functions include:
Box 1.3:  Two forms of vitamin D.
Vitamin D 3 (Cholecalciferol)
–   Produced in skin with direct sunlight, present in cod liver oil
–   Preferred form of supplementation
Vitamin D 2 (Ergocalciferol)
–   Less effective as precursor to 1, 25(OH) 2-vitamin D.
1. Regulation of plasma levels of calcium and phosphorus:  The main
functions of 1, 25-dihydroxyvitamin D on calcium and phosphorus
homeostasis are:

Stimulates intestinal absorption of calcium: 1, 25-dihydroxyvitamin
D stimulates intestinal absorption of calcium in the duodenum through
the interaction of 1, 25-dihydroxyvitamin D with nuclear vitamin D
receptor.Stimulates calcium reabsorption in the kidney: 1, 25-
dihydroxyvitamin D increases calcium influx in distal tubules of the
kidney.Interaction with PTH in the regulation of blood calcium.
Mineralization of bone: Vitamin D plays a role in the mineralization
of osteoid matrix and epiphyseal cartilage in both flat and long bones.
Vitamin D stimulates osteoblasts to produce the calcium-binding
protein osteocalcin, which is involved in the deposition of calcium
during development of bone.
Fig. 1.5:  Physiology of vitamin D.
2. Antiproliferative effects: The vitamin D receptor (VDR) is expressed in
the parathyroid gland, and 1, 25(OH)2 D has an antiproliferative effect on
parathyroid cells and it suppresses the transcription of the parathyroid

hormone gene.
3. Immunomodulatory: Vitamin D is involved in the innate and adaptive
immune system.
Vitamin D Deficiency
Q. Write briefly on clinical features, investigations, treatment and
prevention of rickets.
Causes of vitamin D deficiency are listed in Box 1.4.
Box 1.4:  Causes of vitamin D deficiency.
Impaired cutaneous production due to limited exposure to sunlight.
Dietary absence:  Diets deficient in calcium and vitamin D.
Malabsorption.
Diseases caused due to vitamin D deficiency are:
In children: Deficiency of vitamin D in a growing child before the
epiphyses has fused results in failure of growing bone to mineralize.
–   Rickets: Bone softening disease, deformity of long bones occurs.
In adults:
–   Osteomalacia: Bone-thinning disorder, proximal muscle weakness and
bone fragility.
–   Osteoporosis: Decrease of bone mineralization and increased bone
fragility.
Rickets in Children (Fig. 1.6)
In children, before the closure of epiphyses, vitamin D deficiency causes
retardation of growth associated with an expansion of the growth plate known
as rickets.
Gross Skeletal Changes in Rickets
It depends on the severity and duration of the vitamin D deficiency and also
the stresses to which individual bones are subjected.
During the nonambulatory stage of infancy
1. Head:
Craniotabes: The skull appears square and box-like there is delayed
closure of anterior fontanelle, frontal and parietal bossing.

Frontal bossing: Excess of osteoid produces frontal bossing and a
squared appearance to the head.
Delayed eruption of primary teeth, enamel defects and caries teeth.
2. Chest:
Rachitic rosary: Overgrowth of cartilage or osteoid tissue at the
costochondral junction causes deformation of the chest producing the
‘rachitic rosary’.Pigeon breast/chest deformity: The weakened metaphyseal areas of
the ribs are subject to the pull of the respiratory muscles and thus bend
inward. This creates anterior protrusion of the sternum producing
pigeon breast deformity (pectus carinatum).Harrison’s sulcus/groove: It is due to the muscular pull of the
diaphragmatic attachments to the lower ribs.
Respiratory infections and atelectasis.
Fig. 1.6:  Features of rickets.

During the ambulatory stage
This occurs when an ambulating child develops rickets. It is characterized
by deformities affecting the spine, pelvis, and tibia. Scoliosis, kyphosis
and lumbar lordosis are characteristic.
Bowing of the legs: Due to affection of tibia, knock knees, anterior
curving of legs.
Extraskeletal Manifestations
Seizures and tetany: Secondary to hypocalcemia in vitamin D deficiency
rickets.
Hypotonia and delayed motor development: In rickets developing
during infancy.
Protuberant abdomen, bone pain, waddling gait and fatigue.
Asymptomatic: Detected on radiological evaluation.
Investigations
Wrist radiograph: Findings include: (1) lower ends of the shaft of radius
and ulna become splayed, (2) epiphyseal surfaces―fuzzy and ill-defined,
and (3) unossified zone between shaft and radial epiphysis―widened
(‘saucer’ deformity). Figure 1.7 shows X-ray with splaying (expansion) of
epiphyses and bow legs.Blood:
–   Serum calcium: Low
–   Serum phosphate: Low (due to associated secondary
hyperparathyroidism).
–   Serum alkaline phosphatase: Increased due to increased osteoblast
activity.
–   Plasma 25-hydroxyvitamin D3 level: Low in most of the cases.

Fig. 1.7: X- ray of rickets showing splaying of epiphyses and bow legs.
Comparison of conditions involving bone metabolism is presented in Table
1.3.
Treatment of rickets
Treat the underlying cause.
Supplementation diet with calcium and vitamin D.
For nutritional deficiency of vitamin D: Ergocalciferol, 1,50,000–6,00,000 IU orally or
intramuscularly as a single dose. Or give Ergocalciferol in a dose of 2000 IU every day.
Prevention: (i) Adequate consumption of vitamin D (1000-5000 IU/day); (ii)

Adequate exposure to sunlight (from 30 minutes to 2 hours/week for infants).
Osteomalacia
Q. Discuss the causes, clinical features, investigations and treatment in
case of osteomalacia.
Vitamin D deficiency in adults is accompanied by hypocalcemia and
hypophosphatemia which result in impaired mineralization of bone
matrix proteins, a condition known as osteomalacia. Thus, osteomalacia is
a disorder of mineralization of the organic matrix of the skeleton in adults
when the epiphyseal growth plates have closed. In contrast, in rickets, the
growing skeleton is involved.
Causes of osteomalacia are listed in Box 1.5.
Box 1.5:  Causes of osteomalacia.
Nutritional abnormalities:  Dietary deficiency of vitamin D, parenteral nutrition
Malabsorption: Tropical sprue, Celiac disease, hepatobiliary diseases, pancreatic insufficiency
Disorders of vitamin D metabolism:  Vitamin D dependency type I and type II, anticonvulsants,
chronic renal failure
Acidosis: Distal renal tubular acidosis (type I)
Phosphate depletion:  Use of non-absorbable antacids, tumor-associated osteomalacia
Others:  Multiple myeloma, nephrotic syndrome, lead poisoning, inadequate sun exposure
Clinical FeaturesBone pains, muscle weakness, fractures of bones with minor trauma.
Pain in the hip may cause antalgic gait.
Weakness of proximal muscle results in waddling gait and may resemble
primary muscle disease.
Collapse of vertebrae causes local pain and deformity.
Softening of skeleton may produce deformities such as kyphosis, coxa
vara, pigeon chest and triradiate pelvis with a narrow pubic arch.
Laboratory investigations
Blood (same as for rickets as described on page 9).
Urinary excretion of calcium: Reduced.
Radiological findings
Bone density: Reduced (osteopenia).

Epiphyseal growth plate: Increased in thickness, cupped and hazy at the
metaphyseal border.
Cortical thinning: Due to secondary hyperparathyroidism.
Other features: Presence of nontraumatic fractures, radiolucent bands
called pseudofractures (Looser’s zones) (Fig. 1.8).
Bone scan may be normal or show discrete foci of increased radionuclide
uptake.
Bone mineral density as assessed by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry
(DEXA) is reduced at spine, hip and forearm, with the maximum deficits
at the cortical-rich bone in the forearms.
Fig. 1.8: X-ray shows looser zones (arrow) and osteopenia.
Treatment of osteomalacia
Treat the underlying cause wherever possible.
Dietary deficiency:  It is corrected by 1000–4000 IU of vitamin D 2 (ergocalciferol) or vitamin D 3
(cholecalciferol) for 3 months. This is followed by lower doses as maintenance. Vitamin D should
be taken with fatty diet for maximum absorption.
Osteomalacia due to malabsorption:  Give 50,000–100,000 IU of vitamin D + calcium
supplementation. Small doses of calcitriol (0.5–1.0 μg daily) also effective.
Chronic renal failure:  Calcitriol with weekly monitoring of calcium level.

Vitamin D in health and disease (Table 1.4)
Table 1.4: Role of vitamin D in health and disease.
Parathyroid hormone Hypovitaminosis D causes secondary hyperparathyroidism which
increases the risk of MI, HTN and stroke
Malignancy Transcription of oncogenes involved with cell differentiation and
proliferation is controlled: For example, c-myc, c-fos, c-sis
There is a inverse relationship between sun exposure and cancer
mortality. 10 ng/mL rise in vitamin D level of associated with
–   17% reduction in cancer incidence, 29% reduction in all cancer
mortality and 45% reduction in GI cancer mortality
Nervous system functionVitamin D modulates neurotransmitter and neurological function
Has anticonvulsant and antidepressant effect. 50% of multiple
sclerosis patients are vitamin D deficient
Seizures are common with vitamin D deficiency
Anti-inflammatory function Suppresses and may prevent autoimmune diseases
Seems to reduce severity and frequency of childhood pneumonia
Calcium homeostasis Calcium absorption increases as 25(OH) D blood levels increase
Cardiovascular function Risk of myocardial infarction doubles in patients with vitamin D
deficiency
Heart failure patients have much lower vitamin D levels. HTN
patients given UV light treatments 3 times/week for 6 weeks have
shown mild decreases in BP
Diabetes type 1Infants and children who were supplemented with had decreased
incidence of DM type 1 by 80%
Diabetes type 2Low vitamin D levels associated with insulin resistance and β-cell
dysfunction
Postprandial glucose and insulin sensitivity: Better in healthy
adults with highest vitamin D levels
Highest vitamin D levels associated with 60% improvement in
insulin sensitivity
Respiratory systemVitamin D supplementation provides significant protective effect
against influenza
It is also associated with decrease in FEV1 and an increased
incidence of rhinobronchial atopy
Osteoarthritis (OA)Vitamin D deficiency hastens the progression of OA hip and knee
Mood disorders Vitamin D supplementations improves general mood and hastens
recovery in seasonal affective mood disorders
Polycystic ovary syndromeDeficiency exists in 60% of cases with normalization of menses
and/or fertility within 3 months of supplementation

Pain Persistent, nonspecific musculoskeletal pain in 93% of patients had
vitamin D deficiency
Low back pain patients (53%) have vitamin D deficiency
Autoimmune disease Vitamin D insufficiency in:
Half of the patients with fibromyalgia + SLE, Graves’ disease,
ankylosing spondylitis and rheumatoid arthritis
Falls in the elderlyVitamin D deficiency reported to affect predominantly the weight-
bearing antigravity muscles of the lower limb, which are necessary
for postural balance and walkingImprovement in lower extremity muscle strength and balance with
vitamin D supplementation thought to explain the reduced number
of fall-related fractures
Hypervitaminosis D
Q. Write short answer on hypervitaminosis D.
Clinical Features
Hypervitaminosis D causes hypercalcemia, which manifest as: (1) nausea and
vomiting; (2) excessive thirst and polyuria; (3) severe itching; (4) joint and
muscle pains; (5) disorientation and coma; and (6) metastatic calcifications.
Treatment of hypervitaminosis:  Hydration and treatment of hypercalcemia.
TRACE ELEMENTs
The term ‘trace’ is used for concentrations of elements not exceeding 250
μg/g of extracellular matrix. Trace elements are naturally occurring,
homogeneous, inorganic substances required in humans in amounts less
than 100 mg/day.Classification of trace elements is presented in Box 1.6.
There are about 15 trace elements of which only 10 are essential nutrients
in humans. These include: Iron, zinc, copper, chromium, selenium, iodine,
fluorine, manganese, molybdenum and cobalt.
Box 1.6:  Classification of trace elements.
Essential trace elements
–   Iodine, zinc, selenium, copper, molybdenum, chromium, cobalt, iron
Trace elements that are probably essential
–   Manganese, nickel, silicon, boron, vanadium

Potentially toxic elements with possible essential functions in low doses
–   Fluoride, lead, cadmium, mercury, arsenic, lithium, tin, aluminum
Iron
Q. Write short note on daily requirement of iron and important dietary
sources of iron.
Most essential trace element.
Deficiency state:
– Asymptomatic
– Anemia (refer pages 557-62), weakness, headache, irritability, and
varying degrees of fatigue and exercise intolerance.
Acute Iron Poisoning
Develops when iron level exceed 60 mg/kg elemental iron
Clinical features: Vomiting, abdominal pain, bloody diarrhea, shock,
dehydration, cyanosis, acidosis, and coma. Can cause hepatotoxicity and
bowel obstruction.
Treatment
Gastric lavage with sodium bicarbonate solution
Desferrioxamine 15 mg/kg/hour IV, increased to maximum dose of 35 mg/kg/hour
Correction of acidosis and shock. Extracorporeal removal with exchange transfusion or continuous
venovenous hemofiltration.
FLUOROSIS
Q. Write short note on fluorosis and its radiological signs.
Fluorine: Fluorine’s ionic form is known as fluoride. It is component of
bone mineral and alters its physical characteristics. Fluoride helps to
prevent dental caries, because it increases the resistance of the enamel to
acid attack. Requirement in adults is between 1.5 and 4 mg/day and 96%
of fluorides in the body found in bone and teeth.Deficiency: Intake of <0.1 mg/day in infants and <0.5 mg/day in children
predisposes to an increased incidence of dental caries.
Toxicity: Results in fluorosis. This develops when fluoride content in the
water is high (>3 to 5 ppm).

–   Acute ingestion of >30 mg/kg body weight usually manifests with
gastrointestinal symptoms such as diarrhea, vomiting leading to renal
failure and may cause death.
–   Dental fluorosis: It is characterized by mottling of teeth where the
enamel loses its luster, teeth appear chalky white with transverse
yellow bands. It becomes rough, pigmented, pitted and brittle (fluorite
teeth).
–   Skeletal fluorosis: Its features are:
♦   Sclerosis of bones (especially of spine, pelvis and limbs).
♦   Calcification of ligaments, interosseous membrane  (Fig. 1.9) and
tendinous insertions.
♦   Osteoporosis with brittle bones.
♦   Severe pain and stiffness in joints, stiffness in neck and backbone,
bow legs. Other features are weakness, anemia and weight loss.
Fig. 1.9: X-ray of fluorosis showing calcification of interosseous membrane.
Angular Stomatitis

Q. Write short note on angular stomatitis.
Angular stomatitis refers to cracking of the epithelium at the edge of the
lips. It presents with erythema, maceration, scaling, and fissuring at the
corners of the mouth. Most commonly bilateral and very painful.
Causes of angular stomatitis (Box 1.7).
Box 1.7:  Causes of angular stomatitis.
Iron deficiency anemia
Secondary infection of Candida albicans , Staphylococcus
Vitamin deficiency:
–   Riboflavin (B 2) deficiency
–   Pyridoxine (B 6) deficiency
–   Niacin deficiency (pellagra)
Herpes labialis at the angle of mouth
Angular stomatitis is associated with cheilosis in niacin deficiency and pellagra
ENTERAL AND PARENTERAL NUTRITION
SUPPORT
Some form of nutritional support is needed for patients who cannot eat,
should not eat, will not eat or cannot eat enough.
Indications for Nutritional Support
Severely malnourished patients on admission to hospital
Moderately malnourished patients who are not expected to eat for more
than 3–5 days (because of their physical illness).
Normally nourished patients not expected to eat for more than 5 days or to
eat less than half their intake for more than 8–10 days.
Types of Nutritional Support
Enteral nutrition should be used, if the gastrointestinal tract is functioning
normally.
Parenteral nutrition.
Enteral Nutrition (EN)
Pre-requisite: Must have functioning GI tract. Patients who are not able
to swallow may need artificial nutritional support (e.g. after acute stroke

or throat surgery, or long-term neurological disorders such as motor
neuron disease and multiple sclerosis).
Whenever possible, the enteral route should be used.
Advantages and disadvantages of enteral nutrition (Table 1.5)
Table 1.5: Advantages and disadvantages of enteral nutrition.
Advantages Disadvantages
Intake easily/accurately monitored
Provides nutrition when oral intake is not
possible or adequate
Less cost than parenteral nutrition
Readily available
Reduces risks associated with disease state
Preserves gut integrity and immunologic
function
Decreases likelihood of bacterial translocation
Increased compliance with intake
Decreases the risk of multiorgan failure in
intensive care patientsMechanical complications:
–   Tube migration
–   Increased risk of bacterial contamination
–   Tube obstruction
–   PneumothoraxCosts more than oral diets
Less palatable
Labor:  (1) Intensive assessment; (2)
Administration; (3) Tube patency; and (4) Site
care; monitoring
Methods of enteral nutrition (Table 1.6)
Table 1.6: Methods of enteral nutrition.
Tube feeding less than 4 weeks Tube feeding more than 4 weeks
Nasogastric
Nasoduodenal
Nasojejunal
OrogastricEnterostomy
Gastrostomy
Jejunostomy
Complications of enteral feeding: (1) Access problems (e.g. tube
obstruction); (2) Administration problems (e.g. aspiration pneumonia); (3)
Gastrointestinal complications (e.g. diarrhea); (4) Metabolic
complications (e.g. overhydration).
Rate and method of delivery*
Bolus: 300 to 400 mL rapid delivery via syringe several times daily
Intermittent: 300 to 400 mL, over 20 to 30 minutes, several times/day via
gravity drip or syringe

Cyclic: via pump usually at night
Continuous: via gravity drip or infusion pump.
*Determined by medical status, feeding route and volume, and nutritional
goals.
Parenteral Nutrition
Q. Write short essay/note on total parenteral nutrition.
Central access: Total pareneteral nutrition (TPN) both long- and short-
term placement.
Peripheral parenteral nutrition (PPN).
Venous sites through which the superior vena cava may be accessed are
subclavian vein, internal or external jugular vein, axillary vein, brachial vein,
basilic vein and cephalic vein.
Advantages and disadvantages of parenteral nutrition (Table 1.7)
Table 1.7: Advantages and disadvantages of parenteral nutrition.
Advantages Disadvantages
Provides nutrients when less than 2 to 3 feet of
small intestine remains
Allows nutrition support when GI intolerance
prevents oral or enteral supportEconomic impact
Time-consuming
Inconvenient
Activities and work must be planned around
feedings
Indications for total parenteral nutrition (Box 1.8)
Box 1.8:  Indications for total parenteral nutrition.
GI non-functioning
Nil per oral (NPO) > 5 days
GI fistula
Acute pancreatitis
Short bowel syndrome
Malnutrition with >10–15% weight loss
Nutritional needs not met; patient refuses food
Complications of parenteral nutrition (Table 1.8)

Refeeding Syndrome
Definition: Refeeding syndrome is a syndrome consisting of metabolic
disturbances that occur as a result of reinstitution of nutrition to patients who
are starved or severely malnourished.
Time of occurrence: Usually occurs within 4 days of restarting nutritional
support.
Table 1.8: Complications of parenteral nutrition.
Duration Mechanical Metabolic/GI Infectious
First 48 hoursMalposition
Hemothorax/pneumothorax
Air embolism
Blood loss
Puncture of
subclavian/carotid arteryFluid overload
Hypoglycemia,
hypophosphatemia,
Hypokalemia,
hypomagnesemiaRefeeding
syndrome 
First 2 weeksCatheter displacement
Thrombosis, air embolism
OcclusionHypoglycemic
coma
Acid-base and
electrolyte
imbalanceCatheter-induced
sepsis
Exit site infection
3 months onwards Tear of catheter
Catheter thrombosis
Air embolism
Blood lossDeficiency of
essential fatty acids,
vitamins or trace
elementMetabolic bone
disease
Liver diseaseTunnel infection,
catheter-induced
sepsisExit site infection
Mechanism
When nutritional support is given to a starved or severely malnourished
patient, there is a rapid change from a catabolic to an anabolic state.
Administration of carbohydrates stimulates release of insulin . This causes
cellular uptake of phosphate, potassium and magnesium and may lead to
significant falls in their levels in the serum. This results in electrolyte
imbalance and can produce serious consequences (e.g. cardiac
arrhythmias).
Clinical Features

Initial features may be nonspecific.
Later: Rhabdomyolysis, leucocyte dysfunction, respiratory and cardiac
failure, hypotension, arrhythmias, seizures, coma and sudden death.
Treatment of Refeeding Syndrome
Start nutrition at 5–10 kcal/kg/day and increase levels gradually. Provide thiamine, multivitamins
and trace elements. In thiamin-deficient patients, Wernicke’s encephalopathy can be precipitated
by refeeding with carbohydrates. This is prevented by providing thiamin before starting nutritional
support.Restore the circulatory volume. Monitor fluid balance and clinical status.
Replace PO 4 K and Mg.
PROTEIN-ENERGY MALNUTRITION
Protein-energy malnutrition ( PEM) or protein-calorie malnutrition
include marasmus, kwashiorkor and intermediate states of marasmus-
kwashiorkor.
Marasmus
Q. Write short note on marasmus.
Marasmus is the childhood form of starvation. It develops due to
inadequate intake of protein and calories.
It is characterized by emaciation with apparent muscle wasting and loss
of body fat. There is no edema. The hair is thin and dry. The marasmic
child does not appear as apathetic or anorexic as with kwashiorkor.
Diarrhea is frequent and there may be signs of infection.
Kwashiorkor
Kwashiorkor develops due to an inadequate protein intake with
reasonable caloric (energy) intake.
Kwashiorkor occurs in a young child displaced from breastfeeding by a
new baby. It may be precipitated by infections (e.g. measles, malaria and
diarrheal illnesses). Child appears apathetic and lethargic with severe
anorexia.Edema: In kwashiorkor, marked protein deprivation causes
hypoalbuminemia leading to generalized or dependent edema.
Skin lesions: Children with kwashiorkor have characteristic skin lesions.

This consists of alternating zones of hyperpigmentation, and
hypopigmentation, producing ‘flaky paint’ appearance.
Hair changes: The hair is dry and sparse. There may be loss of color or
alternating bands of pale and darker hair (Flag sign).
Other features: The other features that differentiate kwashiorkor from
marasmus are:
–   Abdomen is distended due to hepatomegaly (presence of enlarged,
fatty liver) and/or ascites.
–   Development of apathy, listlessness, and loss of appetite.
–   Likely presence of vitamin deficiencies.
–   Defects in immunity and secondary infections.
Treatment of PEMProvision of protein and energy supplements. Control of infection.
OBESITY
Q. Describe the risk factors, clinical features, complications and
management of obesity.
Definition: Obesity is defined as an accumulation of excess body fat
(adipose tissue) that is of sufficient magnitude to impair health. Latin word
‘obesus’ meaning stout, fat, plump.
Classification of Overweight and Obesity by Body Mass Index
(Table 1.9)
Table 1.9: Nutritional status based on the WHO and “Asian
criteria” values.
Nutritional status WHO criteria BMI cut-off “Asian criteria” BMI cut-
off
Underweight <18.5 <18.5
Normal 18.5–24.9 18.5–22.9
Overweight 25–29.9 23–24.9
Pre-Obese – 25–29.9
Obese >30 >30

Obese type-1 (obese) 30–40 30–40
Obese type-2 (morbid obese) 40.1–50 40.1–50
Obese type 3 (super obese) >5 >50
Types of Obesity According to Body Fat Distribution
The distribution of the stored fat is important in obesity and accordingly
obesity is divided into:
Central (‘abdominal’, ‘visceral’, ‘android’ or ‘apple-shaped’) obesity:
This type of obesity shows increased accumulation of fat in the trunk and
in the abdominal cavity/intra-abdominal (in the mesentery and around
viscera). It is associated with a greater risk for several diseases (e.g. type 2
diabetes, the metabolic syndrome and cardiovascular disease) than
generalized obesity.Generalized (‘gynoid’ or ‘pear-shaped’) obesity: This type is
characterized by excess accumulation of fat diffusely in the subcutaneous
tissue.
Etiology
Q. Write short essay/note on causes of obesity.
Accumulation of fat in obesity can be considered by the result of caloric
imbalance between the energy consumption (intake of calories) in the diet
and energy expenditure through exercise and bodily functions. However, the
pathogenesis of obesity is complex and incompletely known.1. Genetic aspects of human obesity:
Obesity is a polygenic disorder , with small contributions from a
number of different genes.
Single-gene (monogenic forms) disorders are rare and produce severe
childhood obesity. These include mutations in the leptin gene and
leptin receptor gene, mutations of POMC (Proopiomelanocortin),
Mc4R  (melanocortin-4 receptor) genes.A few genetic conditions in which obesity is a feature including the
Prader–Willi and Laurence–Moon–Biedl syndromes.
2. Environmental contributors to human obesity:
Food: Many environmental factors can influence food intake.
Increased consumption of energy-dense foods, larger food portion size,

and increased variety of food, increased availability, reduced cost and
increased caloric beverages (soft drinks, juices) promote obesity.
Physical activity: It can be divided into three categories: (1) exercise
(fitness and sports-related activities);(2) work-related physical activity;
and (3) non-exercise, non-employment (spontaneous) activity.
Increased sedentary behavior, reduced activities of daily living and
decreased physical activity promote obesity. 3. Reversible causes of obesity and weight gain: Minority of patients
presenting with obesity have specific cause which can be identified and
treated (Table 1.10). Compared to idiopathic obesity, these patients have
short history of marked weight gain.
Pathogenesis (Fig. 1.10)
1. Peripheral Afferent System
Peripheral afferent system can be further subdivided into peripheral appetite
suppressing signals and peripheral appetite stimulant signals.Peripheral appetite suppressing signals
Leptin (Greek term leptos, meaning ‘thin’): Leptin is a hormone
secreted by fat cells and it stimulates POMC/CART pathway (Fig. 1.11)
and inhibits NPY/AgRP pathway and appetite is suppressed
(anorexigenic). Increased leptin stimulates physical activity, heat
production  (thermogenesis), and energy expenditure.
Adiponectin: It is a hormone (fat-burning molecule) and the ‘guardian
angel against obesity,’ and is produced mainly by fat cells (adipocytes). Its
levels are lower in obese.Resistin: Primarily produced by macrophages and not fat cells. It causes
insulin resistance.
Table 1.10: Potentially reversible causes of obesity and weight gain.
Endocrine factors
Hypothyroidism
Cushing’s syndrome
InsulinomaStein–Leventhal syndrome
Hypothalamic damage (e.g. due to trauma, tumor)
Drug induced
Psychiatric and neurologic
medications:  AtypicalAntidiabetes agents: insulin (most forms), sulfonylureas,
thiazolidinediones

antipsychotics (e.g. olanzapine)
pizotifen, sodium valproate,
flunarizine
Steroid hormones:  Progestational
steroids, corticosteroids, hormonal
contraceptivesAntihypertensive agents:  α-adrenergic and β-adrenergic
receptor blockers
Fig. 1.10: Regulation of energy balance. Peripheral afferent system (appetite suppressing and
stimulating signals) influences the activity of the hypothalamus, which is the central regulator of
appetite and satiety. Signals from hypothalamus in turn act on peripheral efferent system (food intake
and energy expenditure).
Gut hormones: These include PYY, pancreatic polypeptide, insulin, and
amylin.
–   Insulin: It is secreted by cells of the pancreas and act centrally to
activate the appetite suppressing pathway.
–   Peptide YY (PYY): It is secreted by the endocrine cells (L cells) in
the ileum and colon. It reduces appetite. Other peripheral appetite
suppressing signals include glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP1) and
oxyntomodulin.
–   Amylin: It is a peptide secreted with insulin from pancreatic β-cells.

Peripheral appetite-stimulating signals
Gut hormones:
–   Ghrelin: It is produced by the oxyntic cells of the fundus of the
stomach and in the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus. Ghrelin
increases food intake (orexigenic effect) and stimulates appetite by
activating the central appetite stimulating NPY/AgRP pathway.
–   Obestatin: It is a peptide produced by the same gene that encodes
ghrelin . It counteracts the increase in food intake induced by
ghrelin .
Retinol-binding protein 4 (RBP4): Secreted by fat cells. Its actions
counteract with those of insulin. Raised levels of RBP4 found in type 2
diabetes mellitus.
Fig. 1.11: Actions of leptin.
2. Central Processing (Table 1.11)
The arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus processes and integrates
neurohumoral peripheral afferent signals and generates efferent signals. It
consists of:
Table 1.11: Examples of central nervous system regulators of energy

balance.
Central anabolic (increased
intake) regulatorsCentral catabolic (decreased intake) regulators
Neuropeptide Y α-Melanocyte-stimulating hormone
Agouti-related protein Corticotropin-releasing hormone
Melanin-concentrating
hormoneThyrotropin-releasing hormone
Hypocretins and orexins Cocaine- and amphetamine-regulated transcript (CART)
Central appetite-suppressing (anorexigenic pathway or leptin melanocortin
pathway)
In this pathway, POMC (pro-opiomelanocortin)/CART (cocaine and
amphetamine-regulated transcripts) neurons enhance energy
expenditure and weight loss through the production of the anorexigenic
(suppresses appetite) neuropeptides mainly αMSH (α-melanocyte
stimulating hormone) by cleavage of POMC by PC1 (prohormone
convertase).
Central appetite-stimulating (orexigenic) pathway: It consists of:NPY (neuropeptide Y)/AgRP (agouti-related peptide) containing neurons
promote food intake (orexigenic effect) and weight gain, through the
activation of Y1/5 receptors in secondary neurons.Secondary neurons in turn release factors such as melanin-concentrating
hormone (MCH) and orexin, which stimulate appetite. This pathway also
decreases energy expenditure.
3. Peripheral Efferent System
It is organized into two pathways namely anabolic and catabolic that control
food intake and energy expenditure, respectively.
Energy intake (Food intake)
Food: The increase in obesity can be related to the type of food consumed
(i.e. food-containing sugar and fat) and also psychological factors.
Control of appetite: Signals may affect different aspects of eating
behavior. For example:
–   Ghrelin  (peptide produced by the stomach) increases hunger but
does not affect satiation or satiety.

–   Cholecystokinin causes satiation , but has no effect on satiety.
–   Leptin act on multiple pathways, its deficiency causes increased
hunger and reduced satiation and satiety.
Following a meal, substances such as cholecystokinin (CCK), bombesin,
and glucagon like peptide-1 (GLP1) are released from the small intestine,
and glucagon and insulin from the pancreas. These hormones are involved
in the control of satiety. The control of appetite is extremely complex.
Many transmitters in the central nervous system affect appetite:
–   Appetite inhibitors: Dopamine, serotonin, γ-aminobutyric acid
–   Appetite stimulators: OpioidsEnergy expenditure
It can be divided into resting (or basal) metabolic rate, the thermic effect of
food, and physical activity energy expenditure.
Resting basal metabolic rate (BMR): BMR is the energy expenditure
and accounts for about 70% of daily energy expenditure, whereas active
physical activity contributes to 5–10% of energy expenditure.Thermic effect of food (thermogenesis): About 10% of ingested energy
is spent in the process of digestion, absorption, and metabolism of
nutrients irrespective of physical activity. This is called as dietary induced
thermogenesis which is lower in obese individuals.Physical activity: Obese individuals tend to spend more energy during
physical activity as they have a larger mass to move.
Pathologic Consequences of Obesity (Complications of Obesity)
Q. Write short essay/note on complications of obesity.
Morbidity and mortality: Obesity is associated with an increase in mortality
and morbidity. Obese individuals are at risk of early death, mainly from
diabetes, coronary heart disease and cerebrovascular disease.
Metabolic Complications of Obesity
Central obesity or upper body fat distribution is associated with increased
concentration of FFA (free-fatty acid), which can produce several metabolic
complications of obesity.
Insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes mellitus

Insulin resistance is the decrease/failure of response of target
(peripheral) tissues to insulin action. Insulin resistance can develop in
obesity and may produce type 2 diabetes mellitus. Central/upper
body/visceral obesity are found in more than 80% of patients with type 2
diabetes.
Causes of insulin resistance in obesity:
–   Obese individuals have excess circulating free fatty acids (FFAs) and
there is an inverse correlation between fasting plasma FFAs and
insulin sensitivity. Central obesity is associated with insulin
resistance. Excess intracellular FFAs increases gluconeogenesis.
–   Adipokines: Adipose tissue acts as a functional endocrine organ and
secrets variety of proteins into the systemic circulation, which are
termed adipokines (or adipose cytokines). In obesity, adiponectin
(one of the adipokines) levels are reduced, which contributes to
insulin resistance.Consequences of insulin resistance (Box 1.9).
Box 1.9:  Consequences of insulin resistance.
Muscle: Hyperglycemia and diabetes mellitus
Kidneys:  Salt retention and hypertension
Ovaries:  Increase testosterone and polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
Heart:  Increase plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI 1) and acute coronary syndrome
Cancers:  Colon, prostrate, breast
Sympathetic system:  Increased cytokines and blood pressure.
Dyslipidemia
Upper body obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus are associated with an
atherogenic lipid profile. Dyslipidemia includes increased triglycerides,
increased low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol with very low
density lipoprotein (VLDL) cholesterol , decreased high-density
lipoprotein (HDL ) cholesterol, and decreased levels of the vascular
protective adipokine adiponectin.Dyslipidemia increases the risk of cardiovascular diseases
(atherosclerosis, cardiomyopathy) in the metabolic syndrome (Fig.
1.12).

Fig. 1.12:  Obesity and metabolic syndrome.
Endocrine Manifestations of Obesity
Reproductive disorders associated with obesity are listed in Table 1.12.
Table 1.12: Endocrine manifestations of obesity.
Men Women
Plasma testosterone and SHBG are reduced Increased androgen
Increase estrogen Decrease SHBG
Gynecomastia seen PCOS
Secondary sexual characters preserved Not only fertility but their chances of IVF
success reduces
(SHBG: Sex hormone-binding globulin; PCOS: Polycystic ovary syndrome)
Mechanical Complications of Obesity

Q. Write short essay/note on mechanical complications of obesity.
Osteoarthritis: Extremity degenerative joint disease (osteoarthritis) and
also gout.
Venous stasis/varicose veins.
Acanthosis nigricans: Reflects the severity of underlying insulin
resistance.
Increased friability of skin: It may be seen especially in skinfolds,
thereby increasing the risk of fungal and yeast infections.
Urinary incontinence.
Pulmonary Disease
These include reduced chest wall compliance, increased work of
breathing, increased minute ventilation (due to increased metabolic rate),
and decreased functional residual capacity and expiratory reserve volume.Obstructive sleep apnea: Sleep apnea is common in patients with severe
obesity. Sleep apnea can be obstructive (most common), central, or mixed
and is often associated with an increased risk of hypertension, right heart
failure and sudden death. Obesity hypo ventilation syndrome is also
known as Pickwickian syndrome.Obesity and asthma: Reduced TLC (total lung capacity), reduced RV
(residual volume) and FRC (functional residual capacity).
Obesity and Cancer (Table 1.13)
Obesity is the biggest preventable cause of cancer after smoking. Accounts
for 14% of cancer deaths in men and 20% in women.
Table 1.13: Obesity and related cancers.
Males Females
Esophagus Gallbladder
Colon Bile ducts
Rectum Breasts
Pancreas Endometrium
Liver Cervix
Prostrate Ovaries

Gastrointestinal Disorders
Following are more prevalent in obese patients:
Gastroesophageal reflux disease
Gallstones: Obesity is associated with increased secretion of cholesterol
in the bile, supersaturation of bile, and a higher incidence of gallstones,
especially cholesterol gallstones.
Fatty liver (steatosis) and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NAFLD):
NAFLD can progress to hepatic cirrhosis and rarely to hepatocellular
carcinoma.
Obesity and Retinal DiseaseOverweight diabetics are twice more likely to develop retinopathy than
non-obese.
Waist to hip ratio was only second to glycemic control in its importance in
preventing retinopathy in studies.
Conditions and complications associated with obesity are summarized in
Table 1.14.
Clinical Assessment, Investigations and Diagnosis
Aims of assessing of obesity is to:1. Evaluate and severity of obesity: Severity of obesity can be quantified
using the BMI (refer Table 1.9).
2. Exclude an underlying cause
3. Identify complications
4. Prepare a management plan
Appearance of a patient with morbid obesity is shown in Figure 1.13.

Fig. 1.13: Appearance of a patient with morbid obesity.
Q. Write short essay/note on diseases for which obesity is a risk factor.
Table 1.14: Conditions and complications associated with obesity.
Risk factors/system involved Outcomes
Metabolic syndrome  
Type 2 diabetes Coronary heart disease, Ischemic heart disease
Hypertension Stroke
Hyperlipidemia Diabetes complications
Cardiovascular Heart failure
Gastrointestinal Gastroesophageal reflux disease, hiatus hernia
Hepatobiliary Liver fat accumulation, nonalcoholic
steatohepatitis, cirrhosis, gallstones
Pulmonary disease
Restricted ventilationExertional dyspnea, breathlessness
Obstructive sleep apnea
Obesity hypoventilation syndrome (Pickwickian
syndrome)
Mechanical effects of weight Urinary incontinence, osteoarthritis of knees and
hips, varicose veins, back strain
Endocrine manifestations
(Increased peripheral steroid interconversion in
adipose tissue)Menstrual abnormalities
Hormone-dependent cancers (breast, uterus)
Polycystic ovarian syndrome (infertility,
hirsutism)

Increased morbidity and mortality
Psychological problems Lack self-confidence, depression, more physical
and sexual abuse, lack of attention, low
education, and low self-esteem
Others Accident proneness, socioeconomic disadvantage
(lower income, less likely to be promoted),
postoperative problems, increased cancer risk
(e.g. colorectal cancer), skin infections (groin and
submammary candidiasis; hidradenitis)Q. Write short essay/note on management of obesity.
Management
Goal: (1) Initially to reduce weight by about 10% from baseline, (2) Reduce weight of about 0.5 to 1
kg/week for 6 months.
1. Life Style Modification
Diet (Table 1.15)
Low calorie diet, low in saturated fats, low density foods, normal protein intake and increased
fibers in diet.
1000 Kcal deficit produces 1 kg weight loss per week. No matter what the calorie intake is the
constituents remain in same proportion (i.e. carbohydrates 55%, fat 30% and protein 15%).
Total fasting: Not recommended . There is diuresis, natriuresis and all deficiencies.
Refeeding syndrome:  Severe and potentially fatal electrolyte, fluid and metabolic abnormalities
when feeding is resumed.
Physical activity:  Regular physical activity enables to maintain loss of weight. Has to be done
under supervision. Moderate exercise to be done for 30 to 45 minutes and 3 to 5 days/week.
Behavioral modification:  (1) Useful as adjunct to diet and physical exercise, (2) Patient often
needs motivation to lose weight.
2. Drug therapy (Pharmacotherapy)
Lifestyle modification should be considered before starting drug therapy.
Centrally acting drugs
Sibutramine
–  Mechanism of action:  Centrally acting, mono amine reuptake inhibitor (primarily serotonin
and norepinephrine). By sympathetic stimulation, it prevents decrease in BMR. It reduces
appetite.
–  Dose: 10–15 mg once daily.
–  Side effects:  Hypertension, tachycardia, sweating, dizziness and headache.
–  Contraindications:  Coronary artery disease, cardiac arrhythmias, uncontrolled
hypertension.
Rimonabant
–  Mechanism of action:  Endocannabinoid (CB1) receptor blocker. It has both central and
peripheral actions and reduces weight and weight-related metabolic factors.
–  FDA approval: BANNED
–  Side effects:  Depression, anxiety, suicidal tendencies.
Peripherally acting drugs

Orlistat
–  Mechanism of action:  Nonsystemic reversible inhibitor of gastric and pancreatic lipases by
forming a covalent bond with serine residue. It acts on stomach and intestine.
–  Dose: 120 mg BD or TID with meals.
–  FDA approval: For adults and adolescents as well as children.
–  Side effects:  Flatulence, defecation increases, oily evacuation, rectal leakage, steatorrhea.
Olestra
Olestra is synthesized using a sucrose molecule, which can support from 6–8 fatty acid chains
arranged radially like an octopus. Too large to move through the intestinal wall and be absorbed.
Same taste and mouth feel as fat. Approval as a food additive up to 35% replacement of fats in
home cooking and 75% in commercial uses.Others:
–   Phentermine:  Amphetamine like drug, act centrally to reduce appetite. It has low addictive
potential, modest efficacy and CVS side effects.
–   Metformin:  Decreases appetite and thereby reduces weight. Since most DM II patients are
obese, this is a good choice in DM II.
–   Tesofensine (TE)  is a norepinephrine, dopamine, and serotonin reuptake inhibitor.
Primarily used as an appetite suppressant.
–   Betahistine:  Stimulates the histamine-1 receptor and reduce the craving not only for food in
general but for fatty foods in particular. Not approved by FDA.
–   Amylin (pramlintide):  Part of the endocrine pancreas and contributes to glycemic control.
Functions as a synergistic partner to insulin.
–   Liraglutide, a GLP-1 agonist (1.8 or 3 mg daily), is an option for overweight or obese
patients.
–   Lorcaserin, serotonin agonist approved by FDA
–   Combination therapy:
♦   Phentermine-topiramate
♦   Bupropion-naltrexone
3. Bariatric surgical techniques:  Divided into three groups
a. Malabsorptive procedures:  Induce decreased absorption of nutrients by shortening the
functional length of the small intestine (e.g. biliopancreatic diversion and Roux-en-Y gastric
bypass). These procedures cause deficiency of nutrients, malnutrition and in some cases,
anastomotic leaks and the dumping syndrome (e.g. with the duodenal switch).
b. Restrictive procedures:  Reduce the storage capacity of the stomach and as a result early
satiety arises, leading to a decreased caloric intake (e.g. adjustable gastric banding, vertical
banded gastroplasty and sleeve gastroplasty).
c. Restrictive plus malabsorptive procedures  (e.g. duodenal switch, Roux-en-Y gastric bypass,
intragastric balloon).
Liposuction:  It is the removal of large amounts of fat by suction (liposuction). It does not deal
with the underlying cause and weight regain frequently occurs. There is no reduction in
cardiovascular risk factors with the procedure.
Various surgical options for the treatment of obesity is shown in Figures 1.14A to C.
Table 1.15: Types of diet in the treatment of obesity.

Fixed energy diet Low calorie diet Very low calorie diet
(VLCD)
1200 to 1800 kcal 800–1000 kcal 400–600 kcal
Intake is limited by controlling
portion sizes, menu choice and
compositionApplicable to most of the
patientsEven below one’s basal
metabolic rate
Minimal self-monitoring Fewer restrictions than VLCD Used for period of 1–2
months under medical
supervision
Lack of compliance to this
rigid patternSupplementation of vitamins
and minerals45–70% protein, 30–50%
carbohydrates and 2 g fat
 Reduction of 6–7 kg observed
over a yearSupplementation of
vitamins, minerals and
trace elements
  Greater weight loss
compared to restrictive
diets
Figs. 1.14A to C: Various surgical options for the treatment of obesity.
ENVIRONMENTAL DISEASES
Radiation Exposure
Types of Radiation
Ionizing radiation: Used in X-rays, computed tomography (CT),
radionucleotide scans and radiotherapy. Radiations interact with atoms,

and release energy and results in ionization which can cause molecular
damage.
–   Penetrating radiation: It includes uncharged neutrons or high-energy
electromagnetic radiations such as X-rays and gamma (γ) rays. It
affects the skin and deeper tissues.
–   Nonpenetrating radiation: It includes charged subatomic alpha (α)
and beta (β) particles.
Non-ionizing radiations: Ultraviolet (UV) rays of sunlight visible light,
laser, infrared and microwave. It affects only skin. Nonionizing UV is
used for therapy in skin diseases and laser therapy for diabetic retinopathy.
Effects of Radiation Exposure
Q. Write short essay/note on effects of radiation exposure.
Excessive exposure to ionizing radiation: It may occur accidently in
industries, nuclear power plants and hospitals. It may be also due to
deliberate nuclear explosions designed to eliminate populations and rarely by
poisoning, e.g. with polonium.
Radiation sicknessQ. Write short note on radiation sickness.
Mild acute radiation sickness: It is characterized by nausea, vomiting
and malaise following doses of about 1 Gy. Lymphopenia develops within
several days, followed 2–3 weeks later by a reduction in all WBCs and
platelets.Acute radiation sickness: It involves several systems and the extent of
damage depends on the dose of radiation. Commonly involved systems are
hematopoietic, gastrointestinal, central nervous system and skin.
Effects on the individual are classified as either deterministic or stochastic.
Deterministic (threshold) effectsNature of tissue: Tissues with actively dividing cells (labile cells), such
as bone marrow and gastrointestinal mucosa, are more sensitive to
ionizing radiation.
Hemopoietic system: Lymphocyte depletion is the most sensitive
indicator of bone marrow injury. After exposure to a fatal dose, aplasia of

the bone marrow is a most common cause of death.
Gastrointestinal mucosal toxicity: May cause death due to severe
diarrhea, vomiting, dehydration and sepsis.
Gonads: Highly radiosensitive and may cause temporary or permanent
sterility.
Eye: Cataracts.
Skin: Radiation dermatitis (radiation burns) characterized by skin
erythema, purpura, blistering and secondary infection may occur.
Complete loss of body hair develops after an exposure >5 Gy.Lung: Acute inflammatory reactions and pulmonary fibrosis.
Central nervous system syndrome: Exposures of >30 Gy causes nausea,
vomiting, disorientation and coma. Death due to cerebral edema can
follow within 36 hours. It may also cause permanent neurological
deficit.Bone necrosis and lymphatic fibrosis occur following regional
irradiation, particularly for breast cancer.
Thyroid gland  due to its capacity to concentrate iodine is responsible for
its susceptibility to damage even after exposure to relatively low doses of
radioactivity.
Stochastic effects
Stochastic (chance) effect is directly proportional to the dose of radiation.
Carcinogenesis: It represents a stochastic effect. With acute exposures,
leukemias (e.g. acute myeloid leukemia) may develop after a latent period
of 2–5 years and solid tumors (e.g. skin, thyroid and salivary glands) after
a latent period of about 10–20 years. Thereafter the incidence of cancer
increases with time. Cancer risk depends on the amount of radiation
received, the time to accumulate the total dose and the interval following
exposure.Teratogenic effects.
Management of Radiation Exposure
Large-dose exposures:  Maintain adequate hydration, control of sepsis and the management of
marrow aplasia. Associated injuries suchas thermal burns require treatment.
Internal exposure to radioisotopes: Treated with chelating agents (such as Prussian blue used to
chelate 137-cesium after ingestion). White cell colony stimulation and hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation may be required for marrow aplasia.

A cumulative risk of cancer following repeated imaging procedures has been well known and
reduction of X-ray exposures should be made, whenever possible.
High Altitude
Illnesses at High Altitude
Q. Write short essay/notes on mountain sickness.
For normal individuals, ascent to altitudes up to 2,500 m or travel in a
pressurized aircraft cabin is harmless. Above 2,500 m high-altitude illnesses
may develop in healthy individuals, and above 3,500 m symptoms commonly
develop. Sudden ascent to altitudes above 6,000 m (e.g. by aviators,
balloonists and astronauts), may cause decompression sickness. The clinical
features of decompression sickness is similar to in divers and even cause loss
of consciousness. However, most high-altitude illness develops in travellers
and mountaineers.Acute mountain sickness
Acute mountain sickness (AMS) is a syndrome characterized by headache,
fatigue, anorexia, nausea and vomiting, difficulty sleeping or dizziness.
Ataxia and peripheral edema may be present.Etiology: Not fully understood. Probably hypoxemia increases cerebral
blood flow and intracranial pressure.
Symptoms: Develop within 6–12 hours of an ascent and vary in severity
from trivial to completely incapacitating.
Treatment
Mild cases require rest and simple analgesics . Symptoms usually resolve after 1–3 days at a
stable altitude, but may recur with further ascent. Occasionally, it may then progress to cerebral
edema.
If the symptoms persist, it indicates the need to descend but may respond to acetazolamide
(carbonic anhydrase inhibitor) that produces a metabolic acidosis and stimulates ventilation.
Acetazolamide is used as a prophylaxis, if a rapid ascent is planned.
Chronic mountain sickness (Monge’s disease)
It occurs on long exposure to high altitude.
Symptoms: Headache, poor concentration and signs of polycythemia.
Physical examination: Cyanosis and clubbing of fingers.
High-altitude cerebral edema

High-altitude cerebral edema (HACE) is a rare, life-threatening condition
and usually preceded by AMS.
Symptoms: Ataxia and altered consciousness. In addition to features of
AMS, the patient also develops confusion, disorientation, visual
disturbance, lethargy and can lead to loss of consciousness.Signs: Papilledema and retinal hemorrhages are common. Focal
neurological signs may be detected.
Treatment
Improve oxygenation.
Descent is needed, and if descent is not possible, oxygen therapy in a portable pressurized bag is
useful.
Dexamethasone: 8 mg immediately and 4 mg 4 times daily.
High-altitude pulmonary edema
Q. Write short essay/notes on high-altitude pulmonary edema.
High-altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE) is a life-threatening condition.
Time of occurrence: It usually occurs in the first 4 days after ascent
above 2500 m. Unlike HACE, HAPE may develop de novo without the
preceding signs of AMS.
Symptoms:
–   Initially, dry cough, exertional dyspnea and extreme fatigue . Later,
the cough becomes wet and may be with blood-stained sputum.
–   Tachycardia and tachypnea develop at rest. Crepitations may be
heard in both lung fields. It may lead to severe hypoxemia, pulmonary
hypertension.
Investigations:
–   Radiologically show diffuse alveolar edema.
–   Decreased arterial oxygen saturation.
Treatment
Reversal of hypoxia with immediate descent  and oxygen administration . Nifedipine (20 mg 4
times daily) is given to reduce pulmonary arterial pressure. If there is delay in descent, oxygen
therapy in a portable pressurized bag should be given.
High-altitude retinal hemorrhage
It may be found in about 30% of trekkers at 5,000 m and is usually

asymptomatic and resolve spontaneously. Visual defects can develop when
the hemorrhage involves the macula. There is no specific treatment.
Venous thrombosis
Can develop at altitudes over 6000 m. Risk factors are dehydration,
inactivity, cold and use of oral contraceptive pill at high altitude.
Refractory cough
Cough is common at high altitude and usually benign. Causes include
breathing of dry, cold air and increased mouth breathing. It may be similar to
cough that occurs in early HAPE.
HEATSTROKE
Q. Write short essay/note on heat-related illnesses and causes of
hyperthermia.
Hyperthermia
Definition: Hyperthermia is defined as an elevation of the core body
temperature above the normal diurnal range of 36 to 37.5 °C due to failure
of thermoregulation.
A temperature above 40 °C (or 104 °F) is generally considered as severe
hyperthermia.
Heat-related illnesses are listed in Box 1.10.
Box 1.10: Heat-related illnesses.
Heat cramps
Heat edema
Heat exhaustion
Exertional heat injury
Heatstroke
Heatstroke
Q. Write short essay/note on heatstroke.
Types of Heatstroke
1. Classic/Non exertional

‘Summer Heat Waves.’
No sweat in 84–100% of patients.
More insidious onset.
Usually affects elderly and debilitated patients with chronic underlying
disease.
Rhabdomyolysis and acute renal failure (ARF) rare.
2. Exertional:
Young, healthy, labourers, athletes, military recruits who over exert
themselves in high ambient (temperatures or in a hot environment) to
which they are not acclimatized.Rhabdomyolysis and acute renal failure (ARF) common.
Usually have predisposing factor.
Q. Write short essay/note on causes of hyperthermia.
Predisposing Factors
1. Increased heat production: Hyperthyroidism, exercise, sepsis.
2. Impaired heat loss (impaired sweating)
Drugs:  Anticholinergics, anti-Parkinsonian drugs, antihistamines, butyrophenones,
phenothiazines, tricyclics.
Abnormal sweat glands:  Examples: (1) sweat gland injury following acute heatstroke,
barbiturate poisoning;(2) cystic fibrosis; and (3) healed thermal burn.
Salt and water depletion:  diuretic induced.
Hypokalemia
3. Impaired voluntary mechanisms:  Coma, physical disability, mental illness
4. Impaired delivery of blood to peripheral circulation:  Cardiovascular disease, hypokalemia
(decreased muscle blood flow), dehydration.
5. Others:  Elderly, high ambient temperature and humidity, poor ventilation, lack of acclimatization,
obesity, fatigue, diabetes mellitus, malnutrition and alcoholism.
Clinical Features
It may develop without any warning prodrome prior to development of
nonexertional heatstroke (classic heatstroke).
As thermoregulatory mechanisms fail body temperature rises rapidly
and patient can deteriorate rapidly from apparent baseline health to coma
or mentally dull state.
Three cardinal signs are:
1. CNS dysfunction

2. Hyperpyrexia (core temperature >40 °C)
3. Hot dry skin . Pink or ashen depending on circulatory state. However
may be clammy and sweat.
Clinical features of heat exhaustion and heatstroke are depicted in Figure
1.15.
Fig. 1.15: Clinical features of heat exhaustion and heatstroke.
Central nervous system
Direct thermal toxicity causes cell death, cerebral edema and local
hemorrhage. Irritability or irrational behavior may precede the
development of either form of heatstroke.
–   Confusion, aggressive behavior, delirium, convulsions and pupillary
abnormalities may progress rapidly to coma.
–   ± decorticate posturing, fecal incontinence, flaccidity or hemiplegia
(however, focal signs are unusual).Cerebellar signs, including ataxia and dysarthria
–   Hypothalamic damage may exacerbate heatstroke by further
impairing sweating and heat loss.

–   Lumbar puncture may show increased protein, xanthochromia and
slight increase in lymphocytes.
Cardiovascular system
Tachycardia, dysrhythmias
Hypotension or normotensive with wide pulse pressure.
Hyperdynamic-hemodynamic profile.
Myocardial pump failure. Myocardial damage and frank infarction
frequent even in patients with normal coronaries due to the effect of heat
on myocytes and coronary hypoperfusion secondary to hypovolemia.
Respiratory system
Extreme tachypnea with respiratory rate up to 60/minute.
Crackles and cyanosis-signs of pulmonary edema
Direct thermal injury to pulmonary vascular endothelium may lead to cor
pulmonale or acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).
Metabolic
Dehydration leading to raised urea and creatinine, and hemoconcentration.
Sweating results in low levels of Na, Mg, K, during early phase of the
illness. Hypokalemia decreases sweat secretion and therefore exacerbates
the condition.
Rhabdomyolysis resulting in hyperkalemia, hypocalcemia and renal
failure.
Metabolic acidosis and respiratory alkalosis common.
Splanchnic
Ischemic intestinal ulceration common. May lead to hemorrhage.
Hepatic damage common. In 5–10%, hepatic necrosis may be severe
enough to cause death.
Renal
As a direct result of heat potentiated by dehydration and rhabdomyolysis.
Acute renal failure 5–6 times more common in patients with exertional
heatstroke in whom it occurs in 30–35%.
Hematological
Anemia and bleeding: Result from direct inactivation of platelets and

clotting factors by heat, liver failure, and platelet aggregation due to heat.
DIC: Due to activation of clotting cascade by damaged vascular
endothelium. Latter may be damaged as a direct result of heat.
Investigations (Box 1.11)
Box 1.11:  Investigations in heatstroke.
Temperature recording
Electrolytes, urea, creatinine, calcium
Liver function tests
Creatine phosphokinase (CPK)
Arterial blood gas (ABG)
ECG monitoring
Urine output
Full blood count (FBC), clotting, fibrinogen, FDP, D-dimer: Anemia frequent, platelets
low/normal, lymphocytosis
Test urine for myoglobin
Management
The most important causes of severe hyperthermia [greater than 40 °C (104 °F)] due to a failure of
thermoregulation are heatstroke, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, and malignant hyperthermia.
[Other differentials refer (Box 1.12)].The context in which symptoms develop usually suggests the etiology [e.g. exertional heatstroke
following exercise in high ambient temperature and humidity; malignant hyperthermia after
anesthetic agents; neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS) among patients treated with
antipsychotic medications].
Box 1.12:  Differential diagnosis of heatstroke.
Acute CNS infection, intracranial bleed. (serotonin, cocaine, amphetamine, antihistamine)
Cerebral malaria
Severe sepsis
Thyroid storm
Drug toxicity
First Aid for Heatstroke or Sunstroke
Remove victim to cooler location, out of the sun.
Loosen or remove clothing, and if possible immerse the victim in very cool water.
If immersion cannot be done, cool victim with water, or wrap in wet sheets and fan to facilitate
quick evaporation.
Use cold compresses mainly in the region of the head and neck, armpits and groin.
Seek medical attention immediately―continue first aid to lower temp. Until medical help takes
over.
Not to administer any medication to lower fever because it is not useful and may be in fact cause

more harm.
Do Not use an alcohol rub.
Do Not give anything by mouth including water until the condition has been stabilized.
In Hospital Care
Usually treat the heatstroke in a critical care unit. Various cooling methods are listed in Table 1.16.
Table 1.16: Various cooling methods that can be carried out in heatstroke.
Evaporative
Immersion
Strategic ice packs
Ice cold IV fluids
Ice packingCooling blankets
Gastric lavage
Peritoneal lavage
Cardiac bypass
Endovascular cooling catheters
Supportive
IV volume replacement.
If inotrope required dobutamine probably drug of choice.
Urgent treatment of hyperkalemia.
Do not treat hypocalcemia per se;  only give calcium, if ECG changes of severe hyperkalemia
occur as calcium may exacerbate rhabdomyolysis.
Small dose of mannitol may benefit patients with rhabdomyolysis, intravenous lorazepam for
shivering.
Avoid following medications
ASA: Uncouples oxidative phosphorylation and increases temperature.
Paracetamol: Increases hepatic dysfunction and may create toxicity.
Dantrolene is not effective, but good for malignant hyperthermia.
Hypothermia (HT)
Definition: Hypothermia is defined as a core temperature below 35 °C (95
°F).
–   Mild hypothermia: Core temperature 32–35°C (90–95 °F).
–   Moderate hypothermia: Core temperature 28–32°C (82–90 °F).
–   Severe hypothermia: Core temperature below 28°C (82 °F).
Primary hypothermia happens because of overwhelming cold exposure.
Heat production in itself is normal.
Secondary hypothermia: Hypothyroidism, Addison’s disease,
malnutrition, burns, hypothalamic abnormalities, sepsis, thiamine
deficiency, alcohol intoxication, hypoglycemia, etc.

Clinical Symptoms (Table 1.17)
Table 1.17: Clinical symptoms of hpothermia (HT).
Mild (HT I) Moderate (HT II) Severe (HT III) Severe (HT IV)
Normal mental status with
shivering. Estimated core
temperature 32–35°C (90–
95°F).
–   Increased metabolic rate
–   Maximum shivering
thermogenesis,” cold
diuresis.”
–   Amnesia/dysarthria/ataxia
–   Loss of coordination
–   Tachycardic, tachypneicAltered mental status
without shivering.
Estimated core
temperature 28–32°C
(82–90°F).
–   Stupor
–   No shivering
–   Bradycardic/atrial
fibrillation
–   Decreased BP and
RR
–   Pupils dilated
(<30°C)Unconscious.
Estimated
core
temperature
24–28°C
(75–82°F)Apparent death.
Core temper ature
13.7–24°C ( 56.7–
75°F) (resuscit ation
may be possibl e).
–   Coma
–   No corneal or
oculocephal ic
reflexes
–   Decreased BP
–   Ventricular
fibrillation
(Maximum risk:
22°C)
–   Apnea
–   Asystole
–   Areflexia/fixed
pupils
–   Flat EEG (1 9°C)
Investigations
These include: Blood glucose, renal function tests, electrolytes including
calcium, CPK, TSH, ABG, complete hemogram, X-ray chest and ECG.
Electrocardiographic changes
Hypothermia causes characteristic ECG changes because of slowed
impulse conduction through potassium channels. This results in
prolongation of all the ECG intervals, including RR, PR, QRS, and QT.Elevation of the J point (only if the ST segment is unaltered), producing a
characteristic J or Osborn wave (Fig. 1.16) . The height of the Osborn
wave is roughly proportional to the degree of hypothermia.

Fig. 1.16: ECG of Osborn wave.
Management
Evaluation and support of the airway, breathing, and circulation.
Prevention of further heat loss .
Initiation of rewarming appropriate to the degree of hypothermia. Various rewarming methods
are:
– Passive rewarming:
♦   Endogenous heat production: Shivering, metabolic rate, TSH, sympathetic activity.
♦   Involves decreasing heat loss.
◊   Remove from cold environment.
◊   Remove wet clothes.
◊   Provide blanket.
–   Active external rewarming and active internal (core) rewarming (Table 1.18)Treatment of complications:  Careful attention to potential complications, including hypotension
during active rewarming, arrhythmia, hyperkalemia, hypoglycemia, rhabdomyolysis, bladder
atony, and bleeding diathesis.
Table 1.18: Methods of active external rewarming and active internal (core)
rewarming.
Active external rewarming Active internal (core) rewarming
Heat to body surfaces
Heating blankets (fluid-filled)
Air blankets
Radiant warmersWarm IV fluids
Warm, humid oxygen
Peritoneal lavage
Gastric/esophageal lavage

Immersion in hot bath
Water bottles/heating pads
Less effective than internal rewarming, if
vasoconstricted. Concern about after drop.
Rewarming rates: 1– 2.5°C/hourBladder/rectal lavage
Pleural/mediastinal lavage
Microwaves (diathermy)
Extracorporeal circulatory rewarming
DROWNING (SUBMERSION INJURIES)
Q. Write short essay on near drowning in fresh water.
Drowning: Asphyxiation caused by submersion in a liquid that causes
interruption of the body’s oxygen absorption.
Near-drowning: Term formerly used to describe victim’s survival at least 24
hours after submersion.
Salt versus fresh water is no longer emphasized as degree of pulmonary
insult is determined by quantity aspirated.
Wet drowning: Aspiration of water into airways and lungs (85%)
–   1 to 3 cc of aspirated water will lead to destruction of surfactant,
alveolar instability, noncardiogenic pulmonary edema, and impaired
gas exchange.
Dry drowning: Severe parasympathetically mediated laryngospasm
(15%)
Both types result in common pathway of hypoxia which leads to acidosis,
cardiac arrest, and brain death.
Pathophysiology of Drowning
Risk Factors for Drowning (Box 1.13)
Three peaks in incidence: (1) Toddlers, (2) Adolescents and (3) Elderly.
Various stages of drowning are shown in Flowchart 1.1.
Box 1.13:  Risk factors for drowning.
Drug and alcohol intoxication
Cardiac arrest
Hypoglycemia
Seizure
Suicidal or homicidal behavior
Child abuse

Signs and Symptoms
About 70% develops signs within 7 hours.
Alertness → agitation → coma.
Cyanosis, coughing and pink frothy sputum (pulmonary edema).
Tachypnea, tachycardia.
Low-grade fever.
Rales, rhonchi and less often wheezes.
Signs of associated trauma to the head and neck should be sought.
End organ effects.
Pulmonary: Fluid aspiration results in varying degrees of hypoxemia,
noncardiogenic pulmonary edema-acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS).
Neurologic: Hypoxemia and ischemia cause neuronal damage, which can
produce cerebral edema and elevations in intracranial pressure which can
progress into hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy.
Cardiovascular: Arrhythmias secondary to hypothermia and hypoxemia like
sinus tachycardia, sinus bradycardia, and atrial fibrillation.
Flowchart 1.1:  Various stages of drowning.
Acid-base and electrolytes: A metabolic and/or respiratory acidosis is often
observed. Rarely drowning in concentrated seawater can produce life-
threatening hypernatremia, hypermagnesemia, and hypercalcemia due to
absorption of swallowed seawater.

Renal
Renal failure due to acute tubular necrosis resulting from hypoxemia, shock,
hemoglobinuria, or myoglobinuria is rare.
Poor prognostic signs of drowning are listed in Box 1.14.
Box 1.14:  Poor prognostic signs in drowning.
Duration of submersion > 5 minutes (most critical factor).
Time to effective basic life support > 10 minutes.
Resuscitation duration > 25 minutes.
Glasgow coma scale < 5 (i.e. comatose).
Persistent apnea and requirement of cardiopulmonary resuscitation in the emergency department.
Arterial blood pH < 7.1 upon presentation.
Management
Includes prehospital care, emergency department (ED) care, and inpatient care.
Ventilation is the most important  initial treatment of submersion injury.
Standard CPR protocol needs to be followed.
Identify spine injuries and other major organ injuries and manage accordingly.
Supportive care: Renal failure, shock, infections, etc.

Endocrinology

CHAPTER
2
DISORDERS OF PITUITARY AND
HYPOTHALAMUS
Pituitary Hormones and Their Principal Actions (Table 2.1)
Q. Write short essay/note on:
Pituitary hormones and their principal actions.
List the hormones of anterior pituitary.
Table 2.1: Pituitary hormones and their principal actions.
Hormone Actions
Anterior pituitary hormones
Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) Synthesis and secretion of thyroxine (T 4) and
triiodothyronine (T 3)
Growth hormone (GH) Growth induction
Follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) and
luteinizing hormone (LH)Sex steroid production, follicle growth, germ cell
maturation
Males:
FSH and LH: Spermatogenesis
FSH: Stimulates sertoli cells to secrete
androgen binding protein (ABP), transferrin,
plasminogen activator and inhibin
LH: Stimulates Leydig cells to produce
testosterone
Females:
FSH and LH are necessary for the
development of corpus luteum during the
luteal phase of menstrual cycle.FSH promotes growth and development of
ovarian follicles during the follicular phase of
menstrual cycle

LH (LH surge) induces ovulation
Prolactin (PRL) Controls milk production by breasts
Adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) Controls cortisol release from adrenal cortex and
skin pigmentation
Posterior pituitary hormones
Arginine vasopressin (AVP) Promotes reabsorption of water by renal tubules
Oxytocin Promotes uterine contraction and expression of
milk from the breasts
Hypopituitarism
Q. Write short essay/note on hyposecretion of anterior
pituitary/hypopituitarism/panhypopituitarism.
Definition
Hypopituitarism is defined as combined deficiency (partial or complete)
of any of the anterior pituitary hormones.
Panhypopituitarism is defined as deficiency of all anterior pituitary
hormones.
It may be due to selective or multiple deficiencies of pituitary hormones or
hypothalamic disease releasing hormones.
Etiology
See Box 2.1.
Box 2.1:  Various causes of hypopituitarism.
A helpful mnemonic is the phrase ‘nine Is’: Invasive, Infarction, Infiltrative, Injury, Immunologic,
Iatrogenic, Infectious, Idiopathic, and Isolated.
Isolated hormone deficiencies
Invasive tumors: Pituitary adenomas, hypothalamic tumors
Injury: Surgery, irradiation, stalk section
Infarction: Sheehan’s syndrome (post-partum pituitary necrosis), diabetic antepartum necrosis,
carotid aneurysm
Inflammatory diseases: Granulomatous disease, autoimmune (lymphocytic) hypophysitis
Infiltrative diseases: Hemochromatosis, amyloidosis
Injury: Head trauma
Immunologic: Lymphocytic hypophysitis
Infections: Tuberculosis, syphilis, fungal infection.
Idiopathic
Developmental defects (Kallmann syndrome)

Clinical Features (Table 2.2)
The presentation is highly variable and depends on the underlying
cause/lesion. Symptoms and signs depend on the degree of hypothalamic
and/or pituitary deficiencies. Mild deficiencies may be asymptomatic.
Hypopituitarism secondary to pituitary tumors: Symptoms are due to
mass effects (e.g. headache, visual impairment, electrolyte alterations and
disorders of the autonomic nervous system produced by hypothalamic
involvement). As the lesions progress (e.g. non-functioning pituitary
tumors) there is a sequential loss of hormone secretion.Prolactin (PRL) deficiency is rare, except for complete destruction of
pituitary or genetic syndromes.
The order of diminished trophic hormone reserve function by pituitary
compression usually follows the order GH > FSH > LH >TSH > ACTH.
Longstanding panhypopituitarism produces a classic picture of pallor
with hairlessness (‘alabaster skin’).
Laboratory Investigations
1. Demonstration of low levels of trophic pituitary hormones:
Biochemical diagnosis of pituitary insufficiency is made by
demonstration of low levels of trophic pituitary hormones in the setting of
low levels of target hormones.Low free thyroxine (T4) with low or inappropriately normal TSH
level suggests secondary hypothyroidism.
Low early morning cortisol  with low or inappropriately normal
ACTH.
Low testosterone level without elevation of gonadotrophins (LH
and FSH) suggests hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.
Low IGF-1 (insulin-like growth factor-1) level indicates GH
deficiency.
2. Provocation tests: These may be necessary to assess pituitary reserve.
GH reserve: GH response to insulin-induced hypoglycemia, l-
dopa,arginine, growth hormone-releasing hormone (GHRH), or growth
hormone-releasing peptides (GHRPs). Insulin-induced hypoglycemia
(also known as insulin tolerance test) is the gold standard test.

TRH reserve: Prolactin level fails to rise after TRH.
Pituitary ACTH reserve: Corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH)
administration induces ACTH release, and administration of synthetic
ACTH (cosyntropin) causes adrenal cortisol release. It is an indirect
indicator of pituitary ACTH reserveACTH reserve: It is assessed by measuring ACTH and cortisol levels
during insulin-induced hypoglycemia.
TSH reserve: TSH response to TRH.
3. Surgical biopsy of tumor: Usually done as part of a therapeutic
operation of tumors. Histological examination of pituitary tumors will
help in identifying the type of tumor namely chromophobe (usually non-
functioning), acidophil (typically prolactin- or growth hormone secreting)
or basophil (typically ACTH-secreting). Immunohistochemistry useful in
confirming their secretory capacity.
Table 2.2: Clinical features due to deficiencies of various
pituitary hormones.
Deficiency Features
GH deficiency (GH often the
earliest to be lost)Decreased growth in children but may be clinically occult in adult
patients. GH deficiency is associated with a decreased sense of well-
being, lethargy, muscle weakness and increased fat mass
LH and FSH deficiency Hypogonadism may precede the clinical appearance of a
hypothalamic-pituitary lesion.
Leads to loss of libido and impotence in males, and oligomenorrhea or
amenorrhea in females.
In both sexes, infertility and osteoporosis occur, axillary and pubic
hair becomes sparse, and the skin becomes fine and wrinkled.
In males, there may be gynecomastia and decreased frequency of
shaving.
ACTH deficiency Weakness, nausea, vomiting, anorexia, weight loss, fever, and
hypotension may occur.
Normal plasma electrolytes (relative preservation of mineralocorticoid
production).
In contrast to the hyperpigmentation that occurs during states of
ACTH excess (Addison’s disease, Nelson’s syndrome),
depigmentation and diminished tanning may develop due to ACTH
insufficiency
TSH deficiency Secondary hypothyroidism is usually less severe than primary
hypothyroidism, and goiter is absent. Cold intolerance, dry skin,
mental dullness, bradycardia, constipation, weight gain, hoarseness,

and anemia are seen.
PRL deficiency Failure of lactation (postpartum)
Management:  It is by replacement of deficient hormones (Box 2.2).
Box 2.2:  Replacement therapy for adult hypopituitarism.
Adrenocorticotropic hormone
Hydrocortisone 15-25 mg daily in divided doses. Mineralocortcoid replacement not needed.
Follicle-stimulating hormone/Luteinizing hormone
Female Patients (any one)
Conjugated estrogen 0.65 mg/day
Micronized estradiol 1 mg/day
Ethinyl estradiol 0.02–0.05 mg/day
Estradiol skin patch 4–8 mg twice weekly
Estradiol plus testosterone
Male Patients (any one)
Testosterone enanthate 200 mg IM every 2–3 weeks
Testosterone skin patch 2.5–5.0 mg/day; can increase dose up to 7.5 mg/day
Testosterone gel 3–6 g daily
Growth hormone
Adults: Somatotropin 0.2–1.0 mg SC (subcutaneously) daily
Children: Somatotropin 0.02–0.05 mg/kg/day
Thyroid-stimulating hormone
L (levo)-Thyroxine 0.05–0.2 mg daily according to T 4 levels
Vasopressin
Intranasal desmopressin-rhinal tube 5–20 μg twice daily
Oral DDAVP (Desmopressin) 300–600 μg daily, usually in divided doses
Sheehan’s Syndrome
Q. Write short note on Sheehan’s syndrome.
Sheehan’s syndrome is a potentially life-threatening complication due to
infarction of pituitary gland following postpartum hemorrhage.
Mechanism
During pregnancy, the pituitary gland is enlarged and is more vulnerable to
ischemia. Post-partum hemorrhage and consequent systemic hypotension can
cause pituitary infarction.

Clinical Features
Earliest symptom is failure to lactate.
Failure to regain menstruation after delivery
Other symptoms of hypopituitarism: They appear over months or years.
Few patients may present acutely (hypotension, hyponatremia,
hypothyroidism).
Coma and death can occur in severe cases.
Diagnosis
Refer laboratory findings of hypopituitarism (refer page 30).
MRI: In early stages, may show hypertrophied pituitary. Later stages,
atrophic pituitary and empty sella.
Treatment of Sheehan’s syndrome:  Control of hemorrhage and volume replacement.
Administration of deficient hormones.
Empty Sella Syndrome
Q. Write short note on empty sella syndrome.
Often an incidental MRI finding (Fig. 2.1).
In this condition, herniation of arachnoid diverticulum through an
incomplete diaphragm sellae results in symmetrically ballooned sella,
which gets filled up with CSF.Usually have normal pituitary function, implying that the surrounding rim
of pituitary tissue is fully functional.
An empty sella can be a primary congenital weakness of the diaphragm or
secondary subsequent to infarction of a pituitary adenoma or to surgical or
radiation-induced damage to the sellar diaphragm.Hypopituitarism may develop insidiously.
Common in obese, multiparous women with chronic headache.
Rarely, functional pituitary adenomas may arise within the rim of pituitary
tissue, and these are not always visible on MRI.

Fig. 2.1:  MRI image of empty sella.
Kallmann Syndrome
Q. Write short note on Kallmann syndrome.
It is due to defective hypothalamic gonadotropin-releasing hormone
synthesis.
Olfactory bulb agenesis or hypoplasia is associated with anosmia or
hyposmia.
Conditions associated with this are color blindness, optic atrophy, cleft
palate, renal abnormalities, cryptorchidism, and neurologic abnormalities
like synkinesis or mirror movements.The deficiency prevents progression through puberty due to low LH and
FSH levels and sex steroids.
Male patients: Delayed puberty and hypogonadism, including micropenis.
Replacement by human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) or testosterone for
a long term is needed.Female patients: It manifests as primary amenorrhea and failure of
secondary sexual development. Long-term treatment with estrogen and
progestin is warranted.

Growth Hormone Therapy (Table 2.3)
Q. Lists the indications and side effects of growth hormone therapy.
Route of administration of GH: Subcutaneously after 8.00 pm, 3 to 7 times
a week (0.15 to 0.3 mg/kg/week).
Effect is dose-dependent and the response is better if started earlier.
Average increment in height = 10 cm/year.
Better response in classic growth hormone deficiency (GHD).
Table 2.3: Indications and side effects of growth hormone
therapy.
Indications Side effects
GH (growth hormone) deficiency Edema
Intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR) Arthralgia
Non-GH deficient short stature FSS (familial
short stature), CGD (constitutional growth delay)Myalgia, muscle stiffness
Chronic renal failure Paresthesias
Burns Carpal tunnel syndrome
Steroid therapy Hypertension
Osteoporosis Melanocytic nevi
HIV-associated cachexia
Sports abuseHypothyroidism
Pituitary Apoplexy
Q. Write short note on pituitary apoplexy.
Pituitary apoplexy is a rare life-threatening endocrine emergency resulting
from sudden hemorrhage into the pituitary gland or sudden infarction of the
gland.
Clinical Features
Sudden severe headache, double vision, sudden severe visual loss.
Cardiovascular collapse, change in consciousness, neck stiffness, and
sometimes hypoglycemia. Sometimes acute life-threatening
hypopituitarism.
GnRH deficiency is most common. Acute adrenal insufficiency is

common due to loss of ACTH. TSH deficiency occurs in half of the
patients.
The condition can evolve over 1 to 2 days.
CT/MRI findings: Pituitary imaging without contrast (CT or MRI)
usually reveals signs of intra-pituitary or intra-adenoma hemorrhage, stalk
deviation and compression of normal pituitary tissue and, in severe cases,
signs of parasellar subarachnoid hemorrhage.
Management of pituitary apoplexyInitial management:  Conservative with careful monitoring of fluid and electrolyte balance along
with immediate replacement of deficient hormones, in particular corticosteroids. Close monitoring
of vision. High dose corticosteroids and supportive treatment needed.
Surgical decompression:  If there is a rapid deterioration in visual acuity and fields, surgical
decompression of the optic chiasm may be required.
Pituitary Tumors
Q. Write short essay/note on clinical manifestation, investigations and
management of pituitary tumors.
Pituitary tumors are the most common cause of pituitary disease, and most of
them are benign pituitary adenomas.
Classification
Pituitary tumors are classified depending on the tumor size into
microadenomas (<1 cm in diameter) and macroadenomas (exceed 1 cm
in diameter).
Pituitary adenomas may be functional  (i.e. associated with hormone
excess and clinical manifestations thereof) or nonfunctional  (i.e. without
clinical symptoms of hormone excess). Nonfunctional tumors detected
incidentally during MRI/CT examination or at autopsy are called as
pituitary incidentalomas.
Various tumors of pituitary are listed in Table 2.4.
Other tumors of pituitary are listed in Box 2.3.
Box 2.3:  Other tumors of pituitary.
Craniopharyngioma
Metastatic tumors
As a component of multiple endocrine neoplasia type I (MEN-I), which includes parathyroid,
pancreatic and pituitary (usually prolactinoma) tumors

Table 2.4: Pituitary tumors, hormone produced and their
associated disorder.
Pituitary adenomas Hormone produced Associated disorder
Lactotroph adenoma
(prolactinoma)Prolactin Hypogonadism,
galactorrhea and amenorrhea (in
females)
Somatotroph adenoma Growth hormone Acromegaly (adults) and gigantism
(children)
Corticotroph adenoma Adrenocorticotropic hormone
(ACTH) and other POMC-
derived peptidesCushing’s disease
Gonadotroph adenoma Follicle-stimulating hormone
(FSH) and luteinizing
hormone (LH)Mass effects, hypopituitarism
Thyrotroph adenoma Thyroid-stimulating hormone
(TSH)Hyperthyroidism
Mammosomatotroph adenoma Prolactin, GH Combined features of GH and
prolactin excess
Nonfunctioning/null cell
adenomaNone Mass effects, hypopituitarism
Clinical Features
The signs and symptoms may be due to mass effects and endocrine
abnormalities.1. Mass effects: Mass effects of the enlarging tumor can produce specific
signs and symptoms due to hypofunction by pressure on surrounding
normal pituitary tissue (see hypopituitarism). The mass effect is due to
involvement of neighboring structuresDue to stretching of the diaphragm sellae or by invasion of bone: It
causes headache and is common (especially in patients with
macroadenomas) but non-specific.
Due to pressure effects on optic chiasma, nerve or tract: Visual
field abnormalities which include loss of acuity and optic atrophy
(superior temporal quadrantanopsia or temporal hemianopsia).Due to lateral extension into cavernous sinus with subsequent
compression of cranial nerve which produces palsies of these cranial
(III, IV and VI) nerves. This results in diplopia and strabismus and

facial numbness.
Due to mass effects on hypothalamus: Obesity, disturbances of sleep,
thirst, appetite, temperature regulation and diabetes insipidus (DI).
Others: Anosmia (frontal lobe involvement), vomiting, papilledema
(raised intracranial tension).
Occasionally, pituitary tumors infarct or bleeding into produces
‘pituitary apoplexy’ (refer page 32).
2. Clinical features due to secretion of hormones (Table 2.4).
Investigations
Plain radiograph of the pituitary fossa (skull): It may show one or more
of the following findings: Enlargement of sella tursica, calcification of
suprasellar region, erosion of clinoid process and double floor of the sella.
CT scan with contrast enhancement: More sensitive to detect bony
erosions and presence of calcification.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pituitary: MRI before and
after gadolinium is superior to CT scanning and shows pituitary mass.
Small lesions within the pituitary fossa (small pituitary microadenomas)
are very common. Such small lesions are sometimes detected during MRI
scanning of the head for other reasons and are called ‘pituitary
incidentalomas’.Visual field plotting by automated computer perimetry or Goldmann
perimetry.
Functional assessment of the pituitary gland: By hormonal assays and
include PRL, IGF-1 (insulin-like growth factor-1), 24-hours urinary
cortisol, FSH, LH and thyroid function tests.
Treatment of pituitary tumors
1. SurgerySurgery (except for prolactinomas) is the primary mode of treatment  for pituitary tumors that
warrant intervention.
Surgery via the trans-sphenoidal  adenomectomy or hypophysectomy is the treatment of
choice. Very large tumors are removed via the open transcranial  (usually transfrontal) route.
It is usually performed by an endoscopic or endonasal approach.
2. Medical therapy
Somatostatin analogues and/or dopamine agonists:  Octreotide is administered post-
resection. Drug therapy with dopamine agonists such as bromocriptine and cabergoline are
effectively used in the management of prolactinomas. They induce a rapid fall in PRL levels

and can decrease the size of tumor and possibly avoid surgery.
3. Radiation therapy
It is usually used as adjunctive therapy after surgery or when surgery is impracticable or
incomplete or in combination with medical therapy. Radiotherapy suppresses the tumor
growth and reduces its secretory capacity.
Radiotherapy includes external radiotherapy, or implantation of Yttrium  in the pituitary
fossa, or gamma knife or a modified linear accelerator.
Gamma knife (stereotactic radiosurgery) involves precise delivery of large single high-energy
dose directly to the tumor under stereotactic surgery and is particularly useful for residual
tumor in the cavernous sinus.
Acromegaly
Q. Write short essay/note on acromegaly and its major clinical signs.
Growth hormone (GH) is required for proper growth and development. It
directly affects metabolism of fat and indirectly effects bone growth.
Excess secretion of GH prior to closure of epiphyseal growth plates in
long bone before onset of puberty causes pituitary gigantism.
Excess secretion after puberty causes acromegaly.
Males and females are equally affected.
Etiology of Acromegaly
Excess of growth hormone (GH excess) after puberty may be due to:
Pituitary tumor (somatotrope pituitary adenoma) is the most common
cause. Acromegaly is caused by growth hormone (GH) secretion usually
from a macroadenoma of pituitary gland. Few adenomas secrete both GH
as well as prolactin.Other tumors: In a few patients, acromegaly is caused by tumors of the
pancreas, lungs, and adrenal glands (either because they produce GH
themselves or, more frequently they produce GHRH, the hormone that
stimulates the pituitary to make GH).
Clinical Features (Table 2.5 and Figs. 2.2A to C)
Clinical features are due to increased GH (growth hromone) and IGF-
1(insulin-like growth factor-1).Investigations
1. Biochemical investigations

GH levels: Acromegaly can be confirmed by assessment of GH
secretion. Basal fasting GH levels [normal, 1–5 ng/mL (46–232
pmol/L)] are >10 ng/mL (465 pmol/L) in more than 90% of patients
and range from 5 ng/mL (232 pmol/L) to >500 ng/mL (23,000
pmol/L), with a mean of approximately 50 ng/mL (2300 pmol/L).
Table 2.5: Various systems involved in acromegaly and
presenting features.
System/tissue involved Features
Local tumor effects Pituitary enlargement, visual-field defects, cranial nerve palsy,
headache
Somatic systems Acral enlargement including thickness of soft tissue of hands
and feet
Musculoskeletal system
and neurologicalGigantism, prognathism, jaw malocclusion, widely spaced teeth,
arthralgias and arthritis, carpal tunnel syndrome,
acroparesthesia, proximal myopathy, hypertrophy of frontal
bones, osteoporosis
Skin and integumental Skin tags, acanthosis nigricans, increased sweat and sebum
resulting in moist and oily skin,enlargement of lips, nose and
tongue, increased heel pad thickness
Gastrointestinal system Macroglossia, colonic polyps, visceromegaly, pancreatic cancer
Cardiovascular system Left ventricular hypertrophy, asymmetric septal hypertrophy,
cardiomyopathy, hypertension, congestive heart failure,
coronary artery disease
Pulmonary system Sleep disturbances, sleep apnea (central and obstructive),
narcolepsy
Visceromegaly Tongue, thyroid gland, salivary glands, liver, spleen, kidney,
prostate
Reproduction Menstrual abnormalities, galactorrhea, decreased libido,
impotence, low levels of sex hormone-binding globulin,
gynecomastia
Multiple endocrine
neoplasia type 1Hyperparathyroidism, pancreatic islet cell tumors
Carbohydrate metabolism Impaired glucose tolerance, insulin resistance and
hyperinsulinemia, diabetes mellitus
Lipid Hypertriglyceridemia
Mineral Hypercalciuria, increased levels of 25-hydroxyvitamin D3,
urinary hydroxyproline levels increased
Electrolyte Low renin levels, increased aldosterone levels
Thyroid Low thyroxine binding globulin levels, goiter

Figs. 2.2A to C:  Clinical features of acromegaly. (A) Summary of various clinical features
(diagrammatic); (B) Acromegalic facies and thick and spade-shaped hands (C).
Glucose tolerance test: GH levels are measured during an oral
glucose tolerance test (OGTT). Normally, plasma GH suppresses to
below 0.5 μg/L (approximately 2 mU/L). In acromegaly, there is
failure to suppress GH below 0.3 μg/L and is diagnostic of
acromegaly. Some patients may show a paradoxical rise and about
25% of patients with acromegaly have a positive diabetic glucose
tolerance test.IGF-1 (insulin-like growth factor-1) levels: It is the single best test
useful in diagnosis. IGF1 is almost always elevated in acromegaly. A
normal IGF1 together with random growth hormone < 1 μg/L will
exclude acromegaly if the diagnosis is clinically unlikely.Serum IGFBP-3 concentrations are elevated in patients with
acromegaly.
Postprandial plasma glucose may be elevated , and serum insulin is
increased in 70% of patients.
Prolactin: Shows mild to moderate elevation in about 30% of patients
due to cosecretion of prolactin from the tumor.
Others: Elevated serum phosphorus.
2. Radiological investigations (Figs. 2.3A to C)

X-ray
Plain films of skull: Shows sellar enlargement in 90% of cases. Other
findings may be thickening of the calvarium, enlargement of the
frontal and maxillary sinuses, and enlargement of the jaw.
Radiographs of the hand: Shows increased soft tissue bulk,
‘arrowhead’ tufting of the distal phalanges, increased width of intra-
articular cartilages, and cystic changes of the carpal bones.Radiographs of the feet: Shows similar changes to that of hand, and
there is increased thickness of the heel pad  (Normal heel pad
thickness <22 mm). X-ray of spine: Scoliosis, calcification of spinal
ligaments.
MRI scan of pituitary: If the biochemical tests are abnormal, MRI will
almost always reveal and localize the pituitary adenoma. If the MRI is
normal, abdominal and chest imaging should be performed to look for an
ectopic source of hormone secretion.3. Pituitary function: Partial or complete anterior hypopituitarism is
common.
4. Visual field examination: Defects are common (e.g. bitemporal
hemianopia).
Treatment of acromegaly
Untreated acromegaly is associated with markedly reduced survival. Most deaths are due to heart
failure, coronary artery disease and hypertension  related causes. Patients with acromegaly have
an increase in neoplasia (i.e. carcinoma colon).
Treatment is indicated in all except the elderly or those with minimal abnormalities.
Aim of therapy:  To achieve a mean growth hormone level below 2.5 μg/L or a normal IGF1.
1. Surgery:  Trans-sphenoidal surgical removal of pituitary adenoma is the first line therapy.
Figs. 2.3A to C: X-ray findings in acromegaly. (A) Lateral x-ray skull showing sellar
enlargement, thickening of the calvarium, enlargement of the frontal and maxillary sinuses, and
enlargement of the jaw; (B) X-ray ankle shows increased thickness of the heel pad in
acromegaly; (C) X-ray of hand showing increased soft tissue bulk, ‘arrowhead’ tufting of the

distal phalanges.
2. Medical therapy: Indication for primary treatment with drugs:  Patients
without risk of visual impairment from the tumor
who are not fit candidates for surgery and those who decline surgery
with tumors that is unlikely to be controlled by surgery
with persistence of acromegaly after surgery
who require the preservation of intact pituitary function (especially fertility).
Drugs used:  There are three receptor targets for the treatment of acromegaly.
a.  Somatostatin receptor ligands (SRL)
About 90% growth-hormone secreting adenomas express somatostatin receptor subtypes
(SSTR) namely SSTR2 and SSTR5.
Mode of action:  Somatostatin analogues ( Octreotide, Pasireotide or L anreotide) are
more effective than dopamine agonists and act on pituitary somatostatin receptors to
produce inhibition of GH and IGF-I.
Limitations:  Costly, transient diarrhea, nausea, abdominal discomfort due inhibition of
motor activity, gallstones, and hair loss < 10%.
b.  GH receptor antagonist
Pegvisomant  is a GH receptor antagonist, blocks peripheral IGF-1 action in almost all
patients, and is indicated in patients who are inadequately controlled with other
modalities or in patients experiencing clinically significant drug side effects.
Limitations:  Daily injection, costly, acts on peripheral tissues and neither affects
pituitary tumor nor secretion of GH, GH raises 76% due to loss of negative feedback by
lower IGF1 levels, LFTs to be monitored as increased AST.
c.  Dopamine receptor agonists:  Act on D 2 receptors. Bromocriptine or cabergoline are
dopamine receptor agonists and are useful in those with mildly elevated IGF-1.
3. Radiotherapy
Indications:  It is usually employed as second line treatment 1) if acromegaly persists after
surgery, 2) in patients who are not fit candidates for surgical therapy, and 3) in whom
medical therapy fails.
External radiotherapy or implantation of Yttrium into the gland.
Stereotactic radiosurgery (gamma knife, cyber knife).
4. Others:  Treatment of associated conditions such as diabetes, hypertension and hyperlipidemia.
Prolactinoma
Q. Write short essay/note on:
Prolactinoma and hyperprolactinemia.
Causes, clinical features, investigations and treatment of
hyperprolactinemia.
Prolactinoma is a pituitary tumor that produces prolactin and is the most
common functional pituitary tumor. Most of these tumors are

microadenomas.
Elevated level of plasma prolactin is known as hyperprolactinemia.
Causes of Hyperprolactinemia (Box 2.4)
Clinical Features
Hyperprolactinemia stimulates milk production in the breast and inhibits
GnRH and gonadotropin secretion. It usually presents with:
Hypogonadism, decreased libido, infertility and galactorrhea
(spontaneous or expressible) in both sexes.
In females: Amenorrhea, oligomenorrhea, and osteoporosis
In males: Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism leading to loss of libido,
impotence, gynecomastia and rarely galactorrhea.
A sufficiently large macroadenoma usually produces visual field defects
and headache.
Box 2.4:  Causes of hyperprolactinemia.
Physiological
Pregnancy, ‘stress’, nursing, nipple stimulation
Pathological
A. Drug-induced: Estrogens, opiates, dopamine-receptor antagonists (phenothiazines,
butyrophenones, metoclopramide), dopamine-depleting agents (reserpine, methyldopa)
B. Disease states
1. Pituitary adenomas (lactotroph, somatotroph-lactotroph, stalk compression by chromophobe
tumors)
2. Hypothalamic and stalk disease (craniopharyngiomas, irradiation, granulomas, stalk
section/compression)
3. Primary hypothyroidism
4. Miscellaneous (cirrhosis, chronic renal failure, seizures)
Investigations
The investigation of prolactinomas is the same as for other pituitary tumors
discussed above (pages 30-1).
Normal range for serum prolactin is approximately 5 to 20 mg/L.
Serum PRL  over 150 µg/L in a nonpregnant woman is generally due to
pituitary adenoma; a level of over 300 µg/L is almost diagnostic of tumor
(even in a nursing mother).Visual fields should be checked.

Primary hypothyroidism must be excluded.
Anterior pituitary function should be assessed if there is evidence of
hypopituitarism or radiological evidence of a pituitary tumor.
MRI or contrast-enhanced CT scan of the pituitary: It is needed if
there are any clinical features suggestive of a pituitary tumor. It is
desirable when prolactin is significantly elevated (above 1000 mU/L). It
can easily delineate macroprolactinoma (tumors above 10 mm diameter),
but microprolactinoma (smaller ones) may be more difficult to delineate.
Treatment
Hyperprolactinemia is usually treated to prevent the long-term effects of estrogen deficiency or
testosterone deficiency in the male.Medical treatment by dopamine agonists: Bromocriptine (2.5 mg thrice daily) or cabergoline
(0.25 mg–0.5 mg twice a week). They reduce the secretion of prolactin as well as size of pituitary
tumor.
Trans-sphenoidal removal:  It is indicated if dopamine agonists fails or in the presence of a large,
invasive tumor.
External radiotherapy:  Rarely necessary.
Asymptomatic patients who do not require restoration of pregnancy give estrogens to prevent
bone loss and should be regularly monitored.
Diabetes Insipidus (DI)
Q. Write short note on diabetes insipidus (DI) and its diagnosis.
Diabetes insipidus (DI) is an uncommon disorder resulting from deficiency
of vasopressin/ antidiuretic hormone (ADH) or its action. It is characterized
by the persistent passage of excessive amounts of dilute urine and thirst.
Types of Diabetes Insipidus (DI)
Primary deficiency (neurogenic, pituitary, hypothalamic, cranial or
central DI): It is due to agenesis or destruction of neurohypophysis.
Secondary deficiency: It is due to inhibition of ADH secretion (primary
polydipsia).
Deficient action of ADH  (nephrogenic DI)
Transient diabetes insipidus of pregnancy produced by accelerated
metabolism of vasopressin (Gestogenic DI).
Box 2.5:  Causes of diabetes insipidus (DI).
Central DI

1. Idiopathic (30%)
2. Neoplastic or infiltrative lesions of hypothalamus  (pituitary tumors with suprasellar extension,
metastases, leukemia, histiocytosis-X, sarcoidosis, germinomas, pinealomas)
3. Pituitary or hypothalamic surgery
4. Severe head injury, usually associated with skull fracture
5. Ruptured cerebral aneurysms
6. Infections (e.g. encephalitis, TB, etc.)
7. Autoimmune:  Associated with thyroiditis
8. Familial:  Two types AD and X-linked inheritance
Wolfram syndrome (also known as DIDMOAD syndrome) characterized by DI, DM, optic atrophy
and deafness, septo-optic dysplasia
Nephrogenic DI
1. Primary/congenital or familial: X-linked recessive vasopressin receptor mutation.
2. Acquired:  Chronic pyelonephritis, hypokalemia, hypercalcemia, sickle cell disease, protein
deprivation drug-induced (lithium, demeclocycline, amphotericin B, aminoglycosides, cisplatin,
rifampicin, colchicine), amyloidosis, other renal diseases (chronic renal failure, obstructive
uropathy, polycystic disease), Sjögren’s syndrome
Causes of Diabetes Insipidus (Box 2.5)
Clinical Features
Polyuria and polydipsia: Urinary frequency (polyuria) 4 to 18 L/day,
nocturia and compensatory excessive thirst (polydipsia) are the most
marked symptoms.
Other features: Change in mentation, insomnia, weight loss.
Skin, mucous membranes cool.
If left untreated changes in LOC (loss of consciousness), tachycardia,
tachypnea, hypotension (shock-like symptoms), but unlike hypovolemic
shock, urine output is increased.Can lead to hypernatremia, restlessness, agitation, diminished deep
tendon reflexes, seizures.
Complications
Hypernatremia, dehydration and its neurological sequelae
Growth retardation
Hydronephrosis (due to excessive urine output).
Investigation and Diagnosis
Careful history, examination and document presence of polyuria

(usually 4 to 15 L/24h).
Measurement of osmolality of plasma and urine:  It establishes the diagnosis.
–   Normally, plasma osmolality is <290 mOsml/kg and urine osmolality is 300–450 mOsml/kg.
–   In patients with DI and excess urine free water, there is high or high normal plasma osmolality
(>295 mOsml/kg) and low urine osmolality (50–150 mOsml/kg).
–   In primary polydipsia plasma osmolality tends to be low and may be lower than urinary
osmolality.
Urine:
–   High 24 hours urine volumes. If the volume is <2 L, there is no need
for further investigation.
–   Clear and of low specific gravity of urine.
–   Low urine osmolality and usually less than that of plasma osmolality.
Serum sodium is high or high normal  (hypernatremia) and indicates loss
of water.
MRI of pituitary and hypothalamus.
Q. Write short note on water deprivation test.
Water deprivation test (Fig. 2.4): Indication
–   Diagnosis or exclusion of diabetes insipidus.
–   To differentiate diabetes insipidus from primary polydipsia.
–   Procedure
♦   Should be done in the morning under observation with 8 hours
fasting. No fluids (water deprivation) from 07:30 hours.
♦   Measure plasma and urine osmolality, urine volume and weight
hourly for up to 8 hours.
♦   Abandon fluid deprivation if weight loss is >3%.
♦   If plasma osmolality >300 mOsm/kg and/or urine osmolality <600
mOsm/kg, ADH (vasopressin) is given in the dose of 2 μg IM at end
of test. Allow free intake of fluids but measure urine osmolality for
2–4 hours.
–   Interpretation
♦   Normal response: Withholding fluid in normal individuals, the
plasma osmolality remains within normal range (275–295
mOsm/kg) while urine osmolality rises above 600 mOsm/kg (800–
1200 mOsm/kg).

◊   Urine osmolality is greater than plasma osmolality after
restriction of water.
◊   Urine osmolality increase minimally (<10%) after exogenous
ADH.
Fig. 2.4:  Water deprivation test and its interpretation.
–   Primary polydipsia
◊   Patients with primary polydipsia start with low normal plasma
osmolality (280 mOsm/kg).
◊   Urine/plasma osmolality ratio rises to >2 after dehydration
(water deprivation).
–   Central diabetes insipidus
◊   After water restriction in patients with DI, the plasma osmolality
rises above normal (>300 mOsm/kg) without rise in urine
osmolality (<600 mOsm/kg) or specific gravity of urine.
(Normally urine osmolality rises to 1000–1200 mOsml/kg after
water restriction). Urine osmolality remain less than plasma
osmolality and urine/plasma osmolality ratio remains <1.5.
◊   After ADH is given, urine osmolality increase 100% in complete
CDI and over 50% in partial CDI.
–   Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
◊   Urine osmolality remain less than plasma osmolality.
◊   After ADH, urine osmolality increase by <50%. Alternative to water deprivation test is by infusing hypertonic (5%) saline
and measure ADH secretion in response to increasing plasma osmolality.

Treatment
Goals of treatment
Balance fluid intake with output:  In acute cases, rapidly replace fluid and in chronic cases with
slow replacement to prevent cerebral edema.
Daily weights, accurate in/out, urine specific gravity and osmolality.
Drugs
Desmopressin (DDAVP):  An initial dose of 10 μg of the intranasal form is given at bedtime. This
dose is titrated up in 5 μg increments as needed depending on the response of the nocturia. The
typical daily maintenance dose is 10–20 μg once or twice daily.
Chlorpropamide:  Increases the renal responsiveness to vasopressin. Hypoglycemia may develop.
Carbamazepine:  Is an alternate drug which enhances ADH release and raises the sensitivity of
the collecting duct to it.
Clofibrate:  Is a lipid lowering agent which stimulates residual ADH production in the
hypothalamus, therefore increasing ADH release from the posterior pituitary.
Thiazide diuretics: (e.g. bendrofluazide) are the only effective drugs for nephrogenic DI.
NSAIDs:  Also act independent of ADH. Work by inhibiting renal prostaglandin synthesis and
decreasing the glomerular filtration rate.
Treatment of nephrogenic DI
Provision of adequate fluids, calorie and low sodium diet.
Correct the underlying cause.
Drugs: Diuretics, high dose of DDAVP and other drugs (indomethacin, chlorpropramide,
clofibrate and carbamazepine).
Box 2.6:  Indications for thyroid function tests.
Screening for thyroid dysfunction
Surveillance: Women with postpartum thyroiditis, post- neck irradiation
Monitoring: Treatment of hyperthyroidism and hypothyroidism
THYROID DISORDERS
Thyroid Function Tests (TFTs)
Q. Write short essay/note on various thyroid function tests.
Indications for thyroid function tests are listed in Box 2.6.
Various Thyroid Function Tests (Fig. 2.5)

Fig. 2.5:  Basic thyroid evaluation
Q. Write short essay/note on thyroid stimulating hormone.
1. Serum thyroid stimulating hormone/thyrotropin (TSH)
It is measured by immunoradiometric assays (TSH IRMAS). Normal
range for serum TSH is approximately 0.4 to 5.0 mU/L.
Interpretation
Thyroid diseases: As a single test of thyroid function TSH is the most
sensitive index of thyroid function.
–   TSH levels can help in differentiating hyperthyroidism,
hypothyroidism and euthyroidism (normal thyroid gland
function) in most cases.
–   Raised/elevated levels indicate primary hypothyroidism.
Low/suppressed levels indicate primary thyrotoxicosis.Nonthyroid diseases: Other conditions affecting TSH levels include:
–   TSH-secreting tumors of pituitary
–   Severe nonthyroidal illness (e.g. sick euthyroid syndrome)
–   Low TSH may be observed in first trimester of pregnancy and with
high doses of corticosteroids
–   Secondary hypothyroidism due to hypothalamic-pituitary disease
may produce low, normal or normal-high levels of TSH that are

inappropriate for the very low free T4 level.
2. Thyrotropin releasing hormone (TRH) stimulation test: It may be
used in the investigation of hypothalamic pituitary dysfunction.
Serum TSH is measured before and after the intravenous
administration of TRH.
Use: To differentiate secondary or tertiary hypothyroidism.
–   Secondary hypothyroidism (pituitary disease): TRH administration
does not produce increase in TSH.
–   Tertiary hypothyroidism (hypothalamic disease): TRH
administration produces delayed increase in TSH.
–   In primary hypothyroidism, TRH administration produces a prompt
increase in TSH.
3. Serum free T3 (Triiodothyronine fT3) and free T4 (Free
thyroxine/fT4)
Advantage of this test compared to the measurement of total T3 and T4
is that these are not influenced by changes in the thyroid hormone
binding globulins (TBG), prealbumin and albumin. Its level reflects
secretory activityPrimary thyrotoxicosis: fT3 and fT4 levels are elevated.
T3-thyrotoxicosis: fT4 levels are normal and fT3 levels are elevated.
On T4 therapy: fT4 levels are elevated and fT3 levels are normal.
4. Total serum thyroxine (tT4)
Its levels are altered by factors that affect the concentration of TBG.
Normal ranges is 4.6–11.2 μg/dL.
Increased: In hyperthyroidism, during pregnancy, estrogen therapy,
Tamoxifen use and as a congenital anomaly.
Decreased: In hypothyroidism, nephritic syndrome, androgen therapy,
liver failure, or drugs (e.g. salicylates, sulfonylureas and phenytoin).
5. Total serum triiodothyronine (tT3): Its levels are subject to the same
limitations as for tT4 in relation to TBG. Normal range: 75–195 ng/dL.
6. T3 resin uptake, free T4 index (FTI), effective T4 ratio
Nowadays, above three tests (4, 5 and 6) are not used.

7. Reverse T3 (rT3): Reverse T3 (rT3) is mainly a degraded product of T4
in peripheral tissues. Thyroid gland also secrets but in insignificant
amount.
Significance: Raised in patients with high TBG. Normal in hypothyroid
patients treated with thyroxine.
8. Thyroglobulin (Tg): It is secreted by follicular cells of thyroid and is
involved in iodination and synthesis of thyroid hormones.
Use: To predict the outcome of therapy for hyperthyroidism.
–   Increased: Well-differentiated thyroid carcinoma, hyperthyroidism
–   Decreased: Total thyroidectomy or destruction of thyroid by
radiation.
9. Uptake of radioactive iodine (RAIU) or technetium
The iodine uptake activity of thyroid can be measured by
administering orally a low/trace dose of radioactive iodine 131I or 121I
and the radioactivity over the thyroid is measured after 4 hours, using a
counter over the neck. The amount of radioactivity that is taken up by
the thyroid gland is known as radioactive iodine uptake (RAIU).
Alternatively, thyroid uptake is measured by giving technetium-99m
(99mTc) intravenously.Uses of radioactive iodine uptake (RAIU) are lised in Box 2.7.
Box 2.7:  Uses of radioactive iodine uptake (RAIU).
Evaluation of hyperthyroidism
Differentiate Graves from toxic goiter
Function of a thyroid nodule as hot or cold
Interpretation: Normal uptake ranges from 10% to 35% in 24 hours.
–   Uptake increased: Overactive thyroid gland synthesizing excess
T3 shows increased uptake of iodine. A very high RAIU is seen in
hyperthyroidism (e.g. Graves’ disease, toxic multinodular goiter
and adenoma and early thyroiditis). Iodine/enzyme deficiency may
show increased uptake even in the absence of thyrotoxicosis.
–   Uptake decreased: Low RAIU is seen in hypothyroidism, late
thyroiditis. Excess iodine may show diminished uptake even in the
presence or thyrotoxicosis. Acute autoimmune thyroiditis may
manifest as low iodine uptake thyrotoxicosis.

Use: To determine the functional activity and morphology of the
thyroid gland.
–   Very useful in determining the activity of a solitary thyroid
nodule. Functional nodule appears as a ‘hot’ nodule, and a
nonfunctional appears as a ‘cold’ nodule.
–   Useful in follow-up of patients with treated thyroid cancer.
–   Detection of ectopic thyroid tissue: Confirmation a mass on the
tongue as lingual thyroid, in the midline of the neck as thyroglossal
duct, or in the mediastinum as substernal goiter.
Contraindication: RAIU is contraindicated in children and during
pregnancy/lactation.
10. Ultrasound of thyroid gland: Look for nodularity, vascularity, lymph
nodes and for guided FNAC.
11. Thyroid autoantibody tests: The different types of thyroid
autoantibodies responsible for the autoimmune thyroid disorders are:
Antimicrosomal antibody
Antithyroid peroxidase (TPO) antibody (TPOAb): They are
involved in the tissue destructive process associated with
hypothyroidism in Hashimoto and atrophic thyroiditis.Antithyroglobulin (Tg) antibody
TSH receptor (TR) antibody (TRAb): These antibodies were
previously known as thyroid stimulating immunoglobulin (TSI) or
long-acting thyroid stimulators (LATS). Laboratory assessment of
antithyroid peroxidase antibodies is replacing the antimicrosomal and
antithyroglobulin antibodies. 12. Tests to determine etiology of thyroid disease
Calcitonin: It is secreted by parafollicular C-cells and is increased in
medullary carcinoma of thyroid.
Fine-needle aspiration cytology/excision biopsy:  It is helpful in
diagnosis thyroid diseases.
Thyrotoxicosis
Q. Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations (laboratory
diagnosis), complications and management of
hyperthyroidism/thyrotoxicosis.

Q. Discuss the etiopathogenesis, clinical features, investigations,
diagnosis and management/treatment modalities of Grave’s disease.
Definition
Thyrotoxicosis is a state of circulating thyroid hormone excess (with
hypermetabolic state) caused by exposure to excessive levels of thyroid
hormone  (free T3 and T4). This increase in circulating hormone may be
either from destruction of thyroid gland or from ectopic source.
Hyperthyroidism (thyroid overactivity): It is the clinical consequence due
to the excessive circulating thyroid hormone due to excessive thyroid
function /hyperfunction and is the most common cause of thyrotoxicosis. Its
causes are listed in Table 2.6.
Table 2.6: Causes of hyperthyroidism.
Primary hyperthyroidism
Graves disease
Toxic multinodular goiter
Toxic adenoma (Plummer’s disease)
Iodine excess (Jod Basedow)
Activating mutation of TSH receptor
Thyrotoxicosis without hyperthyroidism
Subacute thyroiditis, Hashitoxicosis
Amiodarone induced
Radiation induced
Thyrotoxicosis factitia
Struma ovarii
Infarction of thyroid gland
Secondary hyperthyroidism
TSH secreting pituitary adenoma
Human chorionic gonadotropin-mediated hyperthyroidism (hyperemesis gravidarum, trophoblastic
disease)
Gestational thyrotoxicosis
Etiology (Table 2.6) and Pathogenesis of Hyperthyroidism
Q. Write short essay/notes on causes of hyperthyroidism.
Few of the causes of hyperthyroidism/thyrotoxicosis are discussed below.

1. Graves’ disease
Graves’ disease is the most common form of thyrotoxicosis. It is characterized by one or more
of the following features: (1) thyrotoxicosis, (2) goiter, (3) ophthalmopathy (exophthalmos),
and (4) dermopathy (pretibial myxedema).
Age and gender
–   It may occur at any age, with a peak incidence between 20–40 years of age.
–   Females are affected five times more commonly than males.
Autoantibodies:  It is an autoimmune disorder with auto antibodies.
–   TSI or TSH-receptor antibodies (TRAb):  IgG type of antibodies directed against the TSH
receptors on the follicular cell of thyroid. They stimulate thyroid hormone production and
enlargement of thyroid.
–   Thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin (TSI):  It is the driving force for thyrotoxicosis.
Ophthalmopathy and dermatopathy: Observed in Graves’ disease is due to immunologically
mediated activation of fibroblasts in the extraocular muscles and skin. This along with
accumulation of glycosaminoglycans and trapping of water causes edema initially. Later
fibroblasts cause fibrosis.Genetic factors may be significant in a minority of cases (e.g. HLA-DR3 associated).
Hyperthyroidism may be triggered by viral or bacterial infections. E.coli  and Yersenia
enterocolitica possess cell membrane TSH receptors. The antibodies produced against these
microorganisms can cross-react with the TSH receptors (molecular mimicry).
2.  Treatment-induced hyperthyroidism. Drugs include iodine,
amiodarone, interferon-alpha, and rarely, lithium.
a. Iodine induced hyperthyroidism: It develops following excess
intake of iodine in diet or exposure to radiographic contrast media or
iodine medication.Usually develops in patients with autonomously functioning
thyroid gland (e.g. nodular goiter/Graves’ disease). It can also
occur in endemic goiter and with iodine (Jod-Basedow
phenomenon). It is characterized by suppressed serum TSH level
with normal levels of circulating thyroid hormone.Paradoxically, excess iodine uptake by the thyroid may inhibit the
synthesis thyroid hormone (Wolff-Chaikoff effect). Thus, iodide
toxicity can lead to iodine goiter, hypothyroidism or myxedema.
b.  Amiodarone-induced hyperthyroidism (AIT): Amiodarone is an
antiarrhythmic drug and 200 mg dose has 75 mg iodine. It can also
induce hyperthyroidism which can be:Type I AIT: It develops in patients with preexisting Graves’
disease or multinodular goiter. The hyperthyroidism is probably
triggered by the high iodine content of amiodarone. Jod-Basedow

effect (refer above) occurs in patients with underlying thyroid
disease.
Type II AIT: It is not associated with previous thyroid disease. It
is due to a direct cytotoxicity of the drug on thyroid follicular cells
leading to a destructive thyroiditis with release of T3 and T4. It
produce transient thyrotoxicosis and may later progress to
hypothyroid phase.
3.  Thyrotoxicosis factitiaIt is primarily a psychiatric disorder due to excessive intake of
thyroxine causing thyrotoxicosis.
Patients are clinically thyrotoxic without eye signs of Graves.
High doses of thyroxine lead to TSH suppression and causes shrinkage
of the thyroid.
Stop thyroxine and give symptom relief drugs.
4.  Toxic multinodular goiter
Constitutes 14% of thyrotoxicosis cases.
Commonly occurs in elderly women (>50).
Goiter will be nodular.
T3 (greater), T4 raised and TSH undetectable.
5.  Toxic solitary adenoma/nodule (Plummer’s disease)
Constitutes <5% of all thyrotoxicosis (hyperthyroidism) cases and the
solitary nodule is follicular adenoma.
Usually occur in female >40 years of age.
Clinical Features of Thyrotoxicosis (Table 2.7)
Q. Write short essay/notes on clinical features/signs/manifestations of
thyrotoxicosis/hyperthyroidism.
Q. Write short note on cardiac complications of hyperthyroidism.
Table 2.7: Clinical features of thyrotoxicosis.
Organ/System involved Symptoms
Thyroid Diffuse or nodular enlargement, warmth and
bruit (due to increased vascularity)

Gastrointestinal system Weight loss, increased appetite, vomiting,
increased frequency of stool, diarrhea and
steatorrhea
Cardiovascular system Exertional dyspnea, palpitations, angina, sinus
tachycardia, atrial fibrillation, wide pulse
pressure, cardiac failure, cardiomyopathy,
‘scratchy’ midsystolic murmur (Means-Lerman
scratch)
Nervous system Nervousness, irritability, psychosis, emotional
lability, fine tremors.
Inability to concentrate, hyperreflexia, proximal
myopathy, bulbar myopathy, ill-sustained clonus
Skin and integumentary system Soft, warm and moist. Increased sweating,
pruritus, palmar erythema, spider naevi,
onycholysis, pretibial myxodema (Graves’)
pigmentation, alopecia, clubbing (thyroid
acropachy)
Reproductive system Menstrual disturbances (amenorrhea or
oligomenorrhea), repeated abortions, infertility,
loss of libido, impotence
General Heat intolerance , fatigue, gynecomastia, apathy,
thirst
Eyes Lid lag, exophthalmos, proptosis, extraocular
diplopia, exposure keratitis, lagophthalmos
(classically seen in Graves’ disease)Note: Bold words indicate symptoms of greater discriminant value.
Elderly patients present with anorexia, apathy, fatigue, weight loss and
dominant cardiovascular and myopathic features (apathetic
hyperthyroidism).
Younger patients present predominantly with neurological manifestations.
Children  present with excessive height or excessive growth rate, or with
behavioral problems (e.g. hyperactivity), and weight gain rather than loss.
Thyroid Ophthalmopathy (eye signs) (Box 2.8 and Figs. 2.6A to D)
The ophthalmopathy causes abnormal protrusion of the eyeball (exophthalmos) . Sympathetic
overactivity may produce a characteristic wide, staring gaze and lid lag.
It is observed in about 50% of the patients when first seen. It may precede Graves’ disease by
many years or may develop even after successful treatment of Graves’ disease.
Pathogenesis of Ophthalmopathy: Not Clear.
Ophthalmopathy is characterized by increase in the volume of the retro-orbital connective
tissues and extraocular muscles with a rise in retrobulbar pressure. This produces
exophthalmos and compression of optic nerve (congestive ophthalmopathy).

Ocular myopathy may also be found. The infiltrative process most common in the inferior rectus
muscle and it fails to relax normally. This produces upward gaze limitation and is the most
common physical finding in patients with ophthalmopathy. Involvement of the medial rectus
produces impairment of in lateral gaze.
Symptoms:  Excessive lacrimation, redness, grittiness, diminution of visual acuity and diplopia.
Signs: Exophthalmos, lid lag, lid retraction , corneal ulcers, chemosis, ophthalmoplegia, visual field
defects and papilledema.
Treatment of thyroid ophthalmopathy
Most patients do not require any treatment. Symptomatic measures include:
By sleeping upright: Some patients may gain relief.
Taping of eyelids: To ensure closure at night
Medical:
–   Methylcellulose or hypromellose eye drops  to aid lubrication for grittiness and use of tinted
glasses to reduce lacrimation.
–   Papilledema, loss of visual acuity and visual field defect need emergency treatment  and
are treated by systemic prednisolone (30–120 mg daily). If there is no response, orbital
decompression  should be performed.
Surgical: Lateral tarsorrhaphy for corneal ulcers. Persistent diplopia is corrected by corrective eye
muscle surgery.
Figs. 2.6A to D: (A and B) Exophthalmos (front and side view); (C) Infiltration of extraocular muscles
in hyperthyroidism; (D) Eye signs and enlarged nodular goiter (arrow).
Box 2.8:  Eye signs of thyrotoxicosis.

Dalrymple sign: Rim of sclera is seen all around the cornea, on looking straight forward.
Rosenbach’s sign: Fine tremor of the upper eyelids on slight closure of the eye.
Joffroy’s sign: Lack of wrinkling of the forehead when a patient looks upward.
Möbius sign: Lack of convergence on looking to near object.
Von Graefe’s sign (lid lag sign): Lagging of the upper eyelid on looking downward without
moving the head.
Stellwag’s sign: Staring look with infrequent blinking.
Vigouroux sign: Eyelid fullness
Grove sign: Resistance to pulling down the retracted upper lid)
Ballet sign: Restriction of one or more extraocular muscles)
Kocher sign: Staring look (upper sclera visible)
Naffziger’s sign: Standing behind, patient’s neck is extended and examiner looks from behind
along the superior orbital margin of the patient. Eyeball is seen beyond the superior orbital margin
in exophthalmos.
Fig. 2.7: Non-pitting pedal edema-myxedema
Pretibial Myxedema (Infiltrative Dermopathy)
Q. Write short essay/notes on pretibial myxedema.
It is present in a minority of patients.
This is most common in (Fig. 2.7) the skin overlying the shins  (anterior aspect of leg extending
on to the dorsum of the foot). Rarely, affects face and arms.

It presents as scaly thickening and induration  (raised pinkish or purplish plaques) of the
dermis due to deposition of glycosaminoglycans and infiltration by lymphocytes. The skin may
have a peau d’orange appearance with coarse hair.
Treatment of Pretibial Myxedema
Local injections of triamcinolone or application of betamethasone ointment .
Box 2.9 lists the other disorders associated with Graves’ disease.
Box 2.9:  Other disorders associated with Graves’ disease.
Autoimmune disorders
–   Endocrine: Addison’s disease, type 1 DM, Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, primary gonadal failure,
hypophysitis.
–   Non-endocrine: Celiac disease, pernicious anemia, myasthenia gravis, immune
thrombocytopenic purpura, rheumatoid arthritis, vitiligo, alopecia areata.
Others: Hypokalemic periodic paralysis and mitral valve prolapse
Subclinical Thyrotoxicosis
Presentation:  Atrial fibrillation in individuals above 60 years of age and bone loss in
postmenopausal women.
Lab findings:  Serum levels of free T4 and triiodothyronine are within normal. Serum TSH levels
is subnormal (<0.1 mU/L).
Investigations of Graves’ Disease
TSH levels: Very low or undetectable. This is performed as the primary
test, and normal level excludes thyrotoxicosis.
Serum T3 and T4 levels: Raised in most cases. T3 thyrotoxicosis is
associated with raised T3 levels and normal T4 level.
Absence of TSH response following intravenous TRH.
131 I uptake by the thyroid gland: It may be increased, but not necessary
to perform in most of the patients.
TSH receptor antibody (TRAb): Present in most cases.
Few patients may show minor LFT abnormalities, mild hypercalcemia and
glycosuria.
Q. Write short essay/notes on drugs used in thyrotoxicosis.
Q. Write short essay/notes on adverse effects of antithyroid drugs.
Management of hyperthyroidism of Graves’ disease
Three methods of treatment of hyperthyroidism of Graves’ disease are: (1) antithyroid drugs (ATD)

with initial supplementation by β-blocker, (2) surgical treatment and (3) radioactive iodine
1. Antithyroid drugs (ATD)
Indications:  Primary therapy in pregnancy, in children and adolescents and severe Graves’
disease with eye changes. The drugs include:
a. Thionamides:  e.g. propylthiouracil, carbimazole, methimazole .
Mechanism of action:  Inhibit the function of thyroid peroxidase (TPO) enzyme  and
prevent binding of iodine to tyrosine. (prevents iodination and organification).
Propylthiouracil (100–600 mg/day) inhibit peripheral conversion T 4 to T 3 and is preferred
in pregnant women and severe thyrotoxicosis.
Carbimazole: It has additional immunosuppressive action.
–   Dose: 5–15 mg thrice daily for 3–4 weeks followed by 10 mg thrice daily for 4–8
weeks. Maintenance dose: 5–20 mg daily.
–   Total duration of treatment:  18–24 months.
–   Adverse effects:  Rashes, urticaria, fever, arthralgia, blood dyscrasias (agranulocytosis),
hepatotoxicity, aplasia cutis in neonates.
b. Potassium perchlorate:  It reduces uptake of iodine. It is more toxic and produces red cell
aplasia. It is used only as temporary measure in iodine-induced thyrotoxicosis or when other
therapy is not acceptable.
c. Potassium iodide:
Mechanism of action: Decreases synthesis of T 3 and T 4 and inhibit hormone release. It
makes thyroid gland firm and less vascular and it is the fastest acting thyroid inhibitor.
Indication:  Only in (i) preparation for thyroidectomy  and (ii) thyrotoxic crisis.
d. Beta adrenergic blockers
Non-selective and used for immediate relief and control symptoms due to sympathetic
overactivity such as anxiety, palpitation, increased bowel activity, lid retraction, finger
tremors.
Drug of choice and dosage:  Propranolol in the dose of 20 to 40 mg 6 hourly.
e. Lithium (rarely used)
Advantages of antithyroid drugs:
–   No surgical risk, scar, or chances of injury to parathyroid or recurrent laryngeal nerve.
–   Hypothyroidism, if induced, is reversible.
–   Can be used even in children and young adults.
Disadvantages:
–   Prolonged (often lifelong) treatment is needed and relapse rate is high.
–   Not practicable in uncooperative patient.
2. Surgical treatment
Subtotal thyroidectomy is the treatment of choice.
Surgical treatment is reserved for multinodular goiter (MNG) with following features.
Severe hyperthyroidism in children.
Pregnant women who cannot tolerate antithyroid drugs.
Large goiters with severe ophthalmopathy or with pressure symptoms.
Patients who require quick normalization of thyroid function
Preparation for thyroidectomy:  It includes pretreatment with propranolol, carbimazole and

potassium iodide (to decrease vascularity and make the gland more firm) 60 mg twice daily for
2 weeks before surgery.
Postoperative complications: Hypothyroidism, hypoparathyroidism and damage to recurrent
laryngeal nerve.
3. Radioactive iodine (RAI)
131I concentrated in thyroid, emits gamma-ray radiation from within the follicles and destroy
thyroid cells. Taken orally as sodium salt of 131I dissolved in water or as pills. Patients must
be euthyroid before treatment.
Dose: 185–555 MBq
Indications:  (i) Patients above 40 years of age, (ii) young patients with a short life-span due
to some other reason, and (iii) young individuals who are sterilized.
Complication: Hypothyroidism , infertility, secondary cancers.
Contraindications:
–   Never given for children and pregnant/lactating women
–   Not recommended with patients of severe ophthalmopathy
–   Not advisable in chronic smokers.
Approach for the hyperthyroidism is presented in Figure 2.8.
Fig. 2.8:  Approach to diagnosis in hyperthyroidism.
[FT4: free T 4 (tetrahydrothyronine); FT 3: free T 3 (triiodothyronine); TSH: thyroid-stimulating
hormone; RAIU: radioactive iodine uptake]

Hyperthyroid Crisis/Thyrotoxic Crisis/Thyroid Storm
Q. Write short essay/note on hyperthyroid crisis/thyrotoxic
crisis/thyroid storm/thyroid crisis.
It is a rare life-threatening medical emergency that develops as
complication of thyrotoxicosis which is associated with a mortality of 10%.
Causes of hyperthyroid crisis
Various precipitating factors are:
Severe infections in a patient with previously undetected or inadequately
treated hyperthyroidism/thyrotoxicosis.
Following surgery: May develop following subtotal thyroidectomy in
an ill-prepared patient or some other surgery in an undetected
hyperthyroidism/thyrotoxicosis.
Following radiotherapy: May occur within a few days of 131I therapy in
an inadequately prepared patient. This is because of a transient rise in
serum thyroid hormone levels caused due to acute damage by irradiation.
Other precipitating factors: Cerebrovascular accidents, diabetic
ketoacidosis, acute coronary syndrome, use of Iodine contrast agent,
sudden withdrawal of antithyroid medications, stress, major trauma.
Clinical featuresThe clinical manifestations are due to marked hypermetabolism and
excessive adrenergic response.
Hyperpyrexia from 104°F to 106°F is common and is associated with
flushing and sweating.
Marked tachycardia, often with atrial fibrillation and high pulse
pressure; occasionally heart failure occurs. A fatal outcome is associated
with heart failure and shock.Central nervous system symptoms include marked agitation,
restlessness, delirium, and coma.
Gastrointestinal symptoms include nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and
jaundice.
Treatment of hyperthyroid crisis
Patients should be rehydrated  and given antibiotics if there is infection.
Control hyperthermia:  By external cooling. DO NOT  administer salicylates, as it converts T 4 to

T3.
Propranolol:  Either orally (80 mg 4 times daily) or intravenously (1–5 mg 4 times daily). It also
blocks peripheral conversion of T 4 to T 3.
Propylthiouracil  800–1200 mg orally every 4 hours or carbimazole  (inhibit the synthesis of new
thyroid hormone) 15–30 mg stat followed by 15 mg TID. In an unconscious or uncooperative
patient, carbimazole can be administered rectally with good effect.
Lugol’s iodine: 10 drops TID about one hour after propylthiouracil or carbimazole.
Sodium iopodate: 500 mg/day orally will restore serum T3 levels to normal within 48–72 hours.
This is a radiographic contrast medium which inhibits the release of thyroid hormones and also
reduces the conversion of T 4 to T 3. Hence, more effective than potassium iodide or Lugol’s
solution.Benzodiazepines : For agitation.
Corticosteroids: IV hydrocortisone  100–200 mg every 6 hours suppresses many of the
manifestations of hyperthyroidism.
Bile acid sequestrants, cholestyramine 4 g orally four times daily decreases thyroid hormone
levels by interfering with enterohepatic circulation and recycling of thyroid hormone.
Digoxin:  To control cardiac failure and atrial fibrillation (AF). Lithium and plasmapheresis have
been tried.
Box 2.10: Etiology of hypothyroidism.
Primary:
1. Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
2. Radioactive iodine therapy for Graves’ disease
3. Subtotal thyroidectomy for Graves’ disease, nodular goiter, or thyroid cancer
4. Excessive iodide intake (radiocontrast dyes)
5. Subacute thyroiditis (usually transient). Postpartum thyroiditis
6. Iodide deficiency
7. Drugs: Lithium, interferon-alfa, amiodarone
8. Dyshormonogenesis—Pendred syndrome
Secondary:  Hypopituitarism due to pituitary adenoma, pituitary ablative therapy, or pituitary
destruction
Tertiary:  Hypothalamic dysfunction (rare)
Rarely peripheral resistance to the action of thyroid hormone
HypothyroidismQ. Describe the etiology, clinical features, diagnosis and management of
primary hypothyroidism/spontaneous atrophic hypothyroidism?
Hypothyroidism is a clinical syndrome resulting from a deficiency of
thyroid hormones. It results in a generalized slowing down of metabolic
processes.

Infants and children: Hypothyroidism results in marked slowing o f
growth and development, with serious permanent consequences,
including mental retardation, when it occurs in infancy (cretinism).
Adults: Hypothyroidism causes a generalized decrease in metabolism,
with slowed heart rate, diminished oxygen consumption, and deposition of
glycosaminoglycans in intracellular spaces, particularly in skin and
muscle, producing in extreme cases the clinical picture of myxedema.
Classification and Etiology (Box 2.10)
Q. Write short essay/note on causes of hypothyroidism and treatment.
Primary hypothyroidism: Due intrinsic disorder of the thyroid gland.
Secondary hypothyroidism is rare and is caused due to failure of TSH
production due to disease of anterior pituitary or hypothalamus.
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (Spontaneous atrophic hypothyroidism)
Most common cause of primary hypothyroidism.
Organ-specific autoimmune disorder of thyroid characterized by
lymphoid infiltration of thyroid leading to fibrosis and atrophy.
Patients have TRAb  that block the effects of endogenous TSH.
It may be observed in some patients of Graves’ disease treated with
antithyroid drugs 10–20 years earlier.
Patients have high-risk of developing other autoimmune disorders such
as type 1 diabetes mellitus, pernicious anemia and Addison’s disease.
Postpartum thyroiditis
It is usually transient, self-limiting condition that follows pregnancy.
It may produce hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism or the two sequentially.
Excessive iodide
Inhibits iodide organification and synthesis of T4 and T3 (Wolf-Chaikoff
effect). Most patents quickly recover from this effect. However, patients
with abnormal thyroid gland can develop hypothyroid if iodine is given
for more than a few days.Risk factor for iodine-induced hypothyroidism is patients with chronic
autoimmune thyroiditis, partial thyroidectomy, previous history of
radioiodine therapy and subacute thyroiditis.

Clinical Features (Table 2.8)
Table 2.8: Clinical features of hypothyroidism.
Organ/System involved Symptoms
General Lethargy, somnolence, weight gain, goiter, cold intolerance, hoarse
voice, pallor
Thyroid Enlargement of the gland
Gastrointestinal Reduced appetite, constipation, ileus, ascites, macroglosia
Cardiorespiratory Angina, bradycardia, hypertension (diastolic), cardiac failure,
pericardial effusion, pleural effusion, dyslipidemia
hyperhomocysteinemia
Neuromuscular Aches and pains, muscle stiffness, delayed relaxation of tendon
reflexes (Woltman’s sign)*, carpal tunnel syndrome, depression,
psychosis, cerebellar ataxia, deafness, myotonia, proximal myopathy,
pseudohypertrophy of muscles, Hashimoto encephalopathy
Skin Myxedema (non-pitting edema of the skin of hands, feet and eyelids),
dry flaky skin and hair, alopecia, vitiligo, purplish lips and malar
flush, carotenemia, erythema abigne, xanthelasmas, madarosis
(thinning of lateral 1/3 of eyebrows)
Reproductive Menorrhagia, infertility, galactorrhea (hyper-prolactinemia),
impotence
Hematological Macrocytosis, anemia
Renal Impaired GFR, renal dysfunction
Miscellaneous OSA, hyponatremia, weight gain.Note: Bold words indicate symptoms of greater discriminant value.* Woltman’s sign (hung up ankle
jerk) is due to decreased myosin ATPase activity and decreased rate of reaccumulation of calcium in
the sarcoplasmic reticulum
Q. Write short essay/note on clinical features of hypothyroidism.
Depends on the duration and severity of the hypothyroidism.
Consequence of prolonged hypothyroidism:
–   Infiltration of many body tissues by the mucopolysaccharides,
hyaluronic acid and chondroitin sulfate.
–   Infiltration of the dermis produces nonpitting edema (myxedema).
The term myxedema refers to the accumulation of
mucopolysaccharides in the subcutaneous tissues. It is most marked
in the skin of the hands, feet and eyelids.
–   Myxedema facies: It is a peculiar facial appearance characterized by

striking periorbital puffiness (due to myxedema), scantly eyebrows,
facial pallor  (due to vasoconstriction and anemia), or a lemon-yellow
tint to the skin  (due to carotenemia produced by reduced conversion
of carotene to vitamin A), purplish lips and malar flush.
Most cases of hypothyroidism are not clinically obvious and should be
kept in mind when individuals complain of non-specific symptoms such as
tiredness, weight gain, depression or carpal tunnel syndrome. Many cases
are diagnosed on biochemical screening.
Investigations of Primary Hypothyroidism (Fig. 2.9)
Majority of hypothyroidism results from an intrinsic disorder of the thyroid
gland (primary hypothyroidism).
Serum TSH: It is the investigation of choice. High TSH level confirms
primary hypothyroidism.
Serum T4 levels: Low level confirms the hypothyroid state.
Thyroid and other organ-specific antibodies may be found.
Other abnormalities:
–   Increased serum aspartate transferase from muscle and/or liver
–   Increased serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and creatine kinase
(CK): With associated myopathy
–   Hypercholesterolemia and hypertriglyceridemia
–   Hyponatremia: Due to an increase in ADH and impaired free water
clearance.
–   Anemia: Usually normochromic and normocytic
–   Electrocardiogram (ECG): Demonstrates sinus bradycardia, low
voltage QRS complexes and ST segment and T wave abnormalities.
–   Chest radiograph: May reveal enlarged cardiac shadow.

Fig. 2.9:  Algorithm for hypothyriodism.
[T4: free T4 (tetrahydrothyronine); TPOAb: thyroid peroxidase antibodies; TSH: thyroid-stimulating
hormone]
Q. Write short essay/note on treatment of hypothyroidism (drug, dose
and duration of therapy).
Treatment of Hypothyroidism
Hypothyroidism is treated with T 4.
Replacement therapy with levothyroxine sodium (thyroxine, i.e. T) is given for life, once daily
dosage (1.6–1.8 µg/kg/day).
Starting dose:  It depends upon the severity of the deficiency and on the age and fitness of the
patient.
For healthy patients
–   <50 years at 1.0 µg/kg/day
–   >50 years should be <50 µg/day. Dose increase by 25 µg, if needed, at 6–8 weeks intervals.
For patients with heart disease:  12.5–25 µg/day and increase by 12.5–25 µg/day, if needed, at
6–8 weeks intervals. Few patients with ischemic heart disease may develop angina or worsen with
therapy. They require β-blockers, vasodilators or CABG or angioplasty.
Dosage adjustments
Should be taken on an empty stomach with water, ideally an hour before breakfast.
Age:  In elderly start with half dose.
Severity and duration of hypothyroidism:  Increase the dose in severe cases
Weight:  0.5 µg/kg/day increase up to 3.0 µg/kg/day
Malabsorption: Requires increase dose
Concomitant drug therapy:  Thyroxine only to be taken on empty stomach

Pregnancy: 25–50% increase in dose, safe in lactating mother
Presence of cardiac disease:  Start low dose or alternate day treatment.
Monitoring
Goal: It is to normalize TSH level  regardless of cause of hypothyroidism and to restore T 4
within the normal range.
Adequacy of replacement: Assessed clinically and by thyroid function tests after 6 weeks on a
steady dose.
Complete suppression of TSH should be avoided because it may cause atrial fibrillation and
osteoporosis.
Lifelong therapy is needed.
Myxedema Coma
Q. Write short essay on clinical features and management of myxedema
coma and myxedema madness.
Myxedema coma is a very rare, life-threatening medical emergency that
develops as a complication of hypothyroidism usually in an elderly patient.
It develops in patients with long-standing, severe untreated
hypothyroidism (or may not have been diagnosed) in whom adaptive
mechanisms fail to maintain homeostasis.
Precipitating factors: Infections, drugs (amiodarone, β-blockers,
diuretics, anesthetic agents, barbiturates, lithium, narcotics,
phenothiazines), cardiac failure, hypoxia, hyponatremia and hypercapnia.Warning signs: Presence of cool pale skin (due to hypothermia—body
temperature may be as low as 25°C) and absence of mild diastolic
hypertension.
Laboratory findings
–   Serum free T4 is low, serum TSH  is usually high  but sometimes only
slightly elevated.
–   Serum creatine phosphokinase mostly markedly raised.
Myxedema Madness
Patient presents with hypothermia  and neuropsychiatric manifestations.
Neuropsychiatric manifestations: Include
–   Myxedema madness: Depression is common in hypothyroidism.
Rarely, elderly patient with severe hypothyroidism may become
frankly demented or psychotic, sometimes with striking delusions and

hallucinations. It may develop shortly after starting T4 replacement.
–   Myxedema coma: Depressed level of consciousness, convulsions and
coma.
Patient may develop severe cardiac failure, pericardial effusions,
hypoventilation, and metabolic abnormalities such as hypoglycemia and
hyponatremia.
Lab findings:
–   Hypoglycemia and hyponatremia, increased CO2, decreased WBC
count and Hct, increased CPK.
–   Reduced ECG voltage, blood gases often reveal respiratory acidosis,
hypoxia and hypercapnia.
Management of myxedema coma (Table 2.9)
Treatment must be started before biochemical confirmation of the diagnosis.
Table 2.9: Management of myxedema coma.
Abnormality Treatment
Hypothyroidism Large initial intravenous dose of 300–500 µgT4; if no response
within 48 hours, add T3
Hypocortisolemia Intravenous hydrocortisone 200–400 mg daily
Hypoventilation Intubation and mechanical ventilation
Hypothermia Gentle warming of patient with blankets, no active rewarming
Hyponatremia Mild fluid restriction, 3% saline
Hypotension Cautious volume expansion with crystalloid or whole blood
Hypoglycemia Glucose administration
Precipitating event Identification and elimination by specific treatment (liberal use of
antibiotics)
Other measures Monitor cardiac output and pressures
Whenever needed, cautious use of intravenous fluids, high-flow
oxygen or assisted ventilation
Sick Euthyroid Syndrome/Nonthyroid Illness State (NTIS)
Q. Write short note on sick euthyroid syndrome.
Nonthyroidal illness influences thyroid hormone production and
action at multiple levels, including H-P-T axis, thyroid hormone
transport, and metabolism.

Changes in thyroid function in the setting of systemic illness, surgery,
or fasting not caused by primary thyroid or pituitary dysfunction are
referred to as the nonthyroidal illness syndrome (also called ‘sick
euthyroid syndrome’). Also called ‘low-T3 syndrome’, due to the most
common abnormality, a decreased level of serum total
triiodothyronine (T3).Measurement of serum thyroxine (T4) concentration can be normal,
low or elevated.
Serum TSH (thyrotropin), is usually normal but can be influenced by
nonthyroidal illness.
Conditions associated with euthyroid sick syndrome include
malnutrition, HIV, anorexia nervosa, trauma, myocardial infarction,
chronic renal failure, diabetic ketoacidosis, cirrhosis and sepsis.
–   Treatment with thyroxine is not recommended.
Subclinical Thyroid Diseases
Q. Write short note/essay on subclinical thyroid diseases.
Q. Write short note on subclinical hypothyroidism.
Box 2.11: Common causes of subclinical hypothyroidism.
Iatrogenic
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
Postpartum thyroiditis
Medications: Amiodarone, lithium, interferon, sorafenib
–   Partial thyroidectomy
–   Head and neck radiation
Subclinical Hypothyroidism
Subclinical hypothyroidism is defined as an increased serum TSH in
the presence of a normal serum F T4 and T3 concentration. Prevalent
in women and elderly persons.
Common causes of subclinical hypothyroidism (Box 2.11)
Clinical consequences
Progression to overt hypothyroidism → 2–5% yearly

Risk of CV disease: Diastolic dysfunction, diastolic hypertension, increase
in LDL-C, increased hsCRP, alteration in coagulation parameters,
endothelial dysfunction
Infertility
Neuropsychiatric manifestations.
Indication for treatment with levothyroxine
Patients who are pregnant or planning for pregnancy
Patients with serum TSH > 10.0 mU/L
Symptoms or signs of hypothyroidism
Age <70 years
TSH >7.0 mU/L with antibodies positive
Goiter
High vascular risk including ischemic heart disease, diabetes, dyslipidemia.
Box 2.12: Causes of subclinical hyperthyroidism.
Iatrogenic
Autonomous nodules (solitary and in MNG)
Graves’ disease
Thyroiditis
Graves’ disease in remission
High hCG
Subclinical Hyperthyroidism
Q. Write short note on subclinical hyperthyroidism.
Etiology of subclinical hyperthyroidism (Box 2.12)
Natural course: 40–60% normalize. About 4% progresses to overt
hyperthyroidism.
Effects of subclinical hyperthyroidism
Functional cardiac effects of subclinical hyperthyroidism (Box 2.13).
Noncardiac effects
–   Osteoporosis, decreased BMD, increased risk of fractures
–   Muscle weakness, dementia
There is no evidence to treat subclinical hyperthyroidism with antithyroid
drugs.
Box 2.13: Functional cardiac effects of subclinical hyperthyroidism.

Resting tachycardia
Atrial fibrillation
LV hypertrophy
Increase LV mass index
Increase cardiac workload
Diastolic dysfunction (impaired relaxation)
Increased systolic function at rest
Impaired systolic response to exercise
Thyroiditis
Q. Write short note on causes of thyroiditis.
It is a heterogeneous group of inflammatory disorders involving the thyroid
gland. Etiologies range from autoimmune to infectious origins.
The clinical course may be acute, subacute, or chronic.
Causes of Thyroiditis (Table 2.10)
Subacute Thyroiditis (De Quervain’s Thyroiditis)
Q. Write short note on subacute thyroiditis (de Quervain’s
thyroiditis/granulomatous thyroiditis).
A spontaneously remitting, painful, subacute inflammatory disease of the
thyroid characterized by transient inflammation of the thyroid gland.
Most prevalent in the temperate zone.
Gender and age: Affects more frequently women between the third and
sixth decades of life.
Clinical Features
Prodromal viral symptoms: Often preceded by a viral infection (e.g.
Coxsackie, mumps, adenovirus) of upper respiratory tract. Prodromal
symptoms include fever, malaise and pain in the neck with tachycardia
and local thyroid tenderness.
Table 2.10: Causes of thyroiditis.
Type Causes
AcuteBacterial infections: Staphylococcus, Streptococcus,

Enterobacter
Fungal infections: Aspergillus, Candida, Histoplasma
Radiation: After 131I treatment
Drugs: Amiodarone (may also be subacute or chronic)
Subacute Viral or granulomatous (de Quervain’s) thyroiditis
Silent thyroiditis (includes post-partum thyroiditis)
Mycobacterial infection
Drug induced: Interferon, amiodarone
Chronic Autoimmune: Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, Riedel’s thyroiditis
Parasitic thyroiditis: Echinococcosis, strongyloidiasis,
cysticercosis
Traumatic: Palpation thyroiditis
Anterior neck pain  in the region of thyroid occurs abruptly and may be
sometimes unilateral.
–   It may radiate to the ear, mandible or occiput. Pain may shift to the
contralateral lobe (creeping thyroiditis).
–   Pain may be aggravated  by moving the head, swallowing, or
coughing.
Functional impairment: Initially there is hyperthyroidism and later
followed by a period of hypothyroidism. Finally full recovery occurs in
4–6 months. In about 5% of cases hypothyroidism may persist.
Signs: Enlarged and tender thyroid gland .
Laboratory Findings
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR): Elevated (>55 mm/h)
Leukocyte counts: Normal or slightly elevated
Serum IL-6 and Tg concentrations: Increased during the thyrotoxic
phase.
Thyroid radionuclide uptake is reduced or absent.
Thyroid antibodies are transiently detectable  at low titers in a minority
of patients.
Treatment
Mild cases: Salicylates or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs relieve pain and tenderness
Severe cases: Corticosteroids (prednisone 40–60 mg/day) have a more dramatic and rapid effect.
Symptoms of thyrotoxicosis should be managed with β-adrenergic blocking agents (propranolol
20–40 mg, 3–4 times daily)

In patients with hypothyroidism L-T 4 replacement is neede
Hashimoto’s Thyroiditis
Q. Write short essay/note on Hashimoto’s (autoimmune) thyroiditis.
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis is an autoimmune condition characterized by
destructive lymphoid infiltration of the thyroid and high titers of
circulating:
a. Antithyroid peroxidase (TPO) antibody (TPOAb) in 95% patients.
b. Antithyroglobulin (Tg) antibody in 60–80% patients.
Age and gender: Most often diagnosed between 50 to 60 years of age, 5
to 7 times more frequent in women than in men.
Association with other autoimmune diseases: Often associated with
ulcerative colitis or type 1 diabetes mellitus.
Pathology: Lymphocytic infiltration  (lymphoid follicles with germinal
centre), fibrosis, follicular cell hyperplasia and presence of oxyphil cells
(Askanazy cells/Hürthle cells).
Clinical Features
Most patients are asymptomatic. Some may have a feeling of tightness or
fullness in the neck. Neck pain and tenderness are rare.
Hypothyroidism: Commonest cause of goitrous hypothyroidism.
About 25% present with hypothyroidism and remaining are at a higher
risk of developing in future years. Hashitoxicosis is seen in the acute
phase.
Chronic autoimmune thyroiditis is a component of type 2 autoimmune
polyglandular syndrome
Physical examination: Diffuse enlargement of thyroid with firm or
rubbery consistency.
Investigations
Q. Investigations and treatment of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis.
Thyroid function tests: Show features of hypothyroidism
Antithyroid peroxidase (TPO) antibody (TPOAb) in 95% patients
Antithyroglobulin (Tg) antibody in 60–80% patients

Antinuclear factor (ANF) may be found in patients below the age of 20
years
Ultrasound of thyroid: Reduced echogenicity
Fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) of thyroid.
Complication: An increased risk for thyroid lymphoma (rare).
Treatment of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
Levothyroxine/thyroxine (150–200 µg/day) is indicated for the treatment of hypothyroidism and it
may produce shrinkage of goiter. The dose of thyroxine should be sufficient enough to suppress
serum TSH to low but detectable levels.
Riedel’s Thyroiditis (Sclerosing Thyroiditis/Ligneous
Thyroiditis/Invasive Fibrous Thyroiditis)
Rare, chronic inflammatory disorder of unknown etiology.
Characterized by dense fibrosis of the thyroid gland and adjacent tissues,
and extracervical areas (fibrous mediastinitis, retroperitoneal fibrosis,
retro-orbital fibrosis, sclerosing cholangitis, and pancreatitis).
Clinical Features
Occurs mainly in middle-age or elderly women.
Usually present with a long history of a painless, progressively increasing
anterior neck mass. Most patients are euthyroid.
Pressure symptoms: Dysphagia, cough, hoarseness, stridor, attacks of
suffocation) may be present.
Physical examination: A stony-hard or woody thyroid  mass which
varies in size from small to very large. It may involve one or both lobes
and is fixed to surrounding structures.
Investigations
Thyroid antibodies: May be found in about 45% of patients.
Serum calcium: May be low due to parathyroid invasion.
Differential diagnosis: From thyroid carcinoma or lymphoma of the
thyroid requires open biopsy, since FNAB may be difficult to interpret.
Treatment of Reidel’s thyroiditis
Surgical treatment is necessary to relieve pressure on the trachea and to establish diagnosis.
Corticosteroids are of little or no value.

Goiter
Goiter is the enlargement of thyroid gland.
Classification (Table 2.11)
Table 2.11: Classification of goiter.
Diffuse
Simple (nontoxic): Physiological (puberty, pregnancy), iodine deficiency (endemic goiter)
Toxic goiter: Graves’ disease
Autoimmune/inflammatory: Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, de Quervain’s thyroiditis, Riedel’s
thyroiditis
Dyshormonogenesis goitrogens (e.g. sulfonylureas)
Nodular
Multinodular goiter, toxic multinodular goiter (Plummer’s disease)
Solitary nodular fibrotic (Riedel’s thyroiditis)
Cysts
Tumors:
–   Benign: Adenomas
–   Malignant: Carcinoma, lymphomas
Miscellaneous: Sarcoidosis, tuberculosis
Simple (Nontoxic) Goiter
Diffuse nontoxic (simple) goiter is characterized by the diffuse enlargement
of the thyroid gland without any nodularity. This includes:
Simple hyperplastic goiter (colloid goiter)
Cause: Physiological in pregnancy, puberty and iodine deficiency.
Appearance: Large, smooth firm, non-tender goiter
Effect: Euthyroid and pressure effect.
Risk Factors for Malignancy in Goiter (Box 2.14)
Diffuse Nontoxic (Simple) Goiter
Q. Write short essay/note on clinical features, investigations and
treatment of goiter/multinodular goiter.
Diffuse nontoxic (simple) goiter is characterized by the diffuse enlargement
of the thyroid gland without any nodularity.

Etiology
Types: (A) endemic, and (B) sporadic.
A. Endemic goiter
This term is used when goiters are present in more than 10% of the
population in a given region. The causes are:
Deficiency of iodine: This may be due to low iodine in the soil, water, and
food. Consequences of iodine deficiency: Decreased synthesis of thyroid
hormone and causes compensatory increase in TSH. This leads to
follicular cell hypertrophy and hyperplasia and goitrous enlargement.Goitrogens: These are substances ingestion of which interferes with
thyroid hormone synthesis. Goitrogenic substances include vegetables
which belong to Brassicaceae (Cruciferae) family such as cabbage,
cauliflower, Brussels sprouts, and turnips; and Cassava root which
contains a thiocyanate that inhibits iodide transport within the thyroid.
Consumption of this may worsen the concurrent iodine deficiency.
Box 2.14: Risk factors for malignancy.Solitary thyroid nodules in patients > 60 or < 30 years of age
Irradiation of the neck or face during infancy or teenage years
Symptoms of pain or pressure (especially a change in voice)
Male sex
Large nodules (>3 or 4 cm)
Growth of nodule


Fig. 2.10:  Algorithm for approach to goiter and its treatment modality.
(RAI: radioactive iodine therapy)
B. Sporadic goiter
Less frequent than endemic goiter
Age: Puberty or in young adult life
Sex: Female preponderance.
Causes: In most cases of sporadic goiter the cause is not known.
Clinical Features
Endemic goiter: Diffuse enlargement of the thyroid with euthyroid state
in the initial stage. This is called as simple goiter. But, later they may
develop hypothyroidism. In children and adults endemic goiter may be
present with features of hypothyroidism and mental retardation.Cretinism: Iodine deficiency may produce severe hormone-induced
physiological damage to fetus and newborn and cause cretinism. This is
characterized by stunting, deaf-mutism, malformed limbs, spastic motor
disorders, goiter, and mental impairment.Investigations (Fig. 2.10)
Serum inorganic iodide: Reduced
Urinary iodide excretion: Low < 50 µg/day.
Serum T4: Normal
Serum T3: May be normal or raised due to increased conversion of T4 to
T3
TSH: May be normal or mildly raised.
Treatment
Early stages: Replacement with iodine
Later may need suppressive therapy with T 4.
PARATHYROID DISORDERS
Calcium Homeostasis (Fig. 2.11)
Q. Write short note on calcium homeostasis and its importance.

Distribution of Calcium
Calcium weight is 400 mg/kg in infant and 950 mg/kg in adult.
About 99% of total body calcium in the bone.
Remaining 1% in intracellular fluid (ICF), extracellular fluid (ECF), and
cell membranes. It can be divided in three components: (1) 50% ionized,
(2) 40% bound to protein, and (3) 10% complex with anions (citrate,
phosphate).
Importance of Ionized Calcium
Ionized calcium (Ca++) is physiologically important because:
1. One of the major intracellular messengers.
Precise levels are necessary for muscle contraction (cardiac, skeletal).

Fig. 2.11: Calcium metabolism.
Responsible for exocytosis of secretory granules in neuronal synapses.
Serves as second messenger in many cells.
2. Necessary for blood clotting.
Blood Ca++ level: 8.5–10.2 mg/dL. Usually 10 mg/100 mL (so 500 mg total
in plasma = 0.5 g).

Regulation of Calcium Levels
It occurs in three different organs namely
1. Small intestine: Ingestion of Ca++ in food, taken up across the gut.
2. Kidney: Ca++ is filtered through the nephron, and can be excreted in the
urine.
3. Bone: Major storage site for Ca++.
Calcium cycling in bone tissue
Two processes that go on continuously and include bone formation and bone
resorption.
Calcium phosphate crystals are called ‘hydroxyapatite’. The surfaces of
crystals can exchange Ca++ and phosphate ions with extracellular fluid.
Osteoblasts: Synthesize a collagen matrix that holds calcium phosphate in
crystallized form. Once surrounded by bone, osteoblast becomes
osteocyte.Osteoclasts: They break down bone (removes Ca++ from bone). Change
local pH, causing Ca++ and phosphate to dissolve from crystals into
extracellular fluids.
Hormonal Regulators
1. Calcitonin (CT): Secreted from the C-cells in the thyroid gland.
Actions:
Lowers Ca++ in blood.
Promotes deposition of Ca++ into bone. It actually inhibits bone
resorption by osteoclasts.
Control of secretion: Increased plasma Ca++ stimulates C-cells to
synthesize and release CT.
2. Parathormone (PTH): Secreted from cells of the parathyroid glands
(chief cells).
Actions:
Increases Ca++ in the blood
Increases Ca++ resorption from the bone
–   Stimulates the osteoclasts

–   Increases the number of osteoclasts
Increases Ca++ resorption from the pre-urine filtrate in the nephron.
3. Vitamin D (1, 25 vitamin D3)
Actions: Vitamin D increases
a. Calcium absorption from intestine.
b. PO4 absorption from intestine.
c. Renal reabsorption of Ca and PO4.
d. Bone resorption from old bone and mineralize new bone (net
resorption).
Overall effect: Increase serum Ca and PO4.
Hyperparathyroidism
Q. Write short essay on clinical features, investigations and
management of primary hyperparathyroidism.
Classification and Causes of Hyperparathyroidism (Table 2.12)
Q. Write short essay on classification of hyperparathyroidism.
Table 2.12: Classification and causes.
Type Serum calcium Serum PTH Causes
Primary:  Autonomous
secretion of PTH by
parathyroidRaised Raised Single adenoma (90%),
multiple adenomata,
nodular hyperplasia
and carcinoma of
parathyroid
Secondary:
Parathyroid hyperplasia
with increased PTH
secretion in an attempt
to compensate for
prolonged
hypocalcemia.Low Raised Chronic renal failure,
malabsorption,
osteomalacia and
rickets.
Tertiary:  Adenoma
formation and
autonomous PTH
secretion. Occurring in
cases of secondary
hyperparathyroidismRaised Raised Chronic secondary
hyperparathyroidism
Post renal
transplantation.

Clinical Features of Hyperparathyroidism
Classical symptoms of primary hyperparathyroidism are described by
the adage ‘moans, bones, stones, abdominal groans’. However, nowadays
only few patients present in this way.
–   Moans: Psychiatric manifestations—lethargy, fatigue, depression,
memory loss, psychoses, neuroses, paranoia, confusion, stupor, coma
–   Bones: Arthritis, osteomalacia, osteitis
–   Stones: Renal stones, uremia, polidipsia, polyuria
–   Groans: Constipation, nausea, vomiting, peptic ulcers, indigestion,
pancreatitis
Disorder is most often (more than 70%) diagnosed by incidental finding o f
hypercalcemia on biochemical testing.
Nonspecific symptoms. About 50% of patients are asymptomatic while
others have nonspecific symptoms. These include: Anorexia, nausea,
vomiting, constipation, weakness, fatigue, lassitude, tiredness, generalized
aches, weight loss, pain, drowsiness, poor concentration, memory loss and
depression.Manifestations of hyperparathyroidism: Involve primarily the kidneys
and the skeletal system.
1. Renal manifestations: Due either to deposition of calcium in the renal
parenchyma or to recurrent nephrolithiasis.
Recurrent renal calculi  (usually composed of either calcium oxalate
or calcium phosphate).
Nephrocalcinosis: Deposition of calcium salts in the renal
parenchyma.
Polyuria and polydipsia.
Loss of renal function with uremia, hypokalemia, hyperuricemia,
hyperchloremic acidosis and dilute urine.
2. Skeletal manifestations
Bone pain, osteopenia, osteoporosis, fractures and deformity due to
osteitis fibrosa cystic (10–25% of patients)
Localized bone swelling/brown tumor (e.g. mandible).
3. Other manifestations

Hypertension is a common feature.
Calcification of cornea (observed by slit-lamp examination), arterial
walls and soft tissues of hand.
Peptic ulcers
Myopathy
4. A family history of hypercalcemia or primary hyperparathyroidism
secondary to a parathyroid adenoma raises the possibility of multiple
endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndrome. Features of multiple endocrine
neoplasia syndromes are presented in Box 2.15.
Box 2.15:  Features of multiple endocrine neoplasia syndromes.
MEN 1 (Wermer’s syndrome)
Parathyroid hyperplasia (very common)
Pancreatic tumors (benign or malignant)
–   Gastrinoma
–   Insulinoma
Glucagonoma, VIPoma (both rare)
Pituitary tumor
–   Growth hormone-secreting
–   Prolactin-secreting
–   ACTH-secretingOther tumors: Lipomas, carcinoids, adrenal and thyroid adenomas
MEN 2A (Sipple syndrome)
Medullary carcinoma of the thyroid
Pheochromocytoma (benign or malignant)
Parathyroid hyperplasia
MEN 2B
Medullary carcinoma of the thyroid
Pheochromocytoma
Mucosal neuromas, ganglioneuromas
Marfanoid habitus
Hyperparathyroidism (very rare)
Treatment
Treatment of hypercalcemia (discussed below)
Treatment of primary parathyroidism:
–   Adenoma: Surgical removal
–   Hyperplasia: Removal of all four parathyroid glands and transplantation of some of the excised
tissue to the forearm.
Treatment of secondary disease

Calcium supplements
Vitamin D
Treatment of tertiary disease
Phosphate binders
–   Amphojel, Basaljel
–   Tums
Investigations
Biochemical investigations: Estimation of several fasting serum calcium and
phosphate samples should be done.
Hallmark of primary hyperparathyroidism:
–   Hypercalcemia and hypophosphatemia with detectable or elevated
intact PTH levels during hypercalcemia. When this combination is
present in an asymptomatic patient then further investigation is usually
unnecessary.Established hypercalcemia in more than one serum measurement
accompanied by elevated immunoreactive PTH is characteristic (iPTH).
Correction of serum calcium concentrations: It should be corrected to
the prevailing serum albumin concentration. Calcium level is corrected for
low albumin levels by adding 0.8 mg/dL to the total serum calcium level
for every 1.0 g/dL by which the serum albumin concentration is lower
than 4 g/dL.May be associated with mild hyperchloremic acidosis.
Renal function tests.
Urine investigations
Hypercalciuria (>300 mg/24 hours): Observed in ~30% of patients.
Increased markers of bone resorption: These include urinary
pyridinoline, deoxypyridinoline and N-telopeptide of collagen.
ECG findings
Shortened QT interval.
Rarely cardiac arrhythmias.
Radiological abnormalities
Most sensitive and specific radiologic finding of osteitis fibrosa cystica  is
subperiosteal resorption of cortical bone, best seen in high-resolution

films of the phalanges.
A similar process in the skull  leads to a salt-and-pepper appearance.
Bone cysts or brown tumors may be evident as osteolytic lesions.
The other important skeletal consequence of hyperparathyroidism is
osteoporosis. Unlike other osteoporotic disorders, hyperparathyroidism
often results in the preferential loss of cortical bone.
Dental films may disclose loss of the lamina dura of the teeth, but this is a
nonspecific finding also seen in periodontal disease.
Nephrocalcinosis: Appear as scattered opacities within the renal outline.
Soft tissue calcification: For example, calcification of arterial wall.
Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) and CT scan: Reveal reduced
bone density.
Investigations for localization of the tumor: Parathyroid imaging is
generally indicated only for patients who have undergone previous
parathyroid surgery. Investigations to localize the tumor include:High-resolution ultrasonography, CT scanning and subtraction imaging
and scintigraphy with technetium 99 sestamibi.
Selective neck vein catheterization with PTH estimation.
Hypercalcemia
Treatment of hyperparathyroidsm is presented in Box 2.16.
Q. Write short essay/note on hypercalcemia.
Normal serum calcium level is 8–10 mg/dL (2.0–2.5 mmol/L) and normal
ionized calcium levels are 4–5.6 mg/dL (1–1.4 mmol/L).
Raised calcium level is known as hypercalcemia. Hypercalcemia is
considered as mild if the total serum calcium level is between 10.5 and 12
mg/dL (2.6–3 mmol/L) and severe when the level is above 14 mg/dL.Hypercalcemia is one of the most common biochemical abnormalities. It
is often detected incidentally during routine biochemical investigation in
asymptomatic patients. However, it can present with chronic symptoms
and occasionally as an acute emergency.Box 2.16:  Treatment of hyperparathyriodism.
PRIMARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM
Medical Management

1. Treatment of hypercalcemia (discussed below)
2. Bisphosphonates—alendronate
3. Calcimimetics—Cinacalcet (activate the calcium-sensing receptor in the parathyroid gland,
thereby inhibiting PTH secretion)
4. Estrogen- progesterone, raloxifene, denosumab
Indications for Surgery: Parathyroidectomy
1. Symptomatic patients (nephrolithiasis, symptomatic hypercalcemia)
2. Asymptomatic patients with
–   Serum calcium concentration of 1.0 mg/dL or more above the upper limit of normal.
–   Skeletal indications
–   Bone density at the hip, lumbar spine, or distal radius that is > 2.5 standard deviations below
peak bone mass (T-score <-2.5).
–   Previous asymptomatic vertebral fractures
–   Renal indications
♦   Estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) <60 mL/min.
♦   Twenty-four-hour urinary calcium >400 mg/day 
♦   Nephrolithiasis or nephrocalcinosis by radiograph, ultrasound, or CT.
–   Age <50 years
SECONDARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISMTreatment of chronic kidney disease (CKD)
Supplement calcium and vitamin D
TERTIARY HYPERPARATHYROIDISM
No specific treatment
Causes of Hypercalcemia (Table 2.13)
Q. Write short essay/note on causes of hypercalcemia.
Table 2.13: Causes of hypercalcemia.
Parathyroid hormone related with normal or
elevated PTH levels
Primary hyperparathyroidism (commonest) or
tertiary hyperparathyroidism
Lithium therapy—induced
hyperparathyroidism
Familial hypercalciuric hypercalcemiaVitamin D related with low PTH levels
Vitamin D intoxication: Iatrogenic or self-
administered excess
Granulomatous diseases (sarcoidosis,
tuberculosis, berylliosis)
Lymphoma
Idiopathic hypercalcemia of infancy
Malignancy related with low PTH levels
(second commonest cause)
Multiple myeloma
PTH related protein secretion: Tumors of lung
and kidney
Secondary deposits in bone: Breast carcinomaHigh bone turnover
Long-term immobilization
Hyperthyroidism
Drugs: For example, thiazide diuretics
Paget’s disease with immobilization

Production of osteoclastic factors by tumors
Associated with renal failure
Secondary hyperparathyroidism
Aluminum intoxicationExcessive calcium intake
Milk-alkali syndrome
Clinical Features
(refer clinical features of hyperparathyroidism above pages 55-6).
Q. Write short essay/note on the management of hypercalcemia.
Management
Treatment of acute hypercalcemia
Adequate rehydration  is essential, usually at least 4–6 L of 0.9% saline on day 1, and 3–4 L for
several days thereafter.
Intravenous bisphosphonate is the treatment of choice for hypercalcemia of malignancy or of
undiagnosed cause. Pamidronate is preferred (15–60 mg as an intravenous infusion in 0.9% saline
or dextrose over 2–8 hours).
Calcitonin  (200 units IV 6-hourly)
Prednisolone (30–60 mg daily) is effective in few instances (e.g. in myeloma, sarcoidosis and
vitamin D excess).
Oral phosphate (sodium cellulose phosphate) 5 g three times daily.
General measures
Diuretics after correction of volume: For example, furosemide 40–160 mg/day or ethacrynic
acid 50–200 mg/day. Forced diuresis with 4–6 L of intravenous fluid/day and furosemide 2 hourly.
Sodium, potassium and magnesium should be supplemented.
Saline decreases concomitant reabsorption of sodium and calcium in both the proximal and distal
renal tubules, and enhances urinary excretion of calcium.Mithramycin 10–25 µg/kg intravenously over 6 hours for 3–8 days.
Special therapies in few selected cases
Malignancy induced hypercalcemia: Indomethacin 25 mg 6 hourly orally in few cases.
Hemodialysis with a low-calcium bath.
Hypoparathyroidism
Q. Write short note on causes and general management of
hypoparathyroidism.
Deficient secretion of PTH which manifests itself biochemically by
Hypocalcemia
Hyperphosphatemia
Diminished or absent circulating iPTH and

Clinically the symptoms of neuromuscular hyperactivity.
Causes of Hypoparathyroidism
Surgical hypoparathyroidism: Commonest. It may be due to the removal
of the parathyroid glands or due to interruption of blood supply to the
parathyroid glands.
Idiopathic hypoparathyroidism
–   Occurs at an early age (genetic origin) with autosomal recessive mode
of transmission ‘multiple endocrine deficiency –autoimmune-
candidiasis (MEDAC) syndrome’
–   ‘Juvenile familial endocrinopathy’—‘Hypoparathyroidism—Addison’s
disease—mucocutaneous candidiasis (HAM) syndrome’
–   Circulating antibodies for the parathyroid glands and the adrenals are
frequently present.
–   Other associated disease: Pernicious anemia, ovarian failure,
autoimmune thyroiditis, diabetes mellitus.
Infantile hypoparathyroidism.
Pseudohypoparathyroidism (resistance to PTH).
Functional hypoparathyroidism: In patients who has chronic
hypomagnesemia of various causes. Magnesium is necessary for the PTH
release from the glands and also for the peripheral action of the PTH.DiGeorge syndrome  is a familial condition where the
hypoparathyroidism is associated with intellectual impairment, cataracts
and calcified basal ganglia, and occasionally with specific autoimmune
disease.
Dental manifestation: Abnormal enamel formation with delayed or absent
dental eruption and defective dental root formation.
Malabsorption syndrome: Presumably secondary to decreased calcium
level and may lead to steatorrhea with long standing untreated disease.
Chronic hypoparathyroidism: Lethargy, weakness, fatigue, thin and patchy
hair, brittle nails, dry and scaly skin, personality changes, cataracts,
permanent brain damage.
Other clinical manifestation: Posterior lenticular cataract.
Treatment of hypoparathyroidism

During acute phase: Calcium is given intravenously as for tetany (refer page 59).
Substitution therapy:  1-α-hydroxycholecalciferol (alfacalcidol) or 1, 25 dihydroxycholecalciferol
(calcitriol) at a dose of 0.25–2 µg/day.
Tetany
It is characterized by muscle spasms due to increased excitability of
peripheral nerves.
Causes of Tetany (Table 2.14)
Q. Write short essay/note on causes of tetany/ hypocalcemia.
Tetany is caused due to hypocalcemia or alkalosis or hypomagnesemia.
Table 2.14: Causes of tetany.
Due to hypocalcemia
Increased phosphate levels
Chronic renal failure (common)
Phosphate therapyVitamin D deficiency
Osteomalacia/rickets
Vitamin D resistance
Hypoparathyroidism
Surgical—after neck exploration
(thyroidectomy, parathyroidectomy—
common)
Congenital deficiency (DiGeorge syndrome)
Idiopathic hypoparathyroidism (rare)
Severe hypomagnesemiaOthers
Acute pancreatitis (quite common)
Citrated blood in massive transfusion (not
uncommon)
Low plasma albumin, e.g. malnutrition,
chronic liver disease
Malabsorption, e.g. celiac disease
Resistance to PTH
PseudohypoparathyroidismDrugs
Calcitonin
Bisphosphonates
Due to alkalosis
Repeated vomiting of gastric juice
Excessive intake of oral alkaliHyperventilation, e.g. hysteria
Primary hyperaldosteronism
Due to hypomagnesemia
Clinical Features
Q. Write short essay/note on clinical features of tetany.
Neuromuscular
In children: Characteristic triad of carpopedal spasm, stridor and

convulsions. Carpal spasm is characterized by flexion of the
metacarpophalangeal joints, extension of the interphalangeal joints and
opposition of the thumb (main d’accoucheur).
In adults: Tingling in the hands, feet and around the mouth (circumoral
paresthesia).
Latent tetany: In this signs of overt tetany are lacking. Tests for
recognizing latent tetani are:
Q. Write short note on Chvostek’s sign and Trousseau’s sign.
1. Chvostek’s sign: It is elicited by tapping the skin over the facial
nerve in front of the external auditory meatus. It causes an ipsilateral
contraction of the facial muscles, but up to 10% of population has a
positive test.
2. Trousseau’s sign: Inflate BP cuff on arm to 20 mm Hg > systolic BP
for 3–5 min and watch for carpopedal spasm (flexion at the wrist,
flexion at the metatarsophalangeal (MP) joints, extension of the
interphalangeal (IP) joints adduction thumbs/fingers).
Cardiac manifestation: Prolonged QT interval in the ECG, resistance to
digitalis, hypotension, refractory heart failure with cardiomegaly can occur
(Fig. 2.12).Q. Write short essay/note on management of tetany.
Treatment
Control of tetany
Calcium gluconate:  Slow intravenous (over 10 min) injection of 20 mL of 10% solution of
calcium gluconate is rapidly effective in controlling the tetany.
Magnesium:  If tetany is not relieved by above treatment, administration of magnesium may be
necessary.
Correction of alkalosis
If alkalosis is due to persistent vomiting, treat with intravenous isotonic saline and potassium.
In alkalosis is due to alkali excess, it should be withdrawn. If needed, ammonium chloride 2 g 4
hourly orally will control tetany.
Hysterical hyperventilation:  It may be controlled by rebreathing expired air from a suitable bag
or inhalation of 5% carbon dioxide in oxygen.

Fig. 2.12:  ECG changes in hypo/hypercalcemia.
Pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP)
PHP is an inherited disorder of target-organ unresponsiveness to PTH.
It mimics hormone-deficient forms of hypoparathyroidism, with
hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia, but the PTH level is elevated.
Clinical Features
PHP type IB  is a disorder of isolated resistance to PTH, which presents with
the biochemical features of hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia and secondary
hyperparathyroidism.
PHP type IA has, in addition to these biochemical features, a characteristic
somatic phenotype known as Albright’s hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO)
(Figs. 2.13A to C). This consists of short stature, round face, short neck,
brachydactyly, shortened metatarsals, subcutaneous ossifications and mental
retardation. Because of shortening of the metacarpal bones—most often the
fourth and fifth metacarpals—affected digits have a dimple, instead of a
knuckle, when a fist is made.
Certain individuals in families with PHP inherit the somatic phenotype of
AHO without any disorder of calcium metabolism; this state is called
pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism or PPHP.

Figs. 2.13A to C: Albright’s hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO): (A) Brachydactyly; (B) Shortened
metatarsals; (C) X-ray of knee region.
ADRENAL GLAND DISORDERS
Hormones Secreted by the Adrenal Gland (Table 2.15)
Q. Write short note on hormones secreted by the adrenal gland.
Table 2.15: Various hormones secreted by adrenal gland.
Site Category Hormone produced
Adrenal cortex   
Zona glomerulosa Mineralocorticoid Aldosterone
Zona fasciculata Glucocorticoid Cortisol
Zona reticularis Androgens Dehydroepiandrosterone
sulfate
Dehydroepiandrosterone
Androstenedione
Adrenal medulla Catecholamines Adrenaline
Noradrenaline
Cushing’s Syndrome
Q. Write short essay on causes, clinical features, investigations and
management of Cushing’s syndrome.
Cushing’s syndrome is the term used to describe the clinical state of
increased free circulating glucocorticoid.
It occurs most often following the therapeutic administration of synthetic
steroids or ACTH.

Q. Write short essay on Cushing’s disease.
Cushing’s disease results from corticosteroid excess due to pituitary
dependent bilateral adrenal hyperplasia. The pituitary tumors
producing Cushing’s disease are usually microadenomas (<10 mm in size)
which usually do not cause symptoms by local mass effect. It usually
develops sporadically but may be a component of multiple endocrine
neoplasia type 1.All the spontaneous forms of the syndrome are rare.
Causes of Cushing’s Syndrome (Table 2.16)
Common causes of ectopic ACTH secretion (Box 2.17 )
A cushingoid appearance can be caused by excess alcohol consumption
(pseudo-Cushing’s syndrome)—the pathophysiology is poorly understood.
Box 2.17:  Common causes of ectopic ACTH secretion.
Type of tumor Percentage
Small cell carcinoma of the lung 50%
Endocrine tumors of foregut origin
Thymic carcinoid
Pancreatic islet cell tumor
Medullary carcinoma thyroid
Bronchial carcinoid35%
Pheochromocytoma 5%
Ovarian tumors 2%
Clinical Features (Figs. 2.14, 2.15, Table 2.17 and Box 2.18)
Q. Write short essay on major signs of Cushing’s syndrome.
Systemic fungal infections and tinea versicolor may develop in untreated
patients.
Higher risk of coronary artery disease and venous thrombosis.
The predominant clinical features of Cushing’s syndrome are those of
glucocorticoid excess.

Fig. 2.14: Clinical features of Cushing’s syndrome.

Figs. 2.15A to D: Features of Cushing’s syndrome: (A) Cushing’s habitus, obesity and moon
facies; (B) Buffalo hump;(C and D) Pigmented striae.
Table 2.16: Causes of Cushing’s syndrome.
ACTH-dependent causes ACTH-independent causes 25%
ACTH-secreting pituitary tumor (Cushing’s
disease)— 65%
Pituitary CRH-secreting neoplasm (ectopic
CRP syndrome)
Nonpituitary ACTH-secreting neoplasm
(ectopic ACTH syndrome)—10%Adrenal adenoma
Adrenal carcinoma
Micronodular adrenal disease
McCune-Albright syndrome
Massive macronodular adrenal disease
Iatrogenic (use of corticosteroids)
Table 2.17: Clinical features of Cushing’s syndrome (% prevalence).

Clinical feature Prevalence Cause
General
Weight gain/obesity 90% Accumulation of fat and
retention of fluid
Central obesity (‘lemon on match-stick’)  Centripetal distribution of
fat
Buffalo hump  Fat accumulation at the
lower part of neck
Moon face  Rounded plethoric
appearance
Hypertension 85% Increase in plasma volume
and sodium retention
Skin
Hirsutism 70–75% Increased secretion of
adrenal androgen
Plethoric appearance  Thinning of the skin
Purplish striae over abdomen, buttocks and
thighs Thinning of the skin from
collagen breakdown
Bruising  Thinning of blood vessels
from collagen breakdown
Musculoskeletal
Back pain 80% Osteopenia, osteoporosis
and vertebral compression
fractures
Muscle weakness 65% Proximal myopathy and
hypokalemia. Loss of
protein in muscle
Gonadal dysfunction
Menstrual disorders (oligomenorrhea,
amenorrhea), decreased libido and impotence70–85% Gonadal dysfunction
Neuropsychiatric
Emotional lability, depression, euphoria,
psychosis, irritability85%  
Metabolic
Glucose intolerance 75% Metabolic abnormalities
Diabetes 20%
Hyperlipidemia 70%
Polyuria 30%
Kidney stones 15%Skin pigmentation occurs only with ACTH-dependent causes.

Impaired glucose tolerance or frank diabetes is common, especially in the
ectopic ACTH syndrome.
Hypokalemia due to the mineralocorticoid activity of cortisol is common
with ectopic ACTH secretion.
Proximal muscle weakness, sleep apnea, osteoprosis, hypertension are
common features of the disease.
Features of Cushing’s syndrome due to ectopic ACTH secretion
Impaired glucose tolerance due to gluconeogenesis.
Hypokalemic alkalosis due to the mineralocorticoid activity of cortisol.
Skin pigmentation.
Investigations in Cushing’s Syndrome (Fig. 2.16)
Box 2.18: Mnemonic for Cushing’s syndrome.
C Central obesity, C ollagen fiber weakness, Comedones (acne)
U Urinary free cortisol increased along with glucose
S Striae, S uppressed immunity
H Hypercortisolism, H ypertension, H yperglycemia,
Hypercholesterolemia
I Iatrogenic due to administration of corticosteroids
N Non-iatrogenic, N eoplasms
G Glucose intolerance, Growth retardation
There are two phases of the investigation:
1. Confirmation of the presence or absence of Cushing’s syndrome.
2. Differential diagnosis of its cause (e.g. pituitary, adrenal or ectopic).
Most obese, hirsute, hypertensive patients do not have Cushing’s
syndrome
Some cases of mild Cushing’s have relatively subtle clinical signs.
Confirmation rests on demonstrating inappropriate cortisol secretion,
not suppressed by exogenous glucocorticoids
Random cortisol measurements are of no value.

Confirmatory tests to establish the presence of Cushing’s
syndrome
48-hour low-dose dexamethasone test:  Normal individuals suppress
plasma cortisol to <50 nmol/L. Patients with Cushing’s syndrome fail to
show complete suppression of plasma cortisol levels. This test is highly
sensitive (>97%).
Fig. 2.16: Algorithim of Cushing's syndrome.
24-hour urinary free cortisol measurements: This is simple, but less
reliable—repeatedly normal values (corrected for body mass) render the
diagnosis most unlikely, but some patients with Cushing’s have normal
values on some collections (approximately 10%).Plasma cortisol levels: In normal individuals, measurement of plasma
cortisol levels at 8 AM and 12 midnight will show the lowest levels at
midnight. This circadian rhythm is lost in Cushing’s syndrome and the
cortisol levels remain the same throughout the day. A midnight level
below 1.8 µg/dL is normal, and has a high sensitivity for excluding
Cushing’s syndrome. However, it has a low specificity.Overnight dexamethasone suppression test
Low dose dexamethasone suppression test
Late-night salivary cortisol: It may be used as a screening test for
Cushing’s syndrome. Concentration of cortisol in saliva is highly

correlated with free plasma cortisol, irrespective of salivary flow rates and
stable at room temperature for 1 week.
Tests that establish the cause of Cushing’s syndrome
Plasma ACTH level at 8 AM (Table 2.18)
High-dose dexamethasone suppression test (Table 2.19)
Plasma potassium levels
–   Normal in pituitary dependent disease and tumors of adrenal gland.
–   Low (3.5 mmol/L) in ectopic ACTH syndrome.
ACTH/cortisol response to corticotrophin-releasing factor (CRF).
–   Increased in pituitary dependent disease
–   Unchanged in ectopic ACTH syndrome and tumors of adrenal gland
Bilateral inferior petrosal sinus sampling for ACTH before and after
CRF stimulation.
Other investigations
Biochemical investigations: Blood glucose, cholesterol and LDL may be
raised.
Radiological investigations
–   Plain radiograph  of the skull. Radiograph of chest to detect lung
cancer.
–   CT scan  of anterior mediastinum, upper abdomen and pancreas to rule
out tumors.
–   CT/MRI head and MRI abdomen.
Table 2.18: Interpretation of plasma ACTH level at 8 AM.
Level of plasma ACTH Probable source of ACTH as
Normal levels (10–80 ng/L) Pituitary
Intermediate values (80–300 ng/L) Pituitary dependent disease or ectopic ACTH
syndrome
Very high levels (>300 ng/L) Ectopic ACTH syndrome
Low ACTH (<10 ng/L) Adrenal tumors, macronodular adrenal
hyperplasia or exogenous steroid administration
Table 2.19: Tests in Cushing’s syndrome.

Test and protocol Measure Normal test result or
positive suppressionUse and explanation
Dexamethasone (for Cushing’s)
Overnight
Take 1 mg on going to
bed at 23:00 hPlasma cortisol at
09:00 h next morningPlasma cortisol <100
nmol/LOutpatient screening
test. Some ‘false
positives’
‘Low-dose’
0.5 mg 6-hourly Eight
doses from 09:00 h on
day 0Plasma cortisol at
09:00 h on days 0 and
+2Plasma cortisol < 50
nmol/L on second
sampleFor diagnosis of
Cushing’s syndrome
‘High-dose’ used in differential diagnosis
2 mg 6-hourly Eight
doses from 09:00 h on
day 0Plasma cortisol at
09:00 h on days 0 and
+2Plasma cortisol on day
+2 less than 50% of
that on day 0 suggests
pituitary-dependent
diseaseDifferential diagnosis
of Cushing’s syndrome
Pituitary-dependent
disease suppresses in
about 90% of cases
Management
1. Adrenal tumors
–   Surgical resection
♦   Adrenal adenomas:  Surgical removal. Postoperatively, prednisolone is given as a
replacement therapy till the contralateral adrenal, hypothalamus and pituitary recovers.
♦   Adrenal carcinomas:  Surgical resection, irradiation of tumor bed and administration of
adrenolytic drug (mitotane).
–   Medical adrenalectomy:  Medications that inhibit steroidogenesis include ketoconazole,
metyrapone, mitotane, aminoglutethimide and octeotide
2. Cushing’s disease
–   Treatment of choice:  Trans-sphenoidal removal of the tumor.
–   Radiotherapy and radiosurgery for recurrent or residual ACTH- secreting tumors. External
pituitary irradiation alone is slow acting and useful in only 50–60% of cases.
–   Medical therapy to reduce ACTH  (e.g. bromocriptine): Rarely effective
–   Bilateral adrenalectomy:
♦  Done if the diagnosis is uncertain. Followed by pituitary irradiation with Yttrium-90
implantation to prevent the development of Nelson’s syndrome.
♦  Prednisolone and fludrocortisones should be given post-operatively for a variable length of
time.
3. Ectopic ACTH syndrome
–   Surgical removal of benign tumors (e.g. bronchial carcinoid).
–   Radiotherapy and chemotherapy: For malignant tumors.Recurrent tumors may be treated with metyrapone or aminoglutethimide.
Box 2.19: Medical therapy of hypercortisolism.

INDICATIONS
Management of hypercortisolism when surgery is contraindicated
Control of hypercortisolism in preparation for surgery or awaiting radiation
Persistence or recurrence of hypercortisolism after surgery
Treatment of occult ectopic ACTH syndrome
MEDICAL THERAPY
Adrenal Enzyme Inhibitors
Oral Drugs
Ketoconazole: 200–400 mg thrice daily
Metyrapone: 600–4500 mg/day
Intravenous Etomidate
Adrenolytic Agents
Mitotane 0.5–3 g/day
Other Agents
Drugs that Target Pituitary
Cabergoline
Pasireotide (somatostatin analog)
Glucocorticoid-Receptor Antagonists (mifepristone)
Medical therapy of hypercortisolism is mentioned in Box 2.19.
Nelson’s Syndrome
Q. Write short note on Nelson’s syndrome.
Nelson’s syndrome is increased pigmentation  (because of high levels o f
ACTH) associated with an enlarging pituitary tumor post- bilateral
adrenalectomy.
It occurs in about 20% of cases after bilateral adrenalectomy for Cushing’s
disease.
The syndrome is rare now that adrenalectomy is an uncommon primary
treatment, and its incidence may be reduced by pituitary radiotherapy soon
after adrenalectomy.Treatment: Nelson’s adenoma may be treated by pituitary surgery and/or
radiotherapy.
Hyperaldosteronism
Q. Write short essay on:
Etiology, clinical features, diagnosis and management of primary
hyperaldosteronism.

Conn’s syndrome.
Excessive production of the aldosterone hormone is called
hyperaldosteronism.
Classification
Primary hyperaldosteronism: Develops due to an abnormality in the
zona glomerulosa of the adrenal gland.
Secondary hyperaldosteronism: Develops due to the stimulation of
aldosterone secretion by angiotensin II following activation of renin-
angiotensin system.
Primary HyperaldosteronismEtiology
Adrenal adenoma (Conn’s syndrome)
Bilateral hyperplasia of zona glomerulosa
Idiopathic
ACTH dependent (glucocorticoid-responsive or dexamethasone-
suppressible): This is characterized by secretion of aldosterone under
ACTH control. Therefore, treatment consists of administration of
glucocorticoids to suppress release of ACTH.
Consequences: Excess secretion of aldosterone results in sodium retention,
potassium loss and metabolic alkalosis.
Clinical featuresHypertension: Most important clinical consequence of
hyperaldosteronism
Tetany due to metabolic alkalosis
Muscle weakness due to hypokalemia.
Polyuria and polydipsia due to nephrogenic DI.
Investigations
Investigation for diagnosis
Hypokalemia: However, normal serum potassium does not exclude the
diagnosis.
Urinary potassium loss: Levels >30 mEq/day during hypokalemia are

inappropriate
Plasma aldosterone concentration (PAC):  Elevated (>15 ng/dL) and is
not suppressed with 0.9% saline infusion (2 L over 4 hours) or
flurocortisone administration.
Suppressed plasma renin activity (PRA) or immunoreactivity.
PAC: PRA ratio (Plasma aldosterone: renin ratio (ARR)) : Used as the
screening test for primary hyperaldosteronism. A level above 20 is
abnormal when plasma aldosterone is measured in ng/dL and PRA is
measured in ng/mL/min.Confirmatory aldosterone suppression test
Others
–   Oral salt loading test:  Suppression of aldosterone below 8.5 ng/dL
rules out primary hyperaldosteronism.
–   Saline infusion test
–   Oral captopril test: In primary hyperaldosteronism, this test does not
produce any significant decrease in PAC.
Investigation for differential diagnosis
CT/MRI scanning: To detect adenoma and hyperplasia. Scanning of the
adrenal with selenium-75 cholesterol to detect an adenoma.
Adrenal vein catheterization: To detect hypersecretion of aldosterone.
–   Unilateral hypersecretion in adenoma.
–   Bilateral hypersecretion in hyperplasia.
Dexamethasone suppression .
–   Lowers plasma aldosterone transiently in adenoma.
–   Prolonged suppression in glucocorticoid sensitive hyperaldosteronism.
Measurement of 18-OH-cortisol levels.
–   Very high levels observed in adenomas and glucocorticoid-responsive
hyperplasia.
–   Slightly raised in idiopathic hyperplasia.
Management of primary hyperaldosteronism
Potassium (K+) supplementation
Definitive treatment: Adrenalectomy, bilateral if multiple tumors are present.
Aldosterone antagonists:  Spironolactone and eplerenone are useful in patients where surgery

cannot be performed. High dose of spironolactone (up to 400 mg/day) may be required. A few
patients may develop gynecomastia with spironolactone and the incidence is lower with
eplerenone. Amiloride (10–40 mg/day) may also be tried.
Box 2.20: Causes of secondary hyperaldosteronism.
Physiological:
Salt depletion from inadequate intake or excessive loss through kidney or gastrointestinal tract
Pregnancy (due to estrogen-induced increases in plasma renin substrate)
Pathological:
Inadequate renal perfusion: Excessive diuretic therapy, nephrotic syndrome, liver failure,
congestive cardiac failure, Bartter’s syndrome accelerated or malignant phase of hypertension,
severe renal artery stenosisRenin-secreting renal tumor (very rare)
Secondary Hyperaldosteronism
Q. Write short note on secondary hyperaldosteronism.
Secondary hyperaldosteronism is secondary to an extra-adrenal cause. The
aldosterone release occurs in response to activation of the renin-angiotensin
system. It is characterized by increased levels of plasma renin that stimulates
the zona glomerulosa.
Causes of secondary hyperaldosteronism (Box 2.20)
Adrenocortical Insufficiency
Classification and Causes (Box 2.21)
Q. Write a short essay/note on classification and causes of
adrenocortical insufficiency.
Q. Write short essay/note on etiology and clinical features of Addison’s
disease.
Adrenocortical insufficiency, or hypofunction, may be due to primary adrenal
disease (primary hypoadrenalism) or decreased stimulation of the adrenals
due to a deficiency of ACTH (secondary hypoadrenalism).
Addison’s Disease
Addison’s disease or chronic adrenocortical insufficiency is an uncommon
disorder resulting from progressive destruction of the entire adrenal cortex.

Clinical features of Addison’s disease (Table 2.20 and Figs. 2.17A and B)
Q. Write a short essay/note on major clinical signs of Addison’s disease.
Fatigue and weight loss are the most prominent symptoms.
Clinical features are produce due to the deficiency of glucocorticoid,
mineralocorticoid and androgen as well as excess of ACTH.
Primary adrenal failure may present
–   Acute with hypotension and acute circulatory failure (Addisonian
crisis); or
–   Chronic with vague features of ill health, sometimes including
gastrointestinal symptoms, features suggestive of postural hypotension,
and salt craving.
Skin pigmentation is nearly always present in primary adrenal
insufficiency (but not in secondary).
Cardinal features of Addison’s disease: Hypotension, pigmentation and
previous history of acute adrenal crisis following stress, or slow recovery
from illness.Other autoimmune diseases associated with Addison’s disease:
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, primary atrophic hypothyroidism, pernicious
anemia, type 1 diabetes mellitus, primary ovarian failure and
hypoparathyroidism.Type II polyglandular autoimmune syndrome  is characterized by the
association of two or more of the above endocrinopathies.
Type I polyglandular autoimmune syndrome is the combination of
adrenal insufficiency, hypoparathyroidism and chronic mucocutaneous
candidasis.Type II polyglandular autoimmune syndrome/Schmidt syndrome is
the association of Addison’s disease and Hashimoto’s thyroiditis.
Box 2.21: Causes of adrenocortical insufficiency.
Primary adrenocortical insufficiency (adrenal causes)
Autoimmune adrenal insufficiency
Metastatic malignancy (Lung, breast, stomach carcinomas) or lymphoma
Adrenal hemorrhage
–   Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome
–   Anticoagulation therapy

Infectious: Tuberculosis , CMV, fungi (histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis), HIV
Adrenal infarction: APLA, SLE
Adrenoleukodystrophy
Infiltrative disorders: Amyloidosis, hemochromatosis, sarcoidosis
Bilateral adrenalectomy
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Familial glucocorticoid deficiency and hypoplasia
Drugs: Ketoconazole, metyrapone, aminoglutethimide, trilostane, mitotane, etomidate, rifampin,
cyproterone acetate
Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome 1 and 2
Kearns-Sayre syndrome
Secondary adrenocortical insufficiency (inadequate ACTH)
Exogenous glucocorticoid therapy
Hypopituitarism: Selective removal Pituitary
Pituitary apoplexy
Granulomatous disease of pituitary (tuberculosis, sarcoidosis, eosinophilic granuloma)
Secondary tumor deposits in pituitary (breast, bronchus)
Postpartum pituitary infarction (Sheehan’s syndrome)
Pituitary irradiation
Box 2.22: Three step process in the investigation of adrenocortical
insufficiency.
1. Confirm adrenal insufficiency by demonstrating inappropriately low cortisol secretion
2. Determine whether the cortisol deficiency is primary or central AI
3. Determine the cause of the underlying disorder
Investigations
Q. Write a short essay/note on biochemical abnormality in Addison’s
disease.
Box 2.22 lists the 3 step process in the investigation of adrenocortical
insufficiency
Table 2.20: Clinical features of adrenocortical insufficiency.
Glucocorticoid
deficiencyMineralocorticoid
deficiencyAdrenal androgen
deficiencyACTH excess
Fasting hypoglycemia Hypotension Decreased axillary hair
in femalesPigmentation of
exposed areas, pressure
areas like elbows,
knees and knuckles,
palmar creases, mucousIncreased insulin
sensitivityDizziness Decreased pubic hair in
females

Muscle weakness Salt craving Loss of libido in
femalesmembranes,
conjunctive and
recently acquired scars,
perineum, axillae and
areolae of breasts [due
to increased production
of pro-
opiomelanocortin
(POMC), that is
cleaved into
adernocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH) and
melanocyte-stimulating
hormone (MSH)]Morning headache Weight loss Asymptomatic-during
prepuberty
Increased production of
POMC → increased
melaninAnorexia  
Increased
pigmentation: palmar
creases, gingival
border, axillaElectrolyte anomalies
(hyponatremia,
hyperkalemia,
metabolic acidosis) 
Fatigue, malaise,
weakness, weight loss,
anorexia, nausea,
vomiting, diarrhea or
constipation, postural
hypotension   
Figs. 2.17A and B:  (A) Pigmentation of palms; (B) Oral pigmentation in Addison’s disease.
08:00 AM cortisol level
–   Levels less than 3 μg/dL is suggestive of AI
–   Levels >11 μg/dL exclude AI
–   Random cortisol in ill patient→20 μg/dL reassuring.
Plasma ACTH level

–   Elevated in adrenal insufficiency.
ACTH stimulation test: There is failure of rise in plasma cortisol level
following the administration of 250 μg of synthetic ACTH.
–   Low dose (1 μg) test
♦   Baseline and 30 minute cortisol levels
♦   More physiological ACTH level/stimulation
♦   Useful in central AI
♦   Useful for assessing recovery after chronic steroid treatment.
–   High dose (250 μg) test
♦   Baseline, 30 and 60 minute levels
♦   Stronger stimulation than 1 μg test.Other investigations:
–   PRA is high and plasma aldosterone levels are low or normal.
–   Radiograph:
♦   Tuberculous adrenalitis: Chest radiograph may show evidences of
pulmonary tuberculosis
♦   Plain radiograph of abdomen, CT scan and MRI scan may show
calcification in the adrenal gland.
Adrenal autoantibodies: ACA—adrenal cortex antibody and anti-21-
OH-hydroxylase antibody
Elevated blood urea, hyponatremia and hyperkalemia.
Blood sugar: Low levels.
Peripheral blood: Mild anemia, mild eosinophilia.
Central AI: Evaluate for secretion of other pituitary hormones.
Management
Primary adrenal insufficiency:
Acute treatment:
–   Normal saline for volume resuscitation
–   Look for/treat hypoglycemia by 25% dextrose
–   Steroids:
♦   Loading dose: 50–100 mg/m2 hydrocortisone IV/IM
♦   Continue hydrocortisone with 50–100 mg/m2/day, divided 6th or 8th hourly
♦   Long-term treatment:
◊   Daily glucocorticoid replacement (hydrocortisone):10–15 mg/m2/day in divided

doses.
◊   Daily mineralocorticoid replacement: Fludrocortisone 0.05–0.2 mg daily
Table 2.21: Relative steroid potencies.
Type of steroid Glucocorticoid
(GC)Mineralocorticoid
Hydrocortisone 1 ++
Prednisone/Prednisolone 3 to 5 +
Methylprednisolone 5 to 6 0
Dexamethasone 25 to 50 0
Fludrocortisone 15 to 20 +++++
Relative steroid potencies (Table 2.21)
Stress conditions
–   Primary goal is to avoid serious consequences of an adrenal crisis → always wear
identification
–   Illness:
♦   Minor stress (e.g. sore throat, rhinorrhea, T (temperature) < 38°C)→ may not require
increase in dose
♦   Moderate stress (e.g. severe URTI) → double the glucocorticoid (GC) replacement dose
♦   Major stress (e.g. T > 38°C and/or vomiting), three to four times the GC replacement dose.
–   Surgery:
♦   During general anesthesia, +/- surgery, the GC requirements increases greatly
♦   Dose equivalent to 100 to 150 mg hydrocortisone for major surgical procedures in divided
doses.
♦   Stress dosing is generally continued until the patient can tolerate oral intake, is afebrile, and
is hemodynamically stableTuberculous adrenalitis causing Addison’s disease is treated with antituberculous chemotherapy.
Acute Adrenal Crisis
Q. Write short note on acute adrenal crisis.
Acute adrenal crisis is a state of acute adrenocortical insufficiency and occurs
in patients with Addison’s disease who are exposed to the stress of infection,
trauma, surgery, or dehydration due to salt deprivation, vomiting, or diarrhea.
Other causes: Acute adrenal crisis can also develop after
Bilateral adrenal infarction
Bilateral adrenal hemorrhage: Adrenal hemorrhage and often death may

occur following meningococcemia (Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome).
It is rare with secondary adrenal insufficiency.
Clinical Features
Major manifestations:
–   Shock, but may present with non-specific symptoms such as weakness,
fatigue, lethargy, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain,
confusion or coma.
–   Abdominal tenderness and fever
Crisis in patients with long-standing adrenal insufficiency: Show
features of chronic adrenal insufficiency and may show hyperpigmentation
(due to chronic ACTH hypersecretion) weight loss, serum electrolyte
abnormalities.Lab findings that suggest the diagnosis of acute adrenal crisis:
hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, lymphocytosis, eosinophilia, and
hypoglycemia.
Management
Start therapy as soon as acute adrenal crisis is suspected
Correction of hypovolemia and sodium depletion with normal saline
Infuse 5% dextrose solution if there is hypoglycemia. Administer hydrocortisone (100 mg IV
bolus) OR dexamethasone (4 mg IV bolus)
Administer hydrocortisone at the dose of 100 mg 6 hourly. Taper it over 26–48 hours to a
maintenance dose once the underlying stress resolves
Treat the precipitating cause.
Equivalent Doses of Glucocorticoids (Table 2.22)
Compared to hydrocortisone, prednisolone has only 25% of
mineralocorticoid activity (Table 2.23).
Both dexamethasone and betamethasone have negligible mineralocorticoid
activity.
Table 2.22: Equivalent doses of glucocorticoids (anti-inflammatory
potency).
Hydrocortisone
(cortisol)20 mg Methylprednisolone 4 mg
Cortisone acetate 25 mg Betamethasone 0.75 mg

Prednisolone 5 mg Dexamethasone 0.75 mg
Role of Steroid Therapy
Common Indication and Contraindications of Steroids (Table
2.23)
Q. Write short note on the use and abuse of steroids/the present role of
steroid therapy.
Table 2.23: Common indication and contraindications of steroids.
Common indication of steroids Common contraindications of steroids
Bronchial asthma
Raised intracranial tension
Cerebral edema
Connective tissue diseases (e.g. rheumatoid
arthritis, SLE)
Nephrotic syndrome
Adrenal insufficiency
Shock, septicemia
Leukemia, lymphoma, as an adjunct in
chemotherapy for malignancies
Carditis
Demyelinating diseases
Tuberculosis of pericardium and tuberculous
meningitisActive tuberculosis
Peptic ulcer
Bleeding tendencies
Diabetes
Uncontrolled hypertension
Active infection
Transplant rejection, GVH (graft versus host
disease), bone marrow transplantationTransplant rejection, GVH (graft versus host
disease), bone marrow transplantation
Psoriasis, inflammatory bowel disease Psoriasis, inflammatory bowel disease
Eye conditions: Scleritis, chorioretinitis Eye conditions: Scleritis, chorioretinitis
Transplant rejection, GVH (graft versus host
disease), bone marrow transplantationTransplant rejection, GVH (graft versus host
disease), bone marrow transplantation
Psoriasis, inflammatory bowel disease Psoriasis, inflammatory bowel disease
Eye conditions: Scleritis, chorioretinitis Eye conditions: Scleritis, chorioretinitis
Side Effects of Corticosteroids Therapy (Table 2.24)
Q. Write short note on the complications of corticosteroid therapy.

Table 2.24: Adverse effects of glucocorticoids.
Immune system
Increased susceptibility to infections, re-
activation of latent tuberculosis
Lymphopenia
Suppression of inflammation impaired wound
healing
Suppression of delayed hypersensitivity
reactionBones
Osteoporosis
Avascular necrosis
Bone pains
Fracture
GIT
Gastric erosions, peptic ulceration, masked
perforation, hemorrhage from stomach and
duodenum.PancreatitisMuscles
Myopathy
Cardiovascular
Hypertension
Fluid retention
Accelerated atherosclerosis
Ischemic heart disease (IHD)Metabolic
Glucose intolerance or development of frank
diabetes mellitus
Weight gain
Hyperlipidemia
Hypokalemia
Alkalosis
Fluid and salt retention
Negative nitrogen balance-muscle wasting
Masked perforation, hemorrhage from
stomach and duodenum. Psychiatric
Depression
Insomnia
Euphoria
Steroid psychosisEndocrine
Growth retardation
Menstrual irregularities
Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
suppression
Impotence
Acute adrenal insufficiency, Cushingoid
features
Skin
Acne rubeosis steriodica
Hirsutism
Striae
Ecchymoses
Thin, fragile skin
Panniculitis (on withdrawal)Neurological
Pseudotumor cerebri
Eye
Cataract
Glaucoma
Measures to reduce the side effects of corticosteroids therapy (Table 2.25)

Q. Write short note on measures to minimize the side effects of
corticosteroid.
Table 2.25: Measures to reduce side effects of corticosteroids therapy.
By administering
Lowest required dose
On alternate days rather than daily
As a single dose than in divided doses
In the morning
For the shortest required duration
For indications only
Only under medical supervision 
Monitor intake of calories to prevent weight
gain
Reduce intake of sodium
Use H 2 receptor blockers or proton-pump
inhibitors
Provide high calcium intake and pump
inhibitors
Use bisphosphonates
Waterhouse-Friderichsen Syndrome
Q. Write short note on Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome.
It is characterized by acute hemorrhagic infarction (destruction) of both
the adrenal glands and is usually associated with fulminant
meningococcal septicemia. It produces cutaneous petechiae, vasomotor
collapse and shock.
Can occur at any age but is more common in children.
Abrupt in onset and profound prostration occurs within a few hours. It
produces petichiae, purpuric lesion and hemorrhage into the skin.
Prompt recognition and appropriate therapy: Intravenous fluids, high dose
antibiotics (Penicillin, cephalosporins, sulfonamides), vasopressors,
inotropes, plasma transfusion, steroids must be instituted immediately, or
death follows within hours to a few days due to cardiac and/or respiratory
failure.
PheochromocytomaQ. Write short essay/note on clinical features, diagnosis and treatment
of pheochromocytoma.
Pheochromocytoma is a very rare tumor of the sympathetic nervous
system composed of chromaffin cells that secretes catecholamines
noradrenaline (norepinephrine) adrenaline (epinephrine).Important because they are a rare cause of surgically correctable

hypertension.
Paraganglioma
–   Pheochromocytomas that develop in extra-adrenal paraganglia are
known as paragangliomas.
–   It arises from both sympathetic and parasympathetic paraganglia,
located anywhere from the base of the skull to the pelvis.
–   Paragangliomas typically occur in the head and neck but are also found
in the thorax, pelvis and bladder.
Traditionally, the features of pheochromocytomas have been summarized
by the ‘rule of 10s’ (Box 2.23).
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (Von Recklinghausen’s disease) is associated
with an increased incidence of pheochromocytoma.
Box 2.23: Rule of 10s for pheochromocytoma.
10% Extra adrenal (closer to 15%)- 10% abdominal
10% Occur in children
10% Familial (Now modified as closer to 25%)
10% Sporadic are bilateral or multiple (more if familial)
10% Not associated with hypertension
10% Malignant
10% Discovered incidentally
10% Recur (more if adrenal)
Clinical Features (Box 2.24)Paroxysmal hypertension:
–   Characterized by episodes of pallor or flushing, headache sweating,
palpitations, and anxiety (fear of death).
–   Paroxysms last 10–60 min duration, daily to monthly
–   Paroxysms are spontaneous or precipitated by:
♦   Diagnostic procedures, intra-arterial contrast
♦   Drugs (opioids, unopposed beta-blockade, anesthesia induction,
histamine, ACTH, glucagon, metoclopramide)
♦   Strenuous exercise, movement that increases intra-abdominal
pressure (lifting, straining)
♦   Micturition (bladder paraganglioma)

Sustained hypertension is more common than paroxysmal
hypertension.
Complications of hypertension: Stroke, myocardial infarction,
cardiomyopathy and left ventricular failure.
Gastrointestinal symptoms: Abdominal pain, vomiting, constipation and
weight loss.
Hypercalcemia: Observed in associated MEN2 hyperparathyroidism
Mild glucose intolerance
Lipolysis and weight-loss
Box 2.24: Signs and symptoms of pheochromocytoma.
5 Ps
1. Pressure (Hypertension)—90%
5. Pallor—42%
Familial pheochromocytoma (Table 2.26)
Table 2.26: Familial pheochromocytoma.
MEN 2a 50% pheochromocytoma (usually bilateral),
medullary carcinoma of thyroid,
hyperparathyroidism
MEN 2b 50% pheochromocytoma (usually bilateral),
medullary carcinoma of thyroid, mucosal
neuroma, marfanoid habitus
Von Hippel-Landau 50% pheochromocytoma (usually bilateral),
retinoblastoma, cerebellar hemangioma,
nephroma, renal/pancreas cysts
NF1 (Von Recklinghausen’s) 2% pheochromocytoma (50% if NF-1 and HTN)
Café-au-lait spots, neurofibroma, optic glioma
Familial paraganglioma  
Familial pheochromocytoma and islet cell tumor  
Other: Tuberous sclerosis, Sturge-Weber, ataxia-telangiectasia, Carney’s Triad (pheochromocytoma,
gastric leiomyoma, pulmonary chondroma)
Investigations (Table 2.27)

Plasma metanephrine is the most sensitive test
Table 2.27: Laboratory findings in pheochromocytoma.
Investigation Level Sensitivity Specificity
24-hour urine Vanillylmandelic
acid (VMA)Raised 63% 94%
24-hour urine metanephrines
and normetanephrinesRaised 76% 94%
24-hour urine free
catecholaminesRaised 83% 88%
24-hour urine free
catecholamines + metanephrinesRaised 90% 98%
Plasma catecholamines Raised 85% 80%
Plasma metanephrines Raised 99% 89%
Other investigationsChromogranin A: It is a major secretory protein present in the soluble
matrix of chromaffin granules and is elevated.
Provocative (glucagon provocative test) and adrenolytic (clonidine,
phentolamine test) tests: Rarely necessary.
CT scan: To localize tumor.
Scintigraphy: Useful for localization of tumor and includes
–   MIBG (123 I-labeled meta-iodobenzylguanidine) scintigraphy.
–   Somatostatin receptor scintigraphy using 111indium-labeled
diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid octreotide scan.
–   (18 F) flurodihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA) PET scan.
Plasma noradrenaline: Selective venous sampling and estimation of
plasma noradrenaline level may be useful in localizing the tumor in
difficult cases.
ManagementExcision of the tumor  is the main treatment. Special care has to be taken preoperatively,
intraoperatively and postoperatively.
Preoperative preparation regimens
Combined α + β-blockade  to be given at least 2 weeks preoperatively to control the hypertension.
Antihypertensive agents used are: phenoxybenzamine, selective α 1-blocker (prazosin, terazosin, or
doxazosin) and propranolol.
High sodium diet —patients are encouraged to start a diet high in sodium content (>5000 mg

daily) because of the catecholamine-induced volume contraction and the orthostasis associated
with alpha-adrenergic blockade.
If uncontrolled add
–   Metyrosine
–   Calcium channel blocker (CCB)-Nicardipine
–   Avoid diuretics as already ECF volume contracted
–   Intraoperative blood pressure needs to carefully monitored and controlled.
–   Postoperative hypotension can be avoided by adequate fluid replacement and hypoglycemia
(10–15% of patients) due to removal of catecholamine suppression of insulin secretion by
glucose infusion.Postoperatively patients may become hypertension free
If tumor cannot be excised:
–   Long-term treatment with α- and β-adrenoreceptors blocking drugs (phenoxybenzamine and
propranolol, or labetalol) is advocated.
–   β-blockers should never be given alone.
–   Patients can also be subjected to nuclear medicine treatment.

GONADAL DISORDERS
Male Hypogonadism
Q. Discuss the causes and approach to male hypogonadism.
Classification and Causes of Male Hypogonadism (Table 2.28)
Androgen Deficiency Symptoms
Musculoskeletal
–   Decreased vigour and physical energy
–   Diminished muscle strength
Sexuality
–   Decreased interest in sex
–   Reduction in frequency of sexual activity
–   Poor erectile function/arousal
–   Loss of nocturnal erections
–   Reduced quality of orgasm
–   Reduced volume of ejaculateMood disorder and cognitive function
–   Irritability and lethargy
–   Decreased sense of well-being, lack of motivation
–   Low mental energy, difficulty with short-term memory
–   Depression
–   Low self-esteem, insomnia, nervousnessVasomotor and nervous
–   Hot flushes, sweating
Table 2.28: Classification and causes of male hypogonadism.
HYPOTHALAMIC-PITUITARY DISORDERS
Panhypopituitarism
LH and FSH deficiency
a. With normal sense of smell
b. With hyposmia or anosmia (Kallmann’s syndrome)

c. With complex neurologic syndromes
Prader-Willi syndrome < Laurence-Moon, Bardet-Biedl syndromes < Möbius’ syndrome < Lowe’s
syndrome
GONADAL ABNORMALITIES
Klinefelter’s syndrome
Other chromosomal defects (XX male, XY/XXY, XX/XXY, XXXY, XYY)
Bilateral anorchia (vanishing testes syndrome)
Cryptorchidism
Noonan’s syndrome
Myotonic dystrophy
Adult seminiferous tubule failure < Adult Leydig cell failure
Insert<
Secondary hypogonadism
Hyperprolactinemia
Glucocorticoid treatments
Chronic, systemic illness
Anorexia nervosa
Diabetes mellitus
Obesity
Malignant tumors of testes
Infiltrative diseases—hemochromatosis
Chronic orchitis - TB, leprosy, syphillis.
Pituitary apoplexy
Trauma
Idiopathic
DEFECTS IN ANDROGEN ACTION
Complete androgen insensitivity (testicular feminization)
Incomplete androgen insensitivity
Physical SignsDiminished muscle mass
Loss of body hair
Abdominal obesity
Gynecomastia
Testes frequently normal, occasionally small
Prepubertal onset: Eunuchoidism
Lack of adult male hair distribution

–   Sparse axillary, pubic hair
–   Lack of temporal hair recession
High-pitched voice
Infantile genitalia
–   Small penis, testes and scrotum
↑ fat deposition in pectoral, hip, thigh and lower abdomen
Eunuchoidal proportion
–   Arm span > height > 5 cm
–   Upper/lower segment ratio < 1
Investigation
Serum testosterone: 8.00 AM
Serum FSH, LH
Semen analysis
Others: Peripheral leukocyte karyotype, other pituitary hormones, serum
prolactin, iron saturation, MRI brain.
Treatment
Treatment of primary hypogonadism
Testosterone replacement
Treatment of the underlying disease
Q. Write short note on testosterone replacement.
Testosterone replacement
Intramuscular preparations—testosterone enanthate (250–300 mg IM q 3 wk)
Transdermal patch/gel
Oral agent—testosterone undecanoate (40–80 mg po 2–3 times daily)
Undesirable effects:  BPH, prostatic cancer, dyslipidemia, polycythemia, transaminitis
Treatment of secondary hypogonadism
GnRH pulsatile infusion
hCG
Box 2.25: Causes of male infertility.
Endocrine
–   Hypothalamic-pituitary disorders
–   Testicular disorders
–   Defects of androgen action
–   Hyperthyroidism
–   Hypothyroidism
–   Adrenal insufficiency

–   Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Systemic illness
Defects in spermatogenesis
Immotile cilia syndrome
Drug-induced
Ductal obstruction
–   Congenital
–   Acquired
Seminal vesicle disease
Prostatic disease
Varicocele
Retrograde ejaculation
Antibodies to sperm or seminal plasma
Anatomic defects of the penis
Poor coital technique
Sexual dysfunction
Idiopathic
ImpotenceQ. What is impotence? Discuss briefly.
Definition: Male sexual dysfunction is termed impotence.
Manifestations: It includes loss of desire, inability to obtain and maintain
erection, premature ejaculation, absence of emission and inability to
achieve orgasm.
Causes of Male Infertility (Box 2.25)
Erectile Dysfunction
Erectile impotence may be due to various causes, but majority are of
psychological origin. In each case of erectile impotence, it is necessary to rule
out the organic causes (Table 2.29).
Gynecomastia
Q. Write short note on gynecomastia.
It is clinically defined as the presence of a rubbery or firm mass
concentrically extending from the nipples in a male secondary to proliferation
of both stromal and epithelial component of the glands.
It must be differentiated from pseudogynecomastia (lipomastia) seen in

obese individuals, which is characterized by only fat deposition  without
glandular proliferation.
Causes of Gynecomastia (Table 2.30)
Clinical FeaturesEnlargement of breast (refer Fig. 11.12C): The principal complaint is
unilateral or bilateral concentric enlargement of breast glandular tissue.
Breast pain: Present in one-fourth of patients and objective tenderness in
about 40%.
A complaint of nipple discharge can be elicited in 4% of cases.
Patients with gynecomastia may have a slightly increased risk of
development of breast carcinoma.
Treatment
1. Medical treatment
The underlying disease should be corrected if possible, and offending drugs should be
discontinued.
Antiestrogens or selective estrogen receptor modulators, such as tamoxifen or raloxifene, have
been found useful in relieving pain and reversing gynecomastia in some patients. Aromatase
inhibitors have also been tried but are not as beneficial as tamoxifen.
2. Surgical treatment
Reduction mammoplasty should be considered for cosmetic reasons
3. RadiotherapyPatients with prostatic carcinoma may receive low-dose radiation therapy (900 cGy or less) to
the breasts before initiation of estrogen therapy. This may prevent or diminish the
gynecomastia that usually results from such therapy
Radiotherapy should not be given to other patients with gynecomastia
Table 2.29: Organic causes of erectile dysfunction.
Neurologic Urogenital Drugs
Anterior temporal lobe lesions Trauma Antiandrogens
Spinal cord lesions Castration Estrogens
Autonomic neuropathy Priapism 5 alfa-reductase inhibitors
Vascular Peyronie’s disease GnRH agonists
Leriche’s syndrome Systemic illness Antihypertensives
Pelvic vascular insufficiency Cardiac insufficiency Diuretics
Sickle cell disease Cirrhosis Psychotropic agents
Endocrine Uremia Tranquilizers

Diabetes mellitus Respiratory insufficiency Monoamine oxidase
inhibitors
Hypogonadism Lead poisoning Tricyclic antidepressants
Hyperprolactinemia Postoperative Tobacco
Adrenal insufficiency Aortoiliac or aortofemoral
reconstructionAlcohol
Feminizing tumors Lumbar sympathectomy Cocaine
Hypothyroidism Perineal prostatectomy  
Hyperthyroidism Retroperitoneal dissection  
Table 2.30: Causes of gynecomastia.
Physiologic Endocrine
Neonatal, pubertal, involutional Primary hypogonadism with Leydig cell damage,
hyperprolactinemia, hyperthyroidism, androgen
receptor disorders, excessive aromatase activity
Drug-induced Systemic diseases
Androgens and anabolic steroids, chorionic
gonadotropin, estrogens and estrogen agonists,
growth hormone, cyproterone, flutamide,
isoniazid, ketoconazole, metronidazole,
cimetidine, omeprazole, ranitidine, cancer
chemotherapeutic agents (especially alkylating
agents), amiodarone, captopril, reserpine,
spironolactone, verapamil, psychoactive agents,
diazepam, haloperidol, phenothiazines, tricyclic
antidepressants, alcohol, amphetamines, heroin,
marijuana, highly active antiretroviral therapy
(HAART), phenytoin, penicillamineHepatic cirrhosis, uremia
Neoplasms
Testicular germ cell or Leydig cell tumors
hCG-secreting nontrophoblastic neoplasms
Idiopathic
Short StatureQ. Write short note on short stature and its differential diagnosis.
Short stature is defined as a height that is below the 2.5th percentile OR
two or more standard deviations below the mean for age and gender for a
given population.
A growth velocity that is below the 5th percentile for age and gender is
called growth deceleration (e.g. <5 cm/year after the age of 5 years).
Dwarfism is defined as short stature for the age of the patient.
Most common causes of dwarfism are familial short stature and
constitutional delay of growth and puberty.

Causes of Short Stature (Table 2.31)
Table 2.31: Causes of short stature.
Nonendocrine causes Endocrine disorders
Constitutional short stature
Familial short stature
Genetic short stature
Intrauterine growth retardation and SGA
syndromes of short stature
Turner’s syndrome and its variants
Noonan’s syndrome (Fig. 2.18A)
Prader–Willi syndrome
Laurence–Moon and Bardet-Biedl syndromesGH deficiency and variants
Congenital GH deficiency
With midline defects
With other pituitary hormone deficiencies
Isolated GH deficiency
Pituitary agenesis
Acquired GH deficiency
Hypothalamic-pituitary tumors
Chronic disease
Cardiac disorders (left-to-right shunt, congestive
heart failure)
Pulmonary disorders (cystic fibrosis, asthma)
Gastrointestinal disorders: Malabsorption (e.g.
celiac disease)
Hematologic disorders
Sickle cell anemia
Thalassemia
Renal disorders
Renal tubular acidosis
Chronic uremia
Immunologic disorders
Connective tissue disease
Juvenile rheumatoid arthritis
Chronic infection (TB)
Malnutrition
Voluntary dieting
Anorexia nervosa
Cancer chemotherapyHypothalamic-pituitary tumors
Histiocytosis X
Central nervous system infections
Head injuries
GH deficiency following cranial irradiation
Central nervous system vascular accidents
Hydrocephalus
Empty sella syndrome
Abnormalities of GH action
GH insensitivity (Laron’s dwarfism)
Pygmies
Psychosocial dwarfism
Hypothyroidism
Glucocorticoid excess (Cushing’s syndrome)
Pseudohypoparathyroidism
Disorders of vitamin D metabolism
Diabetes mellitus, uncontrolled
Diabetes insipidus, untreated
Differential Diagnosis of Short Stature (Table 2.32)
Table 2.32: Differential diagnosis of short stature.
Cause Characteristic findings
GH deficiency Frontal bossing, high-pitched voice, central
obesity
Hypothyroidism Immature facies, dry skin, coarse hair

Cushing’s syndrome Central obesity, striae, hypertension
Gonadal dysgenesis Webbed neck, multiple pigmented naevi, delayed
sexual development, shield chest
Pseudohypoparathyroidism Moon facies, mental retardation, obesity, short
metacarpals
Bone-cartilage dysplasia Abnormal proportions, macrocephaly
Russell-Silver dwarfism Small at birth, pointed facies, asymmetry
Other causes Turner’s syndrome, IUGR, premature birth,
cyanotic congenital heart diseases, chronic liver
disease, chronic pulmonary or kidney disease,
undernutrition, uncontrolled type 1 diabetes
mellitus, rickets, malabsorption
Causes of Tall Stature (Table 2.33)
Table 2.33: Causes of tall stature.
Nonendocrine causes Endocrine disorders
Constitutional tall stature, genetic tall stature Pituitary gigantism
Cerebral gigantism, homocystinuria Sexual precocity
Marfan’s syndrome (Fig. 2.18B), Beckwith-
Wiedemann syndrome, XYY and XYYY
syndromes, Klinefelter’s syndrome, syndromes of
tall statureThyrotoxicosis
 Infants of diabetic mothers

Figs. 2.18A and B:  (A) Short stature in Noonan syndrome; (B) Tall stature in Marfan syndrome.

Diabetes Mellitus

CHAPTER
3
INRODUCTION
Q. Write short essay/note on definition and classification of diabetes
mellitus (DM).
Definition
Diabetes mellitus, the most common endocrine disease, is a metabolic
syndrome characterized by hyperglycemia due to absolute or relative
insulin deficiency/resistance or both.
The prevalence of diabetes is increasing sharply in the developing
countries because of more sedentary lifestyles. India and China have the
largest prevalence of diabetics.
Classification and Etiology
Q. Write short essay/note on etiology/causes of diabetes mellitus (DM).
Diabetes mellitus is classified according to etiopathogenesis that leads to
hyperglycemia into different groups (Table 3.1 and Fig. 3.1) but majority of
cases fall into one of two broad classes namely: type 1 (not type I) and type
2 (not type II).
Type 1 DM: In this there is absolute (complete or near total) deficiency
of insulin . It is subdivided into two subtypes namely type 1 A which is
due to autoimmune destruction of β-cells and type 1 B  where the cause of
β-cell destruction is unknown .
Type 2 DM: It constitutes a heterogeneous group  characterized by
variable degrees of insulin resistance, impaired insulin secretion and
increased glucose production . It also develops due to several genetic and
metabolic syndromes.
–   Risk categories: Type 2 DM is usually preceded by a period of

abnormal glucose homeostasis classified as impaired fasting glucose
(IFG) or impaired glucose tolerance (IGT).
Fig. 3.1:  Types of diabetes mellitus.
(ABCC8: ATP-binding cassette transporter sub-family C member 8; APS1: autoimmune
polyendocrinopathy syndrome type 1; EIF2AK3: eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2-alpha kinase
3; GCK: glucokinase; HNF4: hepatocyte nuclear factor 4; IPEX: immune dysregulation,
polyendocrinopathy, enteropathy, X-linked; INS: insulin; KCNJ11: potassium inwardly-rectifying
channel, subfamily J, member 11; LADA: latent autoimmune diabetes of adults; MODY: maturity
onset diabetes of the young; Neuro D1: neurogenic differentiation 1; PDX1: pancreatic and duodenal
homeobox 1; PNDM: permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus; PTF1A: pancreas transcription factor 1
subunit alpha)
Table 3.1: Classification of diabetes mellitus.
I.   Type 1 diabetes (destruction of beta cell usually leading to absolute deficiency of insulin)Type 1 A: Immune-mediated
Type 1 B: Idiopathic
II.  Type 2 diabetes (may range from predominantly insulin resistance with relative insulin
deficiency to a predominantly insulin secretory defect with insulin resistance)
III. Other specific types of diabetes
A. Genetic defects of β-cell development or function characterized by mutations in
Hepatocyte nuclear transcription factor (HNF) 4 α (Maturity-onset diabetes of the young 1
-MODY 1)
Glucokinase (MODY 2)
HNF-1 α (MODY 3)

B. Genetic defects in insulin action:  Type A insulin resistance, Ieprechaunism, Rabson-
Mendenhall syndrome, lipodystrophy syndromes
C. Exocrine pancreatic defects:  Pancreatitis, pancreatectomy, hemochromatosis, pancreatic
neoplasm, cystic fibrosis, fibrocalculous pancreatopathy
D. Endocrinopathies:  Acromegaly, Cushing syndrome, hyperthyroidism, pheochromocytoma,
glucagonoma
E. Infections:  Cytomegalovirus, coxsackie B virus, congenital rubella
F. Drugs or chemical induced: Glucocorticoids, pentamidine, nicotinic acid, thyroid hormone,
diazoxide, β-adrenergic agonists, thiazides, phenytoin, α-interferon
G. Genetic syndromes sometimes associated with diabetes:  Down syndrome, Klinefelter
syndrome, Turner syndrome, Wolfram’s syndrome, DIDMOAD (diabetes insipidus, diabetes
mellitus, optic atrophy, and deafness), Friedreich’s ataxia, Huntington’s disease, Laurence-
Moon-Biedl syndrome, myotonic dystrophy, porphyria, Prader-Willi syndrome
H. Uncommon forms of immune-mediated diabetes: ‘Stiff-man’ syndrome, anti-insulin receptor
antibodies
IV.  Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM)
V.   Latent autoimmune diabetes in adults (LADA)
Features of Current Classification of DM
The terms insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) and non-insulin
dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) are no longer used now. Because
many patients with type 2 DM eventually need insulin for control of
hyperglycemia.The age or treatment modality is not a criterion for classification. Type 1
DM most often occurs in younger patients before the age of 30 and an
autoimmune destruction of β cell can start at any age. However, about
10% of patients above the age of 30 years have type 1 DM. Type 2 DM
usually develops with increasing age. However, it is now being diagnosed
more frequently in children and young adults (particularly in obese
adolescents).Metabolic Effects of Lack of Insulin (Table 3.2)
Table 3.2: Functions of insulin and metabolic effects of insulin
deficiency.
Functions of insulin Consequences of insulin deficiency
Functions that decreases blood glucose level Insulin deficiency increases the blood glucose
level
Increases activity of glycolytic enzymes Decreased activity of glycolytic enzymes

Increases glycogen synthesis Glycogen breakdown into glucose increases
(gluconeogenesis)
Increases uptake of glucose by skeletal and
cardiac muscleDecreased glucose transport into skeletal and
cardiac muscle
Decreases activity of gluconeogenic enzymes Increased activity of gluconeogenic enzymes
(gluconeogenesis)
Lipid metabolism:  Increases lipid synthesis Lipolysis (raised plasma free fatty acids),
ketogenesis
Protein metabolism:  Enhances tissue uptake of
amino acids and accelerates protein synthesisDecrease in tissue uptake of amino acids and
reduced protein synthesis
Other functions
Increases transmembrane K+ transport Decrease in movement of K+ into the cell
Decreases cyclic AMP level in adipose tissue
and liverIncreased cyclic AMP levels in adipose tissue
and liver
Etiopathogenesis of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus (T1DM)
Q. Write short essay/note on pathogenesis of diabetes mellitus.
Accounts for ~ 5–10% of all cases
Age: Most common in childhood  (younger than 20 years of age). Since,
it can develop at any age; the term ‘juvenile diabetes’ should be avoided.
Etiology
Autoimmune disease characterized by:
–   Pancreatic β-cell destruction
–   Absolute deficiency of insulin .
Idiopathic: It is a rare form in which there is no evidence for
autoimmunity.
Pathogenesis of Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus (Fig. 3.2)
It is an autoimmune disease that involves interplay of both genetic
susceptibility and environmental factors.
Genetic susceptibility: Incidence of type 1 diabetes is greater in twins of
affected individuals than in the general population, and greater in
monozygotic than in dizygotic twins.HLA genes: About 95% of patients with type 1 diabetes have either
human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DR3 or HLA-DR4, or both , compared

with the general population.
Environmental factors: Viral infections may trigger islet cell destruction
and associations have been found between type 1 diabetes and infection with
mumps, rubella, coxsackie B, or cytomegalovirus. Environmental event
initiates the process in genetically susceptible individuals. Relative deficiency
of vitamin D may also be responsible.
Mechanisms of β-Cell destruction (Fig. 3.2): The autoimmune damage
starts many years before the disease becomes clinically evident. An
inflammatory response in the pancreas called ‘insulitis’ develops and there is
infiltration of the islets with activated T lymphocytes.Phases in the development of diabetes mellitus:
–   Phase with normal glucose tolerance: In most of the patients, islet
cell autoantibodies appear much earlier than overt diabetes. Beta cell
mass and insulin secretion progressively decreases however normal
levels of blood glucose is maintained.
–   Phase of impaired glucose intolerance: Features of diabetes do not
become evident even with destruction of 70–80% of beta cells. At this
point, residual functional beta cells cannot maintain glucose tolerance
and patient develops glucose intolerance.
–   Phase of frank diabetes: Stress, infection or puberty may be
associated with increased insulin requirements and may trigger the
transition from glucose intolerance to frank diabetes.
♦   Honeymoon phase: After the initial clinical presentation of frank
type 1 DM, a phase may occur during which time patient is
euglycemic with modest doses of insulin or, rarely without insulin
for some time. This is referred to as ‘honeymoon phase’. This
usually lasts for a few months after which the patient develops frank
DM again.
♦   Hyperglycemia and ketosis occur after more than 90% of the β
cells have been destroyed  by an autoimmune process.
Immunologic markers: These include autoantibodies against islet cell,
insulin, glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD65), zinc transporter ZnT8 and
tyrosine phosphatase IA-2 and IA-2β. One or more of these autoantibodies
are detected in 85–90% of individuals when fasting hyperglycemia is
initially detected.

Fig. 3.2:  Pathogenesis of type 1 diabetes mellitus.
Type 1 DM can be associated with various autoimmune disorders as
outlined in Table 3.3.
Slow-burning variant of type 1DM: It is characterized by slower
progression to insulin deficiency and develops in later life and is
sometimes called Latent Autoimmune Diabetes in Adults (LADA).
LADA may be difficult to distinguish from type 2 DM.
Table 3.3: Various autoimmune disorders that can be associated
with Type 1 DM.
Autoimmune disease Autoantibody type Autoantibody
percentageDisease prevalence
(%)
Addison’s disease 21- Hydroxylase 1.5 0.5
Celiac disease Transglutaminase 12 6
Pernicious anemia Parietal cell 21 2.6
Thyroiditis or Graves’
diseasePeroxidase or
thyroglobulin25 4
Pathogenesis of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (Fig. 3.3)

Type 2 diabetes is a multifactorial disease. The four major factors are
increasing age, obesity, ethnicity and family history. Type 2 diabetes is
associated with central obesity, hypertension, hypertriglyceridemia, and
decreased HDL cholesterol (metabolic syndrome).
Environmental factors play a role and includes:
–   Sedentary lifestyle
–   Dietary habits and associated obesity. Over-eating, obesity and
under activity is associated with the development of type 2 DM.
Genetic factors: It is much more significant in type 2 DM than in type 1
DM.
–   Type 2 diabetes has a concordance rate of 35% to 60% in
monozygotic twins compared with 17% to 30% in dizygotic twins.
–   Lifetime risk for type 2 diabetes in an offspring is more than double if
both parents are affected .
–   Diabetogenic genes have been found.
In contrast to type 1 DM, in type 2 DM there is no HLA relationship and
there is no evidence of an autoimmune basis. Pancreatic β-cell mass is
intact in type 2 DM, in contrast to type 1 DM. The α-cell mass is
increased.
Characteristics of Type 2 DM
These include: (1) insulin resistance, (2) abnormal/impaired insulin
secretion/action, (3) increased hepatic production of glucose, and (4)
abnormal fat metabolism.

Fig. 3.3:  Pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes. Insulin resistance associated with obesity is induced by free
fatty acids, adipokines, and chronic inflammation in adipose tissue. Insulin resistance causes β cells of
pancreas to undergo compensatory hyperplasia and the resulting hypersecretion of insulin maintains
normoglycemia. However, at some point, β-cell compensation is followed by β-cell failure, and
diabetes develops.
Insulin resistance
Q. Write short essay/note on insulin resistance.
–   Insulin resistance is the decrease/failure of target (peripheral) tissues
to insulin action.
–   Main factors in the development of insulin resistance are combination of
genetic susceptibility and obesity. The obesity accompanying type 2 DM
is central obesity and central adipose tissue is more ‘lipolytic’ than
peripheral sites. Insulin resistance is induced by free fatty acids,
adipokines, and chronic inflammation in adipose tissue.
–   Consequences of insulin resistance:
♦   Decreased uptake of glucose in muscle results in post-prandial
hyperglycemia. The defects in the uptake are due to defect in the
receptors present in target tissues and usually at the post-receptor
level.

♦   Reduced glycolysis and fatty acid oxidation  in the liver.
♦   Inability to suppress hepatic gluconeogenesis
Abnormalities of insulin secretion and action
–   β-Cell dysfunction: Abnormalities (abnormal/impaired) of insulin
secretion develops early in the course of type 2 diabetes and is due to
β-cell dysfunction. β-cell dysfunction is multifactorial in origin. In type
2 diabetes, β-cell dysfunction manifests as inadequate insulin
secretion by the pancreatic β cells (relative insulin deficiency) in
association with insulin resistance and hyperglycemia.
–   Compensatory β-cell hyperplasia: Pancreatic β cells initially
respond  to long-term demands of peripheral insulin resistance by
undergoing compensatory hyperplasia leading to increased insulin
secretion (hypersecretion). Thus, the hyperinsulinemic state can
compensate for peripheral resistance and maintain normal blood
glucose for years.
♦   β-cell failure (early stage): However, at some point, β cells
exhaust their capacity to adapt. β-cell compensation cannot
maintain normal blood sugar level. This stage, the patient develops
impaired glucose tolerance.
♦   β-cell failure (late stage): The early stage of cell failure is followed
by decreased insulin secretion, hyperglycemia and frank diabetes
develops.Increased hepatic production of glucose: Relative lack of insulin is
associated with increased production of glucose from the liver (due to
inadequate suppression of gluconeogenesis) and reduced glucose uptake
by peripheral tissues. Increased hepatic glucose output produces fasting
hyperglycemia.Abnormal fat metabolism: Insulin resistance in adipose tissue causes
lipolysis and increased production of free fatty acid from adipocytes. This
leads to increased synthesis of lipid [very-low-density lipoprotein (VLDL)
and triglyceride] in hepatocytes. Deposition of fat in the liver is a common
association with central obesity and is increased by insulin resistance
and/or deficiency. The deposition of fat/lipid or steatosis in the liver may
result in nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD). This is also
responsible for the dyslipidemia observed in type 2 DM [i.e. raised
triglycerides, decreased high-density lipoprotein (HDL), and raised

small dense low-density lipoprotein (LDL)].
Hyperglycemia (glucotoxicity) and elevated free fatty acid levels
(‘lipotoxicity’) and dietary fat may also cause further beta cell loss and
deterioration of glucose homeostasis.
Pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes mellitus—the ominous octet is
presented in Figure 3.4.
Fig. 3.4:  Pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes mellitus—THE OMINOUS OCTET. Multiple drugs in
combination may be needed to improve glucose homeostasis. The treatment should target the
underlying pathophysiology.
CLINICAL FEATURES OF DIABETES
MELLITUS
Q. Write short essay/note on clinical features of diabetes mellitus/type 1
diabetes mellitus/type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Usually, the clinical features of type 1 and type 2 DM are distinctive.
Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus
Age: Usually begins before the age of 30 years but can occur at any age.
Weight is normal to lean (wasted).
Classical triad of diabetes: The onset of symptoms may be abrupt, with

polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia to metabolic derangements. Weight loss
may develop over days or weeks.
In severe cases patient may develop ketoacidosis during intercurrent
illness or following surgery.
Insulin requirement: In the initial 1 or 2 years, the exogenous insulin
required may be minimal because of endogenous insulin secretion. But
later, its requirement suddenly increases.
Characteristically, the plasma insulin is low and C peptide levels are low
and unmeasurable. Glucagon levels are raised and suppressible with
insulin.
Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus
Age: Usually begins in older above the age of 40 years and frequently in
obese individuals. Due to increase in obesity and sedentary lifestyle, it is
now detected also in children and adolescents.
Presentation: The symptoms develop gradually, over a period of months
to years. Polyuria, polydipsia, unexplained weakness or weight loss.
In asymptomatic individuals, the diagnosis is made after routine blood
(hyperglycemia) or urine testing (glycosuria).
Patients may complain of symptoms like lack of energy, blurring of vision
(due to glucose induced changes in refraction) or pruritus vulvae or
balanitis caused by Candida infection.Many patients may present with one of the chronic complications of
diabetes and are found to be diabetic on investigations. These include:
Staphylococcal skin infections, retinopathy, polyneuropathy, erectile
dysfunction, and arterial disease (myocardial infarction or peripheral
gangrene).Ketoacidosis is infrequent and presentation is usually mild. In the
decompensated state, they are susceptible to the syndrome of
hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state (hyperosmolar non-ketotic coma).Insulin levels in the plasma are normal to high. Glucagon levels are
raised, but resistant to insulin.
Latent Autoimmune Diabetes in Adults (LADA)
Q. Write short essay on latent diabetes.

LADA is a form of autoimmune type 1 diabetes which is diagnosed in
individuals who are older than the usual age of onset of type 1 diabetes.
Often, LADA is mistaken for type 2 diabetes, based on their age at the
time of diagnosis.
Alternate terms for ‘LADA’ include late-onset autoimmune diabetes of
adulthood, ‘slow onset type 1’ diabetes, and ‘type 1.5’.
Features of LADA
Age: Usually less than or equal to 25 years age.
Clinical presentation: Similar to non-obese type 2 diabetes.
Initial control achieved with diet alone or diet plus oral antidiabetic drugs
(OAD). Insulin dependency occurs within months (rarely can take years).
LADA shares an increased frequency of risk for an HLA-DQB1 genotype
than patients with type 1 diabetes and for a variant in the transcription
factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene with patients with type 2 diabetes.Other features of type 1 DM
–   Low fasting and post glucagon stimulated C peptide levels
–   ICA and GADA positive.
Importance of diagnosis: High-risk of progression to insulin dependency.
–   Avoid metformin treatment
–   Early introduction of insulin therapy.
Maturity Onset Diabetes of the Young (MODY)
Q. Write short essay on maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY).
Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a heterogeneous disorder
characterized by noninsulin-dependent monogenic form of diabetes
diagnosed at a young age (<25 years) with autosomal dominant transmission
and lack of autoantibodies accounting for 2–5% of diabetes.Mutations in several transcription factors or in glucokinase result in
insufficient insulin release from pancreatic β-cells, causing MODY.
Almost 11 subtypes of MODY are identified based on the mutated gene.
MODY can occur at any age. About 70% forms of MODY are MODY-3
(hepatic transcription factor-1 gene) and 10% MODY-2 (glucokinase
gene).

Features of Maturity Onset Diabetes of the Young
Age:  Young onset of diabetes <25 years of age
Strong family history of early onset diabetes (2–3 generations affected)
Evidence of macrovascular complications in earlier generation
Sulfonylurea sensitivity. Non-insulin dependence (not requiring insulin even after 5 years of
diagnosis).
Absence of insulin resistance phenotype: normal blood pressure, triglycerides, HDL.
Subtypes of MODY (Table 3.4)
MODY can be of 2 distinct groups that are distinguished based on
characteristic phenotypic features and patterns on oral glucose tolerance
testing.
1. Glucokinase MODY: requires no treatment
2. Transcription factor (i.e. hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha) MODY
requires low-dose sulfonylurea therapy and permanent neonatal diabetes
mellitus (PNDM) (caused by Kir6.2 mutation) requires high-dose
sulfonylurea therapy.
Differences between type 1 DM, type 2 DM and MODY are listed in
Table 3.5.
Table 3.4: Types of maturity onset diabetes of the young
(MODY).
MODY type Defective chromosome Mutation in Phenotypic features
1. 20 q HNF-4α
(hepatocyte
nuclear factor)Adolescent/early adult:
Progressive in insulin
secretory defect
2. 7 p GCK
(glucokinase
gene)Since birth: Stable mild
fasting hyperglycemia
3. 12 q HNF-1α Adolescent/early adult:
Progressive insulin secretory
defect
4. 13 q IPF-1 (insulin
promoter factor)Early adult: Very rare, mild
diabetes
5. 17 q HNF-1 β Adolescent: Progressive
diabetes
6. 2 q Neuro D1 Early adult: Rare
7. 2 p KLF-11 Early adult: Pancreatic

atrophy
8. 9 q CEL (carboxyl
ester lipase)Early adult: Rare
9. 7 q Pax-4 Early adult: Rare
10. 11 p INS Rare
11. 8 p BLK Rare
Table 3.5: Differences between type 1 DM, type 2 DM and
MODY.
Features Type 1 DM Type 2 DM MODY
Frequency Common Increasing 2–5% of type 2 DM
Genetics Polygenic Polygenic Monogenic autosomal
dominant
Family history <15% >50% 100%
Ethnicity Different races Different races Asians, Polynesians,
indigenous Australians
Age of onset Throughout childhood Post-puberty <25 years
Severity of onset Acute and severe Mild Mild/asymptomatic
Ketosis/diabetic
ketoacidosisCommon Uncommon Rare
Obesity association − >90% +/−
Acanthosis nigricans
and metabolic
syndromeAbsent Common Absent
Autoimmunity Positive Negative Positive
Pathophysiology β Cell destruction Insulin resistance and
relative insulinopeniaβ-cell dysfunction
Table 3.6: WHO criteria: Levels of blood glucose in normal, pre-
diabetes and diabetes in glucose tolerance test.
 Euglycemic Pre-diabetes (impaired
glucose tolerance)Diabetes
Fasting glucose level <100 mg/dL >100 mg/dL but less
than 126 mg/dL>126 mg/dL on more
than one occasion
2-hour OGTT (75 gm
anhydrous glucose in
water)<140 mg/dL >140 mg/dL but <200
mg/dL>200 mg/dL

DIAGNOSIS OF DIABETES MELLITUS
Q. Write short note/essay on diagnosis of diabetes mellitus.
Classical symptoms: Diabetes may present with polyuria, polydipsia and
polyphagia. There may significant weight loss despite polyphagia.
Symptoms due to depressed immune status:  Diabetes is associated with
immune dysfunction. It may result in activation of pulmonary
tuberculosis, non-healing of wounds, candidial pruritus vulvae or balanitis,
recurrent styes and recurrent urinary tract infections.End-organ involvement: Some patients may present with symptoms of
end-organ involvement such as retinopathy, nephropathy or neuropathy.
Risk factors of DM: Some patients may have identifiable risk factors
such as obesity, pregnancy and first-degree relatives of known diabetics.
Normal Glucose Levels
Normally the blood glucose levels are maintained in a very narrow range of
70–120 mg/dL .
Glycemia can be classified into three categories: euglycemia (normal), pre-
diabetes (impaired) and diabetes (Table 3.6).
Pre-diabetes:  It is defined as condition in which there is impaired glucose tolerance, but elevated
blood sugar does not reach the criterion accepted for an outright diagnosis of diabetes . Pre-
diabetes may be either ‘impaired fasting glucose’ (IFG), based upon a fasting plasma glucose result,
or ‘impaired glucose tolerance’ (IGT), based upon the fasting and 2-hour oral glucose tolerance test
results (OGTT). Recently, the term ‘pre-diabetes’ has been changed to ‘ categories of increased risk
for diabetes ’. The criteria for diagnosis are:
Q. Write short note/essay on impaired fasting glucose (IFG).
Impaired fasting glucose (IFG): Fasting glucose level is >100 mg/dL but <126 mg/dL (whole
blood glucose ≥ 88 mg/dL but < 110 mg/dL). This diagnostic category does not need glucose
tolerance test. It is not a distinct clinical entity, but individuals have the future risk of frank
diabetes and cardiovascular disease.
Q. Write short note/essay on impaired glucose tolerance (IGT).
Impaired glucose tolerance (IGT): GTT values >140 mg/dL but <200 mg/dL (whole blood
glucose between 125 and 175 mg/dL 2 hours after oral glucose load). Impaired glucose tolerance is
not a disease but a risk factor for future diabetes and cardiovascular disease. This is heterogeneous
group of people who are obese, have fatty liver and are on medication which can alter glucose
tolerance. IGT patients have the same risk of cardiovascular disease as those with frank diabetes,
but microvascular complications are rare.Additionally, HbA 1c in the range of 5.7–6.4% is also included in ‘pre-diabetes’.
Risks in pre-diabetes:  (1) Progression to frank diabetes over time and (2) cardiovascular disease.

IFG and IGT are associated with the metabolic syndrome.
Medical nutrition therapy aimed at reducing 5–10% loss of body weight, exercise have been
found to prevent or delay the development of diabetes in individuals with IGT. However, no drug
therapy is recommended at present. Acarbose and metformin have been tried in Pre-diabetes.
Diagnostic Criteria for Diabetes Mellitus
Q. Write short essay/note on oral glucose tolerance test: WHO
diagnostic criteria.
WHO diagnostic criteria for diabetes mellitus (Box 3.1)
Box 3.1:  WHO criteria for the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus.
Fasting plasma glucose >126 mg/dL (7.0 mmol/L)
Random plasma glucose >200 mg/dL (11.1 mmol/L) with classical signs and symptoms.
One abnormal laboratory value is diagnostic in symptomatic individuals
–   Two values are needed in asymptomatic individuals
–   The glucose tolerance test is only required for borderline cases and for diagnosis of gestational
diabetes.
HbA 1c >6.5 (48 mmol/mol)
Q. Write short note on WHO diagnostic criteria for diabetes mellitus.
Criteria for diagnosis of diabetes (American Diabetes Association—Box
3.2)
Box 3.2:  Criteria for diagnosis of diabetes (American Diabetes Association 2016).
Typical symptoms of DM (polyuria, polydipsia, polyuria, weight loss) + random plasma glucose >200
mg/dL (symptoms of diabetes + random whole blood glucose >175 mg/dL)
OR
Fasting plasma glucose ≥126 mg/dL (fasting whole blood glucose ≥110 mg/dL).
OR
2-hour plasma glucose ≥200 mg/dL during an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) (whole blood ≥ 175
mg/dL during an oral 75 g glucose tolerance test).
OR
Glycated hemoglobin (HbA 1c) ≥6.5%
Q. Write short note/essay on ADA criteria for the diagnosis of diabetes
mellitus.
Q. Write short note/essay on differental diagnosis of glycosuria.
Differential diagnosis of glycosuria (Box 3.3)
Box 3.3:  Differential diagnosis of glycosuria.

Glycosuria with hyperglycemia
Endocrine disorders: Diabetes mellitus, acromegaly, Cushing’s syndrome, hyperthyroidism,
hyperadrenocorticism, functioning α- or β-cell pancreatic tumors, pheochromocytoma
Non-endocrine diseases: Increased intracranial tension (brain tumor or hemorrhage), liver
disorders, drugs (e.g. corticosteroids, adrenocoticotrophic hormones, thiazides), alimentary
glycosuria
Glycosuria without hyperglycemia: Renal glycosuria, pregnancy
Normal renal threshold is blood glucose level of 180 mg/dL and at this
level there is no glycosuria. If the blood sugar level exceeds the renal
threshold (usually >180–200 mg/dL), the excess glucose will not be
reabsorbed into the blood and will be eliminated in the urine as in cases of
diabetes mellitus. The presence of detectable amounts of glucose in urine
is termed glycosuria.When there is glycosuria, it should be determined whether it is secondary
to hyperglycemia (diabetes mellitus) or renal glycosuria or alimentary (lag
storage) glycosuria or any other causes (non-diabetic glycosuria).
Renal glycosuria
Q. Write short note/essay on renal glycosuria and Marble’s criteria for
diagnosis of renal glycosuria.
Definition: Renal glycosuria is the excretion of glucose in the urine at
normal blood glucose concentrations in the absence of any signs of
generalized proximal renal tubular dysfunction. There is decreased renal
threshold below the normal level of 180 mg/dL) for glucose. Renal
glycosuria is a benign condition transmitted as an autosomal dominant
disorder.Diagnosis of renal glycosuria: It is based on the Marble’s criteria (Box 3.4).
Box 3.4:  Marble’s criteria for the diagnosis of renal glycosuria.
Constant glycosuria with little fluctuation related to diet
Normal OGTT (oral glucose tolerance test)
Identification of urinary reducing substance as glucose
Normal storage and utilization of carbohydrates
Alimentary (lag storage) glycosuria
Q. Write short note/essay on alimentary (lag storage) glycosuria.
Alimentary glycosuria is characterized by a transient abnormal rise in

blood glucose level following moderate amount of a meal (which normally
does not cause appearance of glucose in the urine) and appearance of
glucose in the urine. It develops because the blood sugar level exceeds the
normal renal threshold (180 mg/dL).Conditions associated  with alimentary glycosuria:
–   Glucose tolerance test reveals a peak at 1 hour above renal threshold
(which causes glycosuria) but the fasting and post-prandial (i.e. 2 hours
after meal) glucose values are normal.
–   Following gastric surgery (e.g. gastrectomy or gastrojejunostomy) with
rapid gastric emptying time.
–   Hyperthyroidism
–   Liver diseases
–   Some normal individuals.
Oral Glucose Tolerance Test (OGTT)
Q. Write short essay/note on oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT).
Indication: It is not recommended for routine diagnosis of either type 1 or
type 2 DM. This is because fasting plasma glucose identifies the abnormal
glucose metabolism.
In patients where the fasting plasma glucose is in the range of impaired
fasting glucose (100–125 mg/dL)
Diagnosis of gestational diabetes mellitus
Uncertainty about the diagnosis of diabetes
Preparation of the patient: Patient should be taking an unrestricted
carbohydrate diet for at least 3 days or more prior to the test. Because
carbohydrate-restricted diet reduces glucose tolerance. Patient should be with
normal physical activity.OGTT is performed in the morning after patient has fasted overnight (at
least 8 hours).
The patient should rest for at least half an hour before starting the test, and
refrain from smoking, tea/coffee or exercise during the test.
Test: A fasting venous sample of blood is drawn to estimate the glucose
level.Patients is given 75 g of anhydrous glucose dissolved in 250–300 mL of

water orally over 5 minutes. Dose in children is 1.75 g of glucose/kg body
weight upto a maximum of 75 g. Time of starting glucose is taken as 0
hour.
A single venous sample of blood is drawn 2 hours after the glucose
administration and glucose level is estimated. (previously, blood samples
were collected at 1/2 hour, 1 hour, 1 ½ hour, 2 hours).
The criteria for impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) are discussed (refer page
83).
MANAGEMENT OF DIABETES MELLITUS
Q. Long essay on:
Treatment and monitoring the control of uncomplicated diabetes
mellitus.
Diagnosis and management of type 1 DM/type 2 DM.
Diagnosis and treatment of obese patient with type 2 DM.
Diet and Lifestyle Management
Q. Write short essay/note on:
Dietary management of diabetes mellitus.
Medical nutrition therapy in diabetes.
Aims of dietary management (Box 3.5).
Box 3.5:  Aims of dietary management in diabetes.
Achieve good glycemic control
Reduce hyperglycemia and avoid hypoglycemia
Reduce the risk of diabetic complications
Weight management:
–   Weight maintenance for type 1 DM and non-obese type 2 DM
–   Weight loss for overweight and obese type 2 DM
Maintain adequate intake of nutrition
Avoid atherogenic diets or restrict diet those aggravate complications (e.g. avoid high protein diet
in nephropathy)
Medical Nutrition Therapy (MNT)
MNT should optimally manage the “ABCs” of diabetes control: glycated

hemoglobin (A1C), Blood pressure, and low-density lipoprotein (LDL)
Cholesterol.
MNT for diabetes has to be individualized, with consideration given to
eating habits and lifestyle factors. There must be flexibility in use of ordinary
foods for patients and families. The best diet advised is the Mediterranean
Diet.
MNT can reduce the Hb A1c levels by 0.6–1.4% if strictly adhered to.
A regular pattern of meals (and snacks) is important to maintain a
constant daily intake of carbohydrate, and protects against hypoglycemia.
Mild deviations in one or two meals does not matter. It is overall long-
term dietary pattern that is important.
Diet in the management of diabetes varies with the type of disease.
–   In insulin-dependent patients and those on intensive insulin regimens,
since adjustment of insulin can cover wide variations the composition
of the diet is not of critical importance.
–   In non-insulin-dependent patients who are not on exogenous insulin,
rigorous adherence to diet is needed, as the endogenous insulin
reserve is limited. The increased demand produced by excess calories
or increased intake of rapidly absorbed carbohydrate cannot be met.Caloric content of the diet: It is first decision to be taken based on the
need to gain, lose, or maintain current weight. Two basic types of diet
used in the treatment of diabetes are: (i) low calorie weight reducing
diets and (ii) weight maintenance diets. Dietary prescriptions, should be
such that there is daily deficit of 500 kcal, provide a realistic diet and
produce a weekly weight loss of around 0.5 kg. Calorie recommendations
for adults carrying out ‘average’ activity are 36 kcal/kg for men and 34
kcal/kg for women. Recommended diabetic diet should aim at achieving a
BMI of 22.Protein requirement: Minimal protein requirement for good nutrition is
about 0.9 g/kg of body weight/day (acceptable range is 1.0–1.5 g/kg/day)
and should constitute 10–15% of the total calorie intake. Very low
protein diets may retard the progression of diabetic nephropathy. Protein
content should be limited to 0.8 g/kg/day, or about 10 % of daily calories,
once nephropathy develops.Fat: The calories required through carbohydrate and fat must be
determined individually. Restriction of fat is necessary if weight loss is

desired , because of the high energy value of fat compared to protein and
carbohydrate. An average recommendation of fat for non-obese diabetic
patients and those without hyperlipidemias is 30% or less of total
calories, with 10% each as saturated, monounsaturated and
polyunsaturated fats. Monounsaturated fats improve plasma lipid profile
with reduction in total and LDL cholesterol without lowering HDL
cholesterol in type 2 DM patients.Carbohydrate: After choosing the protein and fat content, the remaining
calories are to be derived from carbohydrate. It should constitute 50–55%
of the daily caloric intake, of which significant amount should be in the
form of non-starch polysaccharide, as dietary fiber. Foods with higher
fiber content have a lower glycemic index. Restrict mono and
disaccharides (fructose, sucrose and glucose). The non-nutritive
sweeteners saccharin, aspartame, sucramate and acesulfame K are used to
reduce energy intake without loss of palatability.Alcohol consumption: It accounts for extra calories and has tendency to
inhibit gluconeogenesis. Thus, it may potentiate the hypoglycemic action
of sulfonylureas and insulin. In addition, alcohol predisposes towards the
development of lactic acidosis in patients taking metformin. Hence, it
should best avoided.
Recommended intake of various nutrients in diabetic patients is presented in
Table 3.7.
Pattern of distribution of calories is presented in Table 3.8.
Table 3.7: Recommended intake of various nutrients in diabetic
patients.
Nutrient Recommended intake
Carbohydrate ~50–60% of total calories
Protein 15–20% of total calories
Total fat 25–35% of total calories
Saturated fat <10% of total calories (<7% in dyslipidemia)
Polyunsaturated fat ~10% of total calories
Monounsaturated fat Up to 20% of total calories
Cholesterol <300 mg/day (<200 mg/day in dyslipidemia)
Total calories Adjust based on age, weight and height.

Sedentary individuals: 30 Kcal/kg/day
Moderately active individual: 35 Kcal/kg/day
Heavily active individuals: 40 Kcal/kg/day
Table 3.8: Pattern of distribution of calories.
Percentage of total calories Provision for
20 Breakfast
35 Lunch
15 Late evening feed
30 Dinner
Table 3.9: Treatment goals for adults with diabetes.
Index Goal
Glycemic control HbA 1c <7.0%
Preprandial capillary plasma glucose 3.9–7.2 mmol/L (70–130 mg/dL)
Peak postprandial capillary plasma glucose <10.0 mmol/L (<180 mg/dL)
Blood pressure <130/80
Lipids
Low-density lipoprotein <2.6 mmol/L (100 mg/dL)
High-density lipoprotein >1 mmol/L (40 mg/dL) in men >1.3 mmol/L (50
mg/dL) in women
Triglycerides <1.7 mmol/L (150 mg/dL)
Exercise
Advantages: Exercise improves insulin sensitivity, reduces fasting and
postprandial glucose, and has metabolic, cardiovascular and
psychological benefits in diabetic patients.
American Diabetes Association (ADA) recommends: 30–60 minutes of
aerobic activity 3–4 times a week
Exercise regimens should be individualized. This may be in the form of
walking, gardening, swimming or cycling.
Goals of therapy are presented in Table 3.9.
ORAL HYPOGLYCEMIC (GLUCOSE-

LOWERING) DRUGS
Q. Write short essay/note on oral hypoglycemic drugs and their
mechanism of actions and indications.
Agents used for treatment of type 1 and type 2 diabetes are listed in Table
3.10.
Based on their mechanisms of action, oral hypoglycemic drugs are
subdivided into agents that increase insulin secretagogues, reduce glucose
production, increase insulin sensitivity, enhance GLP-1 action, or promote
urinary excretion of glucose.
Various categories of oral hypoglycemic drugs are listed in Table 3.10.
Table 3.10: Agents used for treatment of type 1 and type 2 diabetes.
Mechanism
of actionExamples HbA 1c
reduction
(%)Specific
advantagesSpecific
disadvantages
Oral
Biguanides Hepatic
glucose
productionMetformin 1–2 Weight
neutral/mild
weight loss do
not cause
hypoglycemia,
inexpensiveDiarrhea,
nausea, lactic
acidosis, vitamin
B12 deficiency
(0.5%).
Insulin
secretagogues:
SulfonylureasInsulin
secretionGlibenclamide
(glyburide),
glipizide1–2 Inexpensive Hypoglycemia,
weight gain
sulfonamide
allergies
Insulin
secretagogues:
Non-sulfonylureasInsulin
secretionRepaglinide,
nateglinide,
nitiglinide1–2 Short onset of
action, lower
postprandial
glucoseHypoglycemia
Insulin
secretagogues:
Dipeptidyl
peptidase IV
inhibitorsProlong
endogenous
GLP-1 actionSaxagliptin,
sitagliptin,
vildagliptin0.5–0.8 Do not cause
hypoglycemiaNasopharyngitis
Meniscus lesions
Headache
Contact
dermatitis
Osteoarthritis
Tremor
α-Glucosidase
inhibitors↓ GI glucose
absorptionAcarbose,
miglitol0.5–0.8 Reduce
postprandialGI flatulence,
liver function

glycemia abnormalities
Contraindicated
in kidney
disease,
inflammatory
bowel disease
Thiazolidinediones
Contraindication:
CHF, liver disease↓ Insulin
resistance ↑
glucose
utilizationRosiglitazone,
pioglitazone0.5–1.4 Lower insulin
requirementsPeripheral
edema, CHF,
weight gain,
fractures,
macular edema;
rosiglitazone
may increase
cardiovascular
risk
Sodium glucose
cotransporter 2
(SGLT2)
inhibitorsHelp
eliminate
glucose in the
urineCanagliflozin,
dapagliflozin,
empagliflozin0.4 to 1.1 No
hypoglycemia,
weight lossGenital and
urinary
infections
Bile acid sequestrants
Bile acid
sequestrants
Contraindications:
Elevated plasma
triglyceridesBind bile
acids,
mechanism
of glucose
lowering not
knownColesevelam 0.5 Constipation,
dyspepsia,
abdominal pain,
nausea,
triglycerides
interfere with
absorption of
other drugs,
intestinal
obstruction
Parenteral
Insulin ↑ Glucose
utilization, ↓
hepatic
glucose
production,
and other
anabolic
actionsRefer Table
3.14Not
limitedKnown safety
profileInjection, weight
gain,
hypoglycemia
GLP-1 receptor
agonists
Contraindications:
Renal disease,
agents that also
slow GI motility↑ Insulin,↓
glucagon,
slow gastric
emptying
satietyExenatide,
liraglutide0.5–10 Weight loss, do
not cause
hypoglycemiaInjection,
nausea, risk of
hypoglycemia
with insulin
secretagogues,
pancreatitis,
renal failure
Amylin agonists Slow gastric Pramlintide 0.25–0.5 Reduce Injection,

Contraindication:
Agents that also
slow GI motilityemptying,↓
glucagonpostprandial
glycemia;
weight lossnausea, risk of
hypoglycemia
with insulin
Medical nutrition
therapy and
physical activity↓ Insulin
resistance, ↑
insulin
secretionLow-calorie,
low-fat diet,
exercise1–3 Other health
benefitsCompliance
difficult, long
term success low
Biguanides-MetforminQ. Write short essay/note on metformin.
It reduces both fasting level of blood glucose and the degree of
postprandial hyperglycemia in patients with type 2 diabetes but has no
effect on normal subjects. It is thought to act by inhibiting the hepatic
gluconeogenesis.It is particularly useful in obese patients or those patients who are not
responding optimally to maximal doses of sulfonylureas.
Hypoglycemia does not occur with therapeutic doses of metformin, which
permits its description as a ‘euglycemic’ drug rather than an oral
hypoglycemic agent.Metformin is not indicated for patients with type 1 diabetes.
Box 3.6:  Contraindication for metformin.
1. Malabsorption or GI disturbances/GI intolerance
2. Low BMI? less than 21 kg/m2, marked weight loss
3. Organ failure: Creatinine: >1.4 mg/dL
–   Liver failure: Acute/chronic
–   Cardiac failure, hypotension/sepsis
4. Active vitamin B 12 deficiency
Contraindication for metformin (Box 3.6).
Insulin Secretagogues (Table 3.11)—Agents that Affect the
ATP-sensitive K+ Channel
Sulfonylureas
Q. Write short essay/note on sulfonylurea and name newer
sulfonylureas.
They specifically bind to a receptor that closes an ATP-sensitive potassium

channel of the pancreatic β cell, thus depolarizing the cell membrane. This
results in an influx of extracellular calcium through voltage gated calcium
channels, which causes insulin granules to move toward the cell surface,
facilitating exocytosis. Thus sulfonylureas have an insulinotropic effect on
pancreatic β cells.
The sulfonylureas are most appropriate for use in non-obese mild type 2
diabetes. In obese mild diabetics and others with peripheral insensitivity to
levels of circulating insulin, primary emphasis should be on weight reduction.
Weight gain is a frequent side effect of sulfonylureas.
First generation: Tolbutamide, chlorpropamide.
Second generation: Glibenclamide (glyburide), glipizide, gliclazide,
glimepiride.
Third generation: GlimiperideGlibenclamide should be taken about half an hour before meals, since
rapid absorption is delayed when the drug is taken with food. Most
sulfonylureas act via the 140 kDa part of the receptor while glimiperide
acts via 65 kDa part of the receptor, hence has better cardiovascular safety.
Table 3.11: Properties of insulin secretagogues.
Class/Genetic Name Daily dosage in milligrams
(mg)Duration of action in hours
Sulfonylureas
Glimepiride 1–8 24
Glipizide 5–40 12–18
Glipizide (extended release) 5–20 24
Glyburide/glibenclamide 1.25–20 12–24
Glyburide (micronized) 0.75–12 12–24
Nonsulfonylureas (Meglitinides)
Repaglinide 0.5–16 2–6
Nateglinde 180–360 2–4
GLP-1 Agonist
Exenatide 0.01–0.02 4–6
Liraglutide 0.6–1.8 12–24
Dipeptidyl Peptidase-4 Inhibitors
Saxagliptin 2.5–5 12–16
Sitagliptin 100 12–16

Vildagliptin 50–100 12–24
Nonsulfonylureas-Meglitinides
Repaglinide and nateglinide are not sulfonylureas but interact with the
ATP-sensitive potassium channel. Owing to their short half-life, these are
given with each meal or immediately before to reduce meal related
glucose excursions.Advantages of megltinides: Flexibility in mealtime dosing- ‘Ramzan
Drug’, no significant increase in bodyweight, can be utilized in mild to
moderate renal failure and lesser hypoglycemia.
Agents that Enhance GLP-1 Receptor Signaling—Incretin-
based TherapyThe incretin effect is defined as the increased stimulation of insulin
secretion caused by oral administration of glucose.
–   Two intestinal peptide hormones (incretin hormones) namely-glucose-
dependent insulinotropic peptide (GIP) and glucagon-like peptide1
(GLP1) have a potentiating effect on secretion of insulin by pancreas.
In response to food, GIP is secreted by the K cells in the duodenum
and GLP1 by the L cells of the ileum.
–   These hormones act on their receptors present on islet cells of pancreas
and stimulate insulin secretion in response to food. This stimulation of
insulin secretion by the gut is referred to as the intestinal secretion of
insulin or incretin effect.
–   The insulin secretion is markedly greater in response to an oral
than to an intravenous glucose challenge.Glucagon-like peptide-1 analogues
–   Drugs: Exenatide, lixisenatide, and liraglutide may be used in
combination with metformin, a sulfonylurea, or a thiazolidinedione.
These analogues need to be given parenterally.
–   Advantages: They produce weight loss and risk of hypoglycemia is
low.
–   Side effects: Include nausea, diarrhea and rarely pancreatitis.
Dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP-4) inhibitors, Gliptins
Q. Write short note on dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4)

inhibitors/vildagliptin.
–   An alternative approach to the use of GLP-1 analogues is to inhibit
dipeptidyl peptidase 4 to conserve endogenous GLP-1. DPP-4
enhance the incretin effect.
–   The enzyme dipeptidyl peptidase 4 (DPP-4) rapidly inactivates GLP1.
Inhibition of this enzyme thus potentiates the effect of endogenous
GLP1 secretion.
–   Drugs available: Linagliptin, saxagliptin, alogliptin, sitagliptin and
vildagliptin  are oral agents. They are most effective in the early
stages of type 2 DM when insulin secretion is relatively preserved.
They are recommended for second line use in combination with
metformin or a sulfonylurea.
–   They have a moderate effect in lowering blood glucose and risk of
hypoglycemia is low.
–   Side effects: Nausea, diarrhea, headache, upper respiratory symptoms,
myalgia and rare risk for pancreatitis.
–   Teneligliptin is a newer, more potent DPP-4 inhibitor which is safe in
renal failure.
α-Glucosidase Inhibitors
Q. Write short essay/note on α-glucosidase inhibitors/acarbose.
Drugs in this group: acarbose, miglitol and voglibose.
Mechanism of action: α-glucosidase is an enzyme present on the brush
border of the small intestine. It is needed for the breakdown of
oligosaccharides (carbohydrates) into simple sugars (before carbohydrates
can be absorbed) in the intestinal lumen.α-glucosidase inhibitors reduce glucose absorption  by inhibiting the
enzyme α-glucosidase. This results in poor absorption of carbohydrates
thereby reduces postprandial hyperglycemia.
They neither affect glucose utilization nor insulin secretion.
Indications: They are useful in the management of patients who develop
significant post-prandial hyperglycemia but otherwise have relatively well-
controlled blood glucose levels.Dosage: Dose of both acarbose and miglitol is 25 mg which is first started

with a single dose taken just before evening meal. This can be gradually
increased to 50 mg with each meal. Dose of voglibose is 0.2–0.3 mg, just
before each meal.
Major side effects: These drugs are poorly tolerated and may produce
diarrhea, flatulence, and abdominal distension. They are due to increased
delivery of unabsorbed oligosaccharides to the large intestine where it
undergoes fermentation.Advantages: They are not as potent as other oral hypoglycemic drugs in
lowering the HbA1c but they are unique because it reduces the
postprandial glucose rise even in patients with type 1 DM. They do not
produce hypoglycemia.
Thiazolidinediones
Q. Write short essay/note on thiazolidinediones.
Drugs in this group: Thiazolidinediones (more conveniently known as the
‘glitazones’) includes pioglitazone, rosiglitazone and troglitazone.
Troglitazone and rosiglitazone are withdrawn due to increased incidence of
liver failure and increased cardiovascular risk, respectively in patients using
it.
Mechanism of action: Thiazolidinediones reduce insulin resistance by
binding to peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR-γ ). Highest levels of the PPAR-γ receptor are found in adipocytes. PPAR-γ is
a nuclear receptor which regulates transcription of large numbers of genes
including those involved in lipid metabolism (promote adipocyte
differentiation, reduce hepatic fat accumulation and promote fatty acid
storage) and insulin action.Pioglitazone
Q. Write short note on side effects of pioglitazone.
Dosage of pioglitazone: 15–45 mg/day.
Combination therapy: It can be combined with metformin and
sulfonylureas.
Side effects: Include
–   Weight gain of 2–3 kg (due to fluid retention as well as increase in
adiposity), fluid retention and heart failure

–   Mild rise in LDL and HDL levels
–   Mild anemia and osteoporosis (increased propensity to bone fractures),
bladder carcinoma
Maximum effect may be seen only after 3–4 weeks.
Precaution s: Liver function should be periodically monitored as liver
dysfunction may develop. It is contraindicated in liver disease and
congestive cardiac failure.
Other Drugs Used in Diabetes
Sodium-glucose co-transporter 2(SGLT2) inhibitors: (e.g.
dapagliflozin, Remogliflozin, empagliflozin, ertugliflozin canagliflozin).
Sodium-dependent glucose co-transporters (SGLT) are found in the
intestinal mucosa of the small intestine and the proximal tubules of the
nephrons. SGLT2 inhibition is independent of glucose-dependent insulin
secretion by the pancreatic β cells. The adverse effects of SGLT2
inhibitors may include fatigue, hypoglycemia, increased urine output,
increased hematocrit, and mycotic genital or urinary tract infections.
Other side effects include hypotension, acute kidney injury, bone fracture
and auto-amputations.Amylin agonist: Pramlintide is a synthetic pancreatic hormone amylin. It
is to be injected before each meal.
Bile acid-binding resins: Colesevelam is a bile acid sequestrants, act in
the GI tract to reduce glucose absorption. Side effects can include
constipation, nausea, and dyspepsia.Dopamine agonist: Bromocriptine is an ergot-derived dopamine agonist
that has been used for the treatment of hyperprolactinemia and Parkinson
disease. A quick release formulation of bromocriptine is used for the
treatment of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Bromocriptine (up to 4.8 mg daily)
as monotherapy or as adjunctive therapy to sulfonylureas was minimally
effective in reducing HbA1c. Common side effects include nausea,
vomiting, dizziness, and headache.Lipase Inhibitors (Orlistat)
It produces weight-loss which improve glucose tolerance and slows the
rate of progression to type 2 diabetes.

Drugs in Pipeline
Glucokinase activators: Piragliatin
Dual PPAR (α and  γ)agonists:  Aleglitazar
Chromium (Cr), sodium tungstate, vanadium, proxyfan, β-sitosterol
S-Allylcysteine (a natural constituent of fresh garlic)
Otelixizumab, an anti-CD3 monoclonal antibody, is known to stimulate
C-peptide levels and reduce insulin requirement in type 1 diabetes.
Box 3.7:  Goals of insulin therapy.
Elimination of primary symptoms of hyperglycemia and glycosuria
Prevention of diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) and hyperosmolar coma
Restoration of lost lean body mass
Improvement of physical performance and sense of well-being
Reduction of frequent infections
During pregnancy: decrease fetal malformation, maternal and fetal morbidity
Delay, arrest or prevent macrovascular or microvascular complications
Insulin Treatment
Q. Write short essay/note on:
Role of insulin in the management of diabetes/insulin therapy.
Classify insulins. Give a brief account of the commonly used
insulins.
Insulin indication and types/Indications for short, intermediate
and long acting insulins.
Insulin is necessary for all patients with type 1 DM and many patients
with type 2 DM. Goals of insulin therapy is mentioned in Box 3.7.
General Indications for Insulin Therapy (Table 3.12)
Table 3.12: Indications for insulin therapy.
Type 1 DM
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)
Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic stateDiabetes under following conditions
Pregnancy (preferably prior to pregnancy)
Acute severe illness needing hospitalization
Perioperative/intensive care unit setting
Patients with acute coronary syndrome (MI)
Patients on high dose corticosteroids

Inability to tolerate or contraindication to oral
antiglycemic agents
Newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes with
significantly elevated blood glucose levels
(patients with severe symptoms or DKA)Patient no longer achieving therapeutic goals
on combination antiglycemic therapy
Insulin Preparations
Classification of insulin preparations (Table 3.13)
Table 3.13: Various ways of classification of insulin preparations.
Basis of classification Types
Source Bovine, porcine and human insulins
Purity Conventional, single peak and monocompotent
insulins
Time course of action Rapid, intermediate and long-acting insulins
Strength 40 and 100 units/mL
Newer insulin analogues Glargine, determer, etc.
Bolus insulin (mealtime or prandial) Regular insulin, lispro, aspart, glulisine
Basal insulin NPH (isophane insulin), glargine, detimer
Properties of Various Insulin Preparations
The commonly used insulin preparations and their duration of action are
presented in Table 3.14.
Table 3.14: Duration of action (in hours) of various insulin preparations.
Class Type Onset of effect
(hours)Peak effect
(hours)Effective
duration of
action (hours)
Rapid acting Insulin analogues:
lispro, aspart,
glulisine<0.25 0.5–1.5 2–4
Short-acting Regular
(crystalline,
soluble, plain)0.5–1 2–3 3–6
Semilente 0.5–1 2–6 10–12
Intermediate Isophane (NPH) 2–4 4–10 10–16
Lente (excess zinc 1–3 6–12 18–24

ions)#
Long-acting Protamine zinc
(PZI)2–4 14–24 36
Ultralente 2–4 18–24 36
Insulin analogues:
glargine, detemir1–4 None 18–24
#Lente (intermediate acting) insulin is mixtures of semilente and ultralente in
the ratio of 30:70, respectively.
Insulin Analogs/Newer Insulins (Table 3.15 and Fig. 3.5)
Q. Write short note on human insulin analogs and advantages of newer
insulins/insulin analogs.
Insulin analogs are prepared by modifying human insulin and have replaced
soluble and isophane insulins, especially type 1 diabetes mellitus. Insulin
analogs have more flexibility and convenience. In contrast to soluble insulin
(which should be injected 30 minutes before eating), rapid-acting insulin
analogues can be given immediately before, during or even after meals.
Long-acting insulin analogues (better than isophane insulin) maintain ‘basal’
insulin levels for up to 24 hours, and may be given once daily.
Table 3.15: Insulin analogs.
Short acting Long acting
Lispro Glargine
Aspart Detemir
Glulisine Degludec
Fig. 3.5: Amino acid structure of insulin and insulin analogs.

Patients on regular insulin regimens may develop repeated episodes of
hypoglycemia between meals (during some part of the day) and particularly
at night. Insulin analogues are useful in such patients. The various
preparations include:
Insulin Lispro
It is first human insulin analog produced by recombinant DNA technology
utilizing a non-pathogenic strain of E.coli .
Glucose-lowering activity: More rapid onset of action (<15 minutes),
early peak (60–90 minutes) and a shorter duration  of glucose-lowering
activity (<5 hours).
Disadvantages: Because of its short duration of action
–   Patient needs to take this insulin analog just before or after meals.
–   Patients need additional use of longer-acting insulin to maintain
glucose control.
Insulin Aspart and Insulin Glulisine
They are also short-acting insulin analogs similar to lispro.
Insulin Glargine
It is a human ‘peakless’ bioengineered insulin analog that has a long
duration of action  and has an acidic pH.
Glucose-lowering activity: After a lag time of 4 to 6 hours, the flat
peakless effect last for 24 hours.
Mechanism of action: After injection into the subcutaneous tissue, acidic
form of insulin becomes neutral and forms micro-precipitate. They
release small amounts of insulin very slowly. It results in a relatively
constant concentration for 24 hours without a pronounced peak.
Advantages: It is given once daily as subcutaneous injection generally at
bedtime. Hypoglycemia does not develop.
Disadvantages: As insulin glargine is in acid form, it may cause
increased pain at the injection site. Its acid nature also limits its ability
to mix with other insulins.
Insulin Detemir
It is a long acting, basal soluble human insulin analog and has a neutral

pH.
Advantages
Because of its neutral pH, it causes least pain  at the site of injection.
It binds to albumin via its fatty acid chain which allows this analog to
remain liquid and soluble following injection. It has prolonged mode of
action due to its attachment to fatty acid.
Neither renal nor hepatic impairment exert influence over its
pharmacological effects.
No gain of weight.
–   It is effective when administered once or twice daily and combined
with  the basal soluble analogue insulin and/or with oral
hypoglycemic drugs or pre-meal short acing insulin regimen.
Insulin detemir and the rapid-acting analog insulin aspart or lispro, it
closely mimic near normal insulin profiles and improves glycemic
control than more conventional insulin therapy.
Insulin Degludec
It is a long acting (>40 hours) human insulin analog.
It forms soluble multi-hexamers at the site of subcutaneous injection and
releases monomers slowly to give an ultra-long peakless phmacokinetic
(PK) profile. It reduces variability of concentration in the plasma with
once daily regimen.
Advantages of Degludec
Peakless insulin
Excellent improvement in HbA1c, superior fasting plasma glucose (FPG)
reduction
Less hypoglycemia. Reduction of up to 36% in nocturnal hypoglycemia
Flexibility: Dosing flexibility: administration any time on any day.
Schematic representation of duration of action of insulin profiles in
diabetes mellitus is depicted in Figure 3.6.

Fig. 3.6: Insulin therapy in diabetes mellitus. Schematic representation of duration of action of insulin
profiles.
Merits and demerits of newer insulin/insulin analogs (Table 3.16).
Table 3.16: Merits and demerits of newer insulin/insulin analogs.
Merits Demerits
Better mimicking of physiological insulin
secretion
Better control of glucose levels in the fasting,
inter-digestive and post prandial period
Lesser risk of hypoglycemia (especially
nocturnal)
No need to be injected half an hour before
meals
More predictable action profile independent of
dose/site of injection/exercise
Greater flexibility with short acting analogues
Compliance is improved with long acting
analogues as once a day insulinNo significant different in adverse effects
when compared to standard insulins
Worsening retinopathy with Lispro
(homologous to IGF-1)
Carcinogenicity: Concerns over Glargine
carcinogenicity
High cost
Q. Write short note on advantages/merits and demerits of newer
insulin/insulin analogs.
Inhaled Insulin

Inhaled human insulin powder was introduced in 2006 and its absorption
was through the alveolar surface in the lungs. However, because of
adverse effects and cost, it was withdrawn in 2007.
Inhalation was done with each meal along with single injection of long-
acting insulin to provide basal levels of insulin.
Side effects: Cough, dry mouth, sore throat and shortness of breath, and
hypoglycemia.
Insulin Regimens (Table 3.17)
Three insulin regimens include (i) conventional insulin therapy, (ii) multiple
subcutaneous injections (MSI) and (iii) continuous subcutaneous insulin
infusion (CSII). The choice of regimen depends on the degree of glycemic
control desired, the severity of insulin deficiency, the patient’s lifestyle, and
their ability to adjust the insulin dose. Most of type 1 diabetes requires two or
more injections of insulin daily. In type 2 diabetes, insulin is usually started
as once-daily long-acting insulin, either alone or in combination with oral
hypoglycemic agents.
Table 3.17: Insulin regimens.
Once-daily insulin regimen Long acting peakless insulin + oral
hypoglycemic agents
Twice daily insulin regimen Intermediate insulin (NPH) given twice daily
Sliding scale- premixed/split- mix regimen Combination of premixed insulin (30:70/50:50)
given twice daily or combination of short and
long acting analogues given three to four times a
day
Basal-bolus regimen/multiple daily injection
therapyBasal-long acting or intermediate acting insulin
(NPH, detemir/glargine) once daily usually at
night
AND
Bolus-separate injections of short or rapid acting
insulin (Regular, Aspart/lispro/glulisine) at each
meal.
Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion /
insulin pump therapyPump delivers a constant feed of insulin into the
body via a cannula subcutaneously
At meal times, an increased burst (bolus) of
insulin can be delivered.
Conventional insulin therapy: It is the simplest regimen and used
commonly. In this regimen, intermediate-acting insulin  (lente), with or

without the addition of small amounts of regular insulin  are injected
subcutaneously once or twice per day.
Insulin mixtures: In this, intermediate-acting insulin along with small
doses of regular insulin is administered to achieve better euglycemic
status.
Split lente regimen: If the total daily requirement of insulin exceeds 50 or
60 units, or when there is a need for better control, the intermediate acting
insulin (lente) is administered in two doses/day. Two-thirds of the total
required dose is taken before breakfast (7–8 AM) and the remaining one-
third before dinner (7–8 PM).
Multiple subcutaneous injections (MSI): Insulin is injected subcutaneously
several times a day into the anterior abdominal wall, upper arms, outer thighs
and buttocks.In this regimen, intermediate or long acting insulin  is administered in
the evening as a single dose/day together with regular insulin prior to
each meal .
It achieves overall control and may reduce the rate of development of
long-term complications.
Commonly used schedule: Calculate the total daily dose of insulin
required at 0.6–0.7 units/kg body weight.
–   25% of the calculated dose is administered as intermediate–acting
insulin at bedtime.
–   75% of the calculated dose is administered as regular insulin in
three divided doses (40% before breakfast, 30% before lunch and
30% before dinner).
Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII)/alternative insulin
therapies: ‘Open-loop’ systems are small battery-powered portable insulin
pumps which provide continuous subcutaneous, intraperitoneal or
intravenous infusion of insulin.In this regimen, a small battery-driven insulin pump  is worn externally
and connected to a butterfly needle, which is inserted into the anterior
abdominal wall.
It mimics the physiological basal plus prandial pattern of insulin secretion
and can achieve excellent glycemic control. The rate of insulin infusion
can be programmed to match the patient’s diurnal variation in

requirements. About 40% of the total daily required dose is given at
basal rate; the remainder is given as preprandial boluses.
Advantages:
–   Ease of taking multiple boluses if desired.
–   Availability to program the basal rate of insulin delivery especially
useful in dawn phenomenon.
–   Improved control over multiple dose insulin (MDI).
–   Reduced risk of severe hypoglycemia and hypoglycemic attacks can be
easily treated.
Disadvantages:
–   Needs a high degree of patient motivation
–   Expensive- high cost
–   Infection at infusion sites
–   High incidence of ketoacidosis
–   Hypoglycemia especially nocturnal and may be fatal.
–   Risk of mechanical malfunctioningArtificial pancreas project aims to close the loop by using miniaturized
glucose sensors to communicate wirelessly with the insulin pump. This
would automatically adjust its insulin rate. However, this is not used in
clinical practice at present.
Insulin Delivery Systems
Q. Write short note on newer insulin delivery device.
Insulin syringes: These are available as disposable plastic syringe in
various sizes (i.e. 40 U/mL or 100 U/mL). Insulin can be administered
using a fine needle (can be re-used several times). They can be used easily
and has enhanced accuracy.Insulin pen: An insulin pen holds a prefilled cartridge contain desired
type of insulin and has a fine disposable needle that can be changed for
each injection. It is suitable for multiple dosing.Implanted insulin pump therapy: Controlled pumps can be implanted in
the peritoneal cavity. Insulin released into the peritoneal cavity is mostly
absorbed and delivered into the splanchnic system.External insulin pump therapy: Portable insulin infusion pump or

continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion (CSII) are alternative insulin
delivery devices (refer above).
Complications of Insulin Therapy
Q. Write short essay/note on adverse/side effects (complications) of
insulin therapy.
Hypoglycemia during insulin treatment: It is the most common
complication of insulin therapy and causes anxiety for both patients and
relatives. It occurs due to imbalance between injected insulin and a
patient’s normal diet, activity and basal insulin requirement. The risk of
hypoglycemia is more before meals, during the night, and during exercise.
Irregular eating habits, unusual exertion and alcohol excess may
precipitate hypoglycemic episodes.At the injection site
–   A shallow injection  causes intradermal (rather than subcutaneous)
delivery of insulin resulting in painful, red lesions or even scarring.
Abscess at injection site is extremely rare.
–   Local allergic reactions: May occur at the injection site early in
therapy. These include local itching, erythematous and indurated
lesions, and discrete subcutaneous nodules. They usually resolve
spontaneously.
–   Fatty lumps, called as lipohypertrophy, may develop due to overuse
of a single injection site due to lipogenic effects of the injected insulin.
It may occur with any type of insulin.
–   Insulin resistance and anti-insulin antibodies: Most common cause
of mild insulin resistance is obesity. Insulin resistance may be
associated with antibodies directed against the insulin receptor.Weight gain: Many patients may gain weight on insulin treatment,
especially if the insulin dose is increased inappropriately. This may be
prevented by diet restriction, exercise, and addition of metformin.Generalized allergic (urticaria and anaphylactic) reactions are very rare.
Pancreatic Transplantation
Q. Write short note on pancreatic transplantation.
Other option available in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus includes

whole pancreas transplantation and islet cell transplantation. Both
transplantation can restore normoglycemia without exogenous insulin therapy
and survival rates of these patients are consistent with other organ
transplantation procedures.
Whole pancreas transplantation: At present, it is usually performed only in
patients with end-stage renal failure who require a combined
pancreas/kidney transplantation and in whom diabetes control is
particularly difficult (e.g. because of recurrent hypoglycemia).Transplantation of isolated pancreatic islets: It is performed by harvesting
pancreatic islets from cadavers (two or three pancreata are usually
necessary). These islets cells are injected into the portal vein and they seed
themselves into the liver.Management of type 1 diabetes, nonobese type 2 diabetes and obese type
2 diabetes are summarized in Boxes 3.8, 3.9 and 3.10 respectively.
Box 3.8:  Summarized management of type 1 diabetes.
Insulin therapy:  Oral hypoglycemic agents (OHAs) are ineffective and patient should be started
on insulin therapy. It can be split dose insulin therapy or intensive insulin therapy.
Usually need multiple injections for acceptable glycemic control.
Box 3.9:  Summarized management of nonobese type 2 diabetes.
Lifestyle modification:  If hyperglycemia is mild, following diabetic-diet can occasionally restore
normal metabolic control.
Monotherapy:  When diet therapy is not sufficient, a trial of sulfonylurea is often effective in
reducing sugar levels.
Two drug therapy:  Next step involved combination therapy with metformin,
Thiazolidinedione/Dipeptidyl peptidase IV inhibitors/Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor
agonists/sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 inhibitors can be the next addition for sugar control.
Insulin therapy:  When patient fails the combination of these three drugs, insulin therapy is
indicated. Usually patients have enough baseline insulin to allow use of single long acting insulin
to take care of sugar control.
Box 3.10: Summarized management of obese type 2 diabetics.
Weight reduction:  First step is weight reduction to improve tissue sensitivity to insulin.
Monotherapy:  Among oral hypoglycemic agents (OHAs) monotherapy with alpha-glucosidase
inhibitors or metformin  may be started, as they are not associated with weight gain or drug-
induced hypoglycemia.
Two drug therapy:  If metformin therapy is inadequate, sulfonylurea may be added .
Three drug therapies:  If this combination of metformin and sulfonylurea is ineffective in
controlling sugar levels then addition of thiazolidinediones/Dipeptidyl peptidase IV inhibitors/

Glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists/sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 inhibitors should be
considered.
Insulin therapy should be instituted if the combination of these three drugs fails to restore
euglycemia. Generally, the sulfonylurea is discontinued when insulin therapy is instituted but the
patient can stay on the metformin and thiazolidinediones. Usually patients have enough baseline
insulin to allow use of single long acting insulin to take care of sugar control.
Algorithm of therapy for type 2 diabetes mellitus is depicted in Flowchart
3.1.
Flowchart 3.1:  Stepwise approach for the management of type 2 diabetes.

(DPP-4-i: dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitor; GLP-1-RA: glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor
agonist;SGLT2-i: sodium and glucose transporter 2 inhibitor; SU: sulphonylurea; TZD,
thiazolidinedione)
Glycosylated Hemoglobin (HbA 1c) and Fructosamine
Q. Write short essay/note on glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c).
Glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c)
HbA1 is a minor component of adult hemoglobin (HbA) and its important
subgroup is glycosylated hemoglobin (HbA1c).HbA1c has an irreversibly
attached glucose and is known as glycosylated hemoglobin.
Normal level: Glycosylated hemoglobin is expressed as a percentage of
the normal hemoglobin (standardized range 4–6.1%). In general, the goal
of diabetic treatment is to obtain a value below 7%. It should be as close to
normal (<6%) as possible without significant hypoglycemia.Significance: The percentage of glycosylated hemoglobin can be
measured and its value provides an excellent assessment of overall state of
glycemic control during the preceding 3 months.Factors that influence HbA1c level:
–   Blood glucose level: The level of HbA1c is dependent on the
prevailing glucose level in the blood (exposure of the red cell to
glucose). If young RBCs are exposed to extremely high blood glucose
(>400 mg/dL) for several hours, HbA1c level increases. Thus, in
patients with diabetes mellitus, it is useful in assessing the blood
glucose control, higher the count poorer is the control.
–   Disease associated with altered RBC survival: Glycation of
hemoglobin occurs only when the RBC circulates in serum. Older
RBCs have more glycosylated hemoglobin than reticulocytes. Total
HbA1c reflects the mixture of both old and younger RBCs. In patients
with hemolytic anemia such as thalassemia, the measured HbA1c level
will be lower, independent of glycemia. Conversely, if the circulating
RBCs are older (e.g. aplastic anemia), then measured HbA1c level will
be higher, regardless of glycemic status.Although the glycosylated hemoglobin level provides a rapid assessment
of glycemic control, blood glucose level should also be tested to know the

control.
Glycosylated Plasma Proteins (‘Fructosamine’)
It may also be measured as an index of diabetic control. It measures
glycation of all serum proteins and the major component being
glycosylated albumin. Since albumin accounts for most of the protein in
blood, the measurement of fructosamine, for practical purposes, measures
glycated albumin. As albumin has a turnover of about 2 weeks,
fructosamine reflects glycemia over the preceding 2–3 weeks (shorter
period).It is useful in diabetic patients with anemia or hemoglobinopathy and
in pregnancy (when hemoglobin turnover is changeable).
Table 3.18: Complications of diabetes.
ACUTE METABOLIC COMPLICATIONS
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)
Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state (hyperosmolar non-ketotic diabetic coma)
Lactic acidosis
Hypoglycemia
CHRONIC (LONG-TERM) COMPLICATIONS
A. Vascular Complications
1. Microvascular
Ophthalmic
–   Diabetic retinopathy (non-proliferative and proliferative)
–   Cataract
–   Glaucoma
Peripheral neuropathy
–   Sensory
–   Motor
–   Sensory motor
–   Autonomic neuropathyRenal
–   Nephropathy: Microalbuminuria, macroalbuminuria
–   Chronic kidney disease
Foot disease
2. Macrovascular
Coronary artery disease
Peripheral vascular disease
Cerebrovascular disease

B.  Nonvascular Complications
Gastroparesis
Infections
Skin changes (dermatological complications)
Hearing loss.
COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES
Classification of complications of diabetes is presented in Table 3.18.
Q. Write short essay/note on:
Classify and enumerate the complications of diabetes
Chronic complications of diabetes mellitus.
Acute Complications of Diabetes (Table 3.18)
Q. Write short essay/note on acute complications of diabetes mellitus.
Diabetic Ketoacidosis
Q. Discuss the precipitating causes, pathogenesis, clinical features,
diagnosis, complications and management of diabetic ketoacidosis
(DKA).
Q. Write short essay/note on diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA).
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) is a medical emergency and a serious
complication of diabetes. More common and marked in type 1 diabetes
and is rare but may also occur in type 2 diabetes. It is usually seen in
previously undiagnosed diabetes mellitus. Precipitating factors are listed in
Box 3.11.

Fig. 3.7:  Pathogenesis of diabetic ketoacidosis.
Mechanism/pathogenesis (Fig. 3.7): Cardinal biochemical features of DKA:
(1) hyperglycemia, (2) hyperketonemia (and ketonuria), and (3)
metabolic acidosis. DKA develops due to the combined effects (1) relative
or absolute insulin deficiency and (2) counter-regulatory glucagon excess.
Other hormones such as catecholamines (e.g. epinephrine), cortisol, and
growth hormone are also be produced in excess.Box 3.11: Precipitating factors of diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) in a known
patient with DM.
Infections (pneumonia, urinary tract infections, sepsis, gastroenteritis)
Inadequate insulin
Infarction (cerebral, coronary, mesenteric, peripheral)
Severe stress (e.g. physical, emotional)
Hyperthyroidism, pheochromocytoma
Drugs (e.g. thiazides, corticosteroids, cocaine)
Pregnancy.
Consequences of insulin deficiency and glucagon excess
Severe hyperglycemia: The blood glucose levels of 500 to 700 mg/dL.
Diuresis and dehydration: Hyperglycemia causes a hyperosmolar state,

which induces an osmotic diuresis leading to volume depletion and
dehydration  (characteristic features of ketoacidosis). There is loss of
electrolyte, particularly of sodium and potassium.
Q. Write short essay/note on ketone bodies.
Activation of the ketogenic machinery:
–   Lipolysis: Insulin deficiency stimulates lipoprotein lipase which
breaks down fat stores (lipolysis) and increases the free fatty acids
(FFA) levels in the plasma.
–   Generation of ketone bodies in liver: In DKA, hyperglucagonemia
(excess of glucagon) alters hepatic metabolism of free fatty acid to
favor ketone body formation. This is through activation of the enzyme
carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1. The free fatty acids are esterified to
fatty acyl coenzyme A in the liver. In the mitochondria of liver cells,
fatty acyl coenzyme A molecules are oxidized to ketone bodies
(acetoacetic acid, β -hydroxybutyric acid and minor amount of
acetone) . These ketone bodies accumulate in the body fluids.Ketonemia and ketonuria: When the rate of production of ketone
bodies exceeds the rate of utilization  by peripheral tissues, it results in
ketonemia and ketonuria.
Metabolic acidosis: Acetoacetic acid and β-hydroxybutyric acid are
strong acids and are responsible for the acidotic state. If the excretion of
ketone bodies in the urinary is compromised by dehydration, it results in
systemic metabolic ketoacidosis (high anion gap).
Clinical features of DKADKA may present as the initial symptom complex that leads to a diagnosis
of type 1 DM for the first time, but more commonly, it develops in patient
with already diagnosed diabetes mellitus.Clinical features of diabetic ketoacidosis are those of uncontrolled
diabetes with acidosis. Patients typically present with polyuria,
polydipsia and other symptoms of progressive hyperglycemia.
Other clinical features include nausea, vomiting, weakness, weight
loss, lethargy, anorexia, leg cramps, blurred vision, and shortness of
breath. Vomiting is an ominous symptom because it precludes oral
replacement of fluid losses; severe volume depletion may follow quickly.

Abdominal pain  is classically periumbilical and sometimes may be so
severe that may be confused with a surgical acute abdomen (such as acute
pancreatitis or ruptured viscus).
Physical findings in DKA
Findings secondary to dehydration and acidosis: These include dry skin
and mucous membranes, reduced jugular venous pressure, tachycardia,
hypotension (postural or supine), cold extremities/peripheral cyanosis,
depressed mental function, and Kussmaul (deep, rapid
hyperventilation) respirations.Fruity (sickly-sweet) smell  of ketones on the patient’s breath  allows an
instant diagnosis.
Hypothermia: Body temperature is either normal or low in
uncomplicated DKA. Presence of fever suggests infection.
Mental apathy, confusion or a reduced conscious level may be observed.
Abdominal tenderness.
Symptoms and signs of cerebral edema:  Headache, altered sensorium,
seizures, bowel/bladder incontinence, papilledema, bradycardia,
hypertension and respiratory arrest.
Complications: Acute gastric dilatation/erosive gastritis, cerebral edema,
hyperkalemia/hypokalemia, hypoglycemia, infections, myocardial infarction,
mucormycosis, and ARDS.Investigations
Urine examination: Shows glucose and ketones.
Plasma levels of following is to be estimated:
–   Glucose  levels are raised (hyperglycemia) often markedly.
–   Ketone bodies are raised.
Serum electrolytes:
–   Potassium levels are normal or raised in the initial stages despite a
total body deficit of potassium. This is because, metabolic acidosis
shifts potassium from intracellular compartment to extracellular
compartment. The levels drop once the treatment is started.
–   Sodium levels are usually low, particularly if the patient has repeated
vomiting and continued to drink water (pseudohyponatremia).

–   Bicarbonate levels are low. Value <12 mmol/L indicates severe
acidosis.
–   Phosphorus level may be high initially despite a total body deficit of
phosphorus.
Blood:
–   Leukocytosis invariably occurs in DKA; this represents a stress
response and may not necessarily indicate infection.
–   ABG: Reveals high anion gap metabolic acidosis.
–   Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) is usually raised due to prerenal failure
produced from volume depletion.
–   Infection screen: Full blood count, blood and urine culture, C-reactive
protein, chest X-ray.
–   Serum amylase may be elevated.
ECG: To rule out myocardial infarction.
Diagnostic criteria for DKA (Table 3.19): Diagnostic criteria for diabetic
ketoacidosis include plasma glucose >250 mg/dL, arterial pH <7.3, serum
bicarbonate <15 mEq/L, ketonemia and/or ketonuria, and anion gap of
>12 mEq/L (usually present in DKA).
Table 3.19: Diagnostic criteria for diabetic ketoacidosis and the
hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state.
Features Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) Hyperosmolar
hyperglycemic
state (HHS)Mild Moderate Severe
Mental status Alert Drowsy Stupor or coma Stupor or coma
Urine or serum
ketone bodiesPositive Negative to trace
Plasma glucose
level (mg/dL)>250 >600
Effective serum
osmolality
(mOsm/kg)Variable >320
Arterial pH 7.25–7.30 7.00–7.24 <7.00 >7.30
Serum bicarbonate
(mEq/L)15–18 10–15 <10 >15
Anion gap >10 >12 >12 <12

(mEq/L)
Management
Goals of therapy of diabetic ketoacidosis (Box 3.12).
Box 3.12:  Goals of therapy of diabetic ketoacidosis.
Rehydration
Reduction of hyperglycemia
Correction of electrolyte imbalance
Correction of acid-base imbalance
Investigation and correction of precipitating factors
Treatment of complications
Fluid resuscitation:  It is a critical part of treating patients with DKA as it is a state of severe
dehydration.
Intravenous solutions to replace extravascular and intravascular fluids and electrolyte losses. The
usual fluid deficit is minimum 3–5 L and should be replaced intravenously. They dilute levels of
both the glucose and the circulating counter regulatory hormones.
Fluid itself leads to correction of acidosis to some extent.
Fluid administration should be as follows:
–   0.9% NaCl  (15–20 mL/kg/hr)
–   Administer 1–3 L during the first hour.
–   Administer 1 L during the second hour.
–   Administer 1 L during the following 2 hours.
–   Administer 1 L every 4 hours, depending on the degree of dehydration and central venous
pressure readings.
–   0.45% NaCl infused at 4–14 mL/kg/hr is appropriate if the corrected serum sodium is elevated.
Insulin recommendationsInsulin is needed to help switch from a catabolic state to an anabolic state. Insulin helps in uptake
of glucose in tissues and the reduction of gluconeogenesis as well as free fatty acid and ketone
production.
In adult patients (if K+ <3.3 mEq/L), an IV bolus of regular insulin  continuous infusion at a dose
of 0.1 U/kg/hr (5–7 units/h in adults), should be administered.
If plasma glucose does not fall by 50 mg/dL from the initial value in the 1st hour, check hydration
status; if acceptable, the insulin infusion may be doubled every hour until a steady glucose decline
between 50 and 75 mg/h is achieved.When the plasma glucose reaches 250 mg/dL in DKA or 300 mg/dL in HHS, it may be possible to
decrease the insulin infusion rate to 0.05–0.1 unit/kg/hr (3–6 units/h), and dextrose (5–10%) may
be added to the intravenous fluids.Initiate subcutaneous insulin at least 2 hour before interruption of insulin infusion. Rapid acting
insulin analogues (glulisine, as part) can be given in place of regular insulin.
Potassium repletion
K+ >5.2 mEq/L
–   Do not give K+ initially, but check serum K+ with basic metabolic profile every 2 hours.

–   Establish urine output ~50 mL/hour.
K+ <3.3 mEq/L: Hold insulin and give K+ 20–30 mEq/hr until K+ >3.3 mEq/L.
K+ = 3.3–5.2 mEq/L: Give 20–30 mEq K+ in each L of IV fluid to maintain serum K+ 4–5
mEq/L.
Correction of acid base balance
Its role is controversial.
Sodium bicarbonate is only infused if decompensated acidosis starts to threaten the patient’s
life, especially when associated with either sepsis or lactic acidosis.
It is recommended for patients in shock and/or if pH is <6.9 .
When arterial pH is 6.9–7.0, one ampule 7.5% sodium bicarbonate (44 mEq/L) should be added to
200 mL of sterile water and administered intravenously at the rate of 200 mL/hour. If pH is below
6.9, 2 ampules of sodium bicarbonate in 400 mL of sterile water given at the same rate of 200
mL/hour. Once the pH reaches 7.1, no further bicarbonate should be given.
Box 3.13:  Criteria for resolution of diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA).
Glucose <200 mg/dL
Serum bicarbonate ≥18 mEq/L, and
Venous pH of >7.3.
Plasma osmolality effectively has fallen below 315 mOsmol/kg
The patient is able to eat
Phosphorus repletion:  A sharp drop of serum phosphorus can also occur during insulin treatment
and no treatment is usually necessary.
Treatment of concurrent infection:  In the presence of infection, the administration of proper
antibiotics is guided by the results of culture and sensitivity studies. It may be advisable to starting
empirical antibiotics on suspicion of infection until culture results are available. Criteria for
resolution of DKA is mentioned in Box 3.13.
Hyperglycemic Hyperosmolar State (HHS)
Q. Write short essay on:
Precipitating factors, clinical features, laboratory findings and
management of hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state (HHS).
Hyperosmolar non-ketotic (HONK) diabetic coma.
It is metabolic emergency which usually occurs as a complication of
uncontrolled type 2 diabetes mellitus. Patients usually present in middle
or later life (presently it is increasingly seen in younger adults), often
with previously undiagnosed diabetes.
This syndrome has a high mortality rate (>50%).
Characteristics of hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state (HHS): It is a

syndrome characterized by:
Severe hyperglycemia [>30 mmol/L (600 mg/dL)]
Hyperosmolality (serum osmolality >320 mOsm/kg)
Extreme dehydration in the absence of significant hyperketonemia (<3
mmol/L) or ketoacidosis (pH >7.3, bicarbonate >15 mmol/L).
Box 3.14: Precipitating factors for hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state (HHS).
Infections
Cerebrovascular accidents
Myocardial infarction
Concurrent medication: e.g. thiazide diuretics, steroids, immunosuppressive agents, phenytoin and
osmotic agents like mannitol
Peritoneal dialysis and hemodialysis
Tube feeding of high-protein formulas/consumption of glucose-rich fluids/parenteral nutrition
Precipitating factors for HHS are listed in Box 3.14.
Pathogenesis (Fig. 3.8)
A partial or relative insulin deficiency results in decreased utilization
of glucose  by skeletal muscle, fat and liver which in turn induces
hyperglucagonemia and increases hepatic glucose output.
Massive glycosuria results in large amount of water loss which along with
decreased intake due to associated illness results in severe dehydration.
As plasma volume decreases, renal insufficiency develops, and limits the
renal glucose loss. This increases further increase in blood glucose
levels. Severe hyperosmolality develops that causes mental confusion
and finally coma.
Clinical features
Onset: It is usually more insidious  in onset compared to diabetic
ketoacidosis (DKA). It presents with a several-week history of polyuria,
weight loss and diminished oral intake.
Dehydration: Characteristic clinical features on presentation are due to
volume depletion and extreme dehydration.
Central nervous system manifestations: These include alteration in the
level of consciousness ranging from mental confusion, stupor or coma,
convulsions (sometimes Jacksonian in type), hemiballism/hemichorea and
transient hemiplegia. Impairment of consciousness is directly related to the

degree of hyperosmolality.
Infections, particularly pneumonia or pyelonephritis and gram-negative
sepsis are very common.
Hyperosmolar state may predispose to stroke or myocardial infarction.
Bleeding and acute pancreatitis may accompany HHS.
Physical examination: Shows severe dehydration, hyperosmolality,
hypotension, tachycardia and altered mental status.
Laboratory findings
Plasma glucose: Markedly raised and usually around 1000 mg/dL (range
600–2400 mg/dL)
Serum osmolarity: Usually extremely high.
Prerenal azotemia with raised BUN (blood urea nitrogen) and creatinine.
Plasma bicarbonate: A mild metabolic acidosis with marginal decrease
in plasma bicarbonate (about 20 mmol/L) is seen. Marked decrease in
plasma bicarbonate (<10 mmol/L) indicates lactic acidosis.
Diagnostic criteria for HHS (refer Table 3.19).

Fig. 3.8:  Pathogenesis of hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state (HHS).
Management
Fluid replacement . The average fluid deficit is much higher than DKA and is about 10 L. It
should be corrected intravenously. Initially 2–3 L isotonic (0.9%) saline should be administered
over 1–2 hours. Subsequently, half-strength (0.45%) saline should be given. Once the plasma
glucose reaches 300 mg/dL, use 5% dextrose-saline solution.
Insulin:  Regular insulin should be administered as low-dose intravenous infusion as in DKA. The
goal is to achieve the plasma glucose around 200 mg/dL.
Potassium supplementation  is needed early (as in DKA).
Lactic acidosis:  Treat with intravenous sodium bicarbonate.
Infections:  With suitable antibiotics.
Anticoagulants:  To prevent thrombosis.
Differentiate between diabetic ketoacidosis and hyperglycemic
hyperosmolar state (Table 3.20)
Q. How will you differentiate between diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) and

hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state (HHS)?
Table 3.20: Differentiate between diabetic ketoacidosis and hyperglycemic
hyperosmolar state.
Features Diabetic ketoacidosis
(DKA)Hyperglycemic
hyperosmolar state (HHS)
Clinical features
Type of diabetes Both type 1 or 2 DM Type 2 DM
Evolution/onset Over hours Over days
Fruity (acetone) odor of breath Observed Not present
Kussmaul’s respiration Seen Not seen
Abdominal pain/tenderness Present Absent
Laboratory findings
Plasma glucose level >250 mg/dL >600 mg/dL
Serum sodium Normal or low (<140
mmol/L)Usually high (>155 mmol/L)
Blood/urine ketones Moderate ketonuria or
ketonemiaAbsent/Minimal ketonuria
and ketonemia
Arterial pH <7.3 >7.3
Serum bicarbonate <15 mEq/L >15 mEq/L
Serum osmolality Variable >320 mosm/L
Anion gap >12 Variable
Fluid deficit 6 liters >10 liters
Mortality rate 1% 20–30%
Hypoglycemia
Q. Discuss the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features and management
of hypoglycemia.
Q. Write short essay/note on hypoglycemic coma.
Whipple’s triad:  It is the most convincing documentation of hypoglycemia.
Symptoms consistent with hypoglycemia
Low plasma concentration  of blood glucose ≤70 mg/dL (3.9 mmol/L) measured with a precise
method (not a glucose monitor)
Relief of symptoms after the plasma glucose level is raised.
Box 3.15:  Causes of hypoglycemia in adults.

Drugs: Insulin or insulin secretagogues, alcohol and others
Critical illness: Hepatic, renal or cardiac failure, sepsis, malaria, inanition
Hormone deficiency: Cortisol, glucagon and epinephrine (in insulin-deficient diabetes)
Non-islet cell tumor
Endogenous hyperinsulinism: Insulinoma, functional beta-cell disorders (nesidioblastosis),
noninsulinoma pancereatogenous hypoglycemia, post-gastric bypass hypoglycemia, insulin
autoimmune hypoglycemia, antibody to insulin, antibody to insulin receptor, insulin secretgogue
Accidental, surreptitious or malicious hypoglycemia
Causes/etiology (Box 3.15)
Q. Write short essay/note on causes of hypoglycemia.
Significance: Hypoglycemia is a dangerous complication, and more serious
than hyperglycemia. Prolonged hypoglycemia may cause permanent damage
to the brain.
Pathogenesis
Whenever blood glucose level falls, three primary physiological defence
mechanisms come into action:
1. Suppression of endogenous insulin release from pancreatic β cells.
2. Increased release of glucagon from pancreatic α cells.
3. Activation of the autonomic nervous system with release of
catecholamines.
In addition, stress hormones, such as cortisol, catecholamines (adrenaline
and noradrenaline) and growth hormone (GH), are also increased in the
blood.
Mechanism of hypoglycemia in diabetes: It may be due to:Insulin excess (exogenous in patient on insulin therapy)
Counter-regulatory failure:
–   In type 1 DM, in the early stages itself there is loss of capacity to
increase glucagon release in response to hypoglycemia.
–   Subsequently, many patients also lose the capacity to release
catecholamines in response to hypoglycemia. This is due to diabetic
autonomic neuropathy.
Clinical features
Blood glucose level and symptom development: Symptoms due to

hypoglycemia usually occur with a plasma glucose at:
–   level of 60 mg/dL in non-diabetic individuals
–   higher levels (80 mg/dL) in poorly controlled diabetic patients
–   lower levels in well-controlled diabetic patients.
Symptoms fall into two main groups:
–   Related to acute activation of the autonomic nervous system
(neurogenic symptoms):  These are produced by excessive secretion
of adrenaline and symptoms include sweating, tremor, tachycardia,
anxiety and hunger. Adrenergic symptoms predominate, when
hypoglycemia is of rapid onset (e.g. insulin reactions).
–   Those secondary to glucose deprivation of the brain
(neuroglycopenia): It causes dizziness, headache, clouding of vision,
blunted mental acuity, and loss of fine motor skill, confusion,
abnormal behavior, convulsions and loss of consciousness. Central
nervous system symptoms predominate, when hypoglycemia is of
gradual onset. Patients with longstanding diabetes may not develop
warning adrenergic symptoms (hypoglycemic unawareness) due to
severe neuropathy and are at a greater risk of central nervous
dysfunction.Daytime vs nocturnal hypoglycemia:
–   Daytime hypoglycemic episodes present with sweating, nervousness,
tremor and hunger.
–   Nocturnal hypoglycemic episodes develop during sleep and present
with night sweats, unpleasant dreams and early morning headache.
Frequently, nocturnal hypoglycemia is asymptomatic.
Management
Oral carbohydrate: If hypoglycemia is detected early, it may be corrected by ingestion of
carbohydrate (preferably in an easily absorbable form).
Intravenous dextrose:  It is given in serious hypoglycemia, when there is impaired mental
functions, and prolonged hypoglycemia is anticipated (e.g. with depot-insulin and oral
sulfonylureas like chlorpropamide). Initially, 50 mL of 50% dextrose is administered, followed by
infusion of 5–10% dextrose. Oral carbohydrate should be given as soon as the patient is able to
eat.Glucagon: Glucagon in the dose of 0.5–1 mg subcutaneously or intramuscularly may be given
when there is severe hypoglycemia. It may be repeated if necessary after 10 minutes. Glucagon
stimulates hepatic glycogenolysis. But it may not be effective in severe and prolonged
hypoglycemia due to depot-insulins. It should not be used for the treatment of hypoglycemia due
to oral hypoglycemic drugs.

Octreotide:  It is useful for patients who develop recurrent hypoglycemia following dextrose
infusion.
Other measures are aimed at preventing recurrence of hypoglycemia. These include adjusting the
dose of oral hypoglycemic drugs, changing the timing of insulin injections, adjustments in diet and
physical activity/exercise, etc.
Somogyi Phenomenon
Q. Write short note on Somogyi phenomenon.
The Somogyi phenomenon (post-hypoglycemic hyperglycemia) is
rebound hyperglycemia that follows an episode of hypoglycemia. It is due
to counter-regulatory hormone release.
Significance: The correction of the morning hyperglycemia is by
reducing, and not increasing the evening dose of intermediate-acting
insulin.
Clues to the presence of Somogyi phenomenonWorsening of diabetic control  in the presence of increasing insulin
doses. It manifests as morning fasting hyperglycemia, in response to
unrecognized nocturnal hypoglycemia.
Excessive hunger and weight gain  in presence of worsening
hyperglycemia.
Nocturnal hypoglycemia:  Subtle manifestation such as mild nocturnal
sweating, morning headache and hypothermia.
Plasma glucose and urine glucose: Shows wide fluctuations over short
time intervals, and not related to meals.
Confirmation of Somogyi phenomenon: By documentation of
hypoglycemia at 3 AM and hyperglycemia in the morning (fasting).
Improvement in diabetic control after a decrease in the insulin dose.
Dawn Phenomenon
Q. Write short note on Dawn phenomenon.
It is closely related to the Somogyi phenomenon in that there is fasting
hyperglycemia, without nocturnal hypoglycemia.
Mechanism:  Nocturnal surge of GH release or increased clearance of
insulin in the mornings.

Confirmation: Documenting of hyperglycemia at 3 AM and in the
morning (fasting).
Significance: Correction of the fasting hyperglycemia depends on
increasing and not decreasing the insulin.
Box 3.16:  Causes of coma in a diabetic patient.
1. Diabetic coma
–   Ketosis producing diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA)
–   Nonketonic hyperglycemic-hyperosmolar coma (NKHHC)
–   Lactic acidosis (LA)
2. Hypoglycemic coma (HC)
3. Other comorbid conditions: Metabolic encephalopathies or infection related
Differential diagnosis of morning hyperglycemia is mentioned in Table
3.21.
Q. List the differences in coma due to hypoglycemia and diabetic
coma/ketoacidosis in type 1 DM.
Differences between hypoglycemic and hyperglycemic/diabetic coma are
presented in Table 3.22.
Causes of coma in diabetes (Box 3.16).
Table 3.21: Differences diagnosis of morning hyperglycemia.
Feature Dawn phenomenon Somogyi effect
Definition Recurring early morning
hyperglycaemiaEarly morning
hyperglycaemia due to
treatment with excessive
amount of exogenous insulin
Casuse Decrease of insulin secretion
between 3 a.m. and 5 a.m.Nocturnal hypoglycemia
due to excessive dose of
insulin
Diagnosis (3 a.m. and 5 a.m. glucose
level)High/normal plasma glucose
levelLow plasma glucose level
Table 3.22: Differences between hypoglycemic and hyperglycemic/diabetic
coma.
Features Hypoglycemic coma Hyperglycemic coma
Physical findings
Volume of pulse Full Weak

Respiration Shallow or normal Rapid and deep (air hunger)
Blood pressure Normal/may be raised Decreased
Skin Clammy, sweating Dry
Tongue Moist Dry
Tissue turgor Normal Reduced
Eyeball tension Normal Reduced
Breath acetone Not present May be present
Reflexes Brisk Diminished
Laboratory findings
Glucose in urine Absent/ present (depends on
time of last voiding)Present
Plasma glucose level Reduced Raised >200 mg/dL
Plasma acetone Negative Usually present
Plasma bicarbonate Normal Low <20 mg/L
Plasma CO 2 Normal Diminished
Blood pH Normal <7.35
Q. Write short essay/note on the cause of coma in diabetes.
CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES
Pathogenesis of chronic complications of diabetes is multifactorial and
includes: (1) hyperglycemia (glucotoxicity) is the main mediator, (2) insulin
resistance and (3) obesity.
Hyperglycemia
Effects of Hyperglycemia (Fig. 3.9)
These can be brought out by four distinct metabolic pathways.
1. Formation of advanced glycation end products (AGEs):  Increased
intracellular glucose leads to markedly increased  formation of advanced
glycosylation end products. AGEs can directly cross-link extracellular
matrix proteins and its consequences are:
a. Basement membrane thickening.
b. Trapping of LDL in the intima accelerating atherogenesis.
c. Glomerular dysfunction, endothelial dysfunction, altered extracellular
matrix composition.
2. Activation of protein kinase C (PKC):  In patients with hyperglycemia,

intracellular hyperglycemia stimulates synthesis of diacyl glycerol (DAG)
from glycolytic intermediates. DAG activates intracellular protein kinase
C. PKC activation produces:
a. Proangiogenic molecules such as vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) causes neovascularization  characteristic of diabetic
retinopathy.
b. Profibrogenic factors (e.g. TGF- β) results in increased production
of extracellular matrix and basement membrane material.
c. Plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI-1) reduces fibrinolysis and
favors vascular occlusion  (by forming atherosclerotic plaques or
thrombus).
3. Disturbances in polyol pathways: Some tissues (e.g. nerves, lenses,
kidneys, blood vessels) do not require insulin for glucose transport.
Persistent hyperglycemia increases the intracellular glucose in these
tissues and excess intracellular glucose is metabolized by the enzyme
aldose reductase to sorbitol (polyol) to fructose.
a. This reaction uses NADPH  (the reduced form of nicotinamide
dinucleotide phosphate) as a cofactor.
b. NADPH is also necessary for the regeneration of reduced glutathione
(GSH). GSH protects against injury by free radicals.
c. Reduced NADPH → decrease in GSH → increases cells
susceptibility to oxidative stress. 4. Hyperglycemia increases the flux through the hexosamine pathway and
generates fructose-6-phosphate. Which results in glycosylation of proteins
such as endothelial nitric oxide synthase or by changes in gene expression
of transforming growth factor β (TGF-β) or plasminogen activator
inhibitor- l (PAI-1).

Fig. 3.9:  Pathogenesis of chronic complications of DM due to hyperglycemia.
Symptoms of Hyperglycemia (Box 3.17)
Q. Write short note on symptoms of hyperglycemia.
Cardiovascular Complications of Diabetes
Q. Write short essay/note on the cardiovascular complications of
diabetes.
The lesions of large- and medium-sized muscular arteries are the most
common causes of mortality in long-standing diabetes. These include:
Box 3.17:  Symptoms of hyperglycemia.
Excessive thirst, dry mouth
Polyuria, nocturia
Tiredness, fatigue, lethargy, weight loss
Pruritus vulvae/balanitis due to genital candidiasis
Blurring of vision
Nausea, headache, mood changes, irritability, difficulty in concentrating, apathy
Hyperphagia (especially for sweet foods)
Atherosclerosis: Diabetes is one of the major modifiable risk factor for

atherosclerosis and other cardiovascular morbidities. The main cardiovascular
complications of diabetes are accelerated atherosclerosis. The
atherosclerosis is more severe and occurs at earlier age . Diabetics have
increased levels of plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI-1), which inhibits
fibrinolysis and favors development of atherosclerotic plaques. Renal
arteries also develop severe atherosclerosis. The atherosclerotic lesions can
manifest in a variety of ways:
Myocardial infarction: It is due to atherosclerosis of the coronary arteries
and is the most common cause of death in diabetics. Diabetics have
greater risk of coronary artery disease and cardiovascular complications
than nondiabetics. Risk for cardiovascular disease is more even in pre-
diabetics.Gangrene of the lower/upper (Fig. 3.10) extremities: Patient may also
present with intermittent claudication. Gangrene may results from
advanced vascular disease and is more common in diabetics.Renal vascular insufficiency.
Cerebrovascular accidents (stroke).
Fig. 3.10:  Diabetic gangrene of right index finger.
Box 3.18:  Renal changes in diabetes mellitus.

Glomerular lesions
–   Diffuse widespread thickening glomerular basement membrane (GBM)
–   Nodular glomerulosclerosis (Kimmelstiel-Wilson nodules)
–   Insudative lesions: Fibrin caps and capsular drop
Pyelonephritis: Acute and chronic including necrotizing papillitis
Tubular lesions: Armanni-Ebstein lesions
Renal vascular lesions (arteriosclerosis and atherosclerosis)
Diabetic Nephropathy
Q. Write short essay/note on:
Clinical features, diagnosis and management of diabetic
nephropathy.
Kimmelstiel-Wilson lesions.
Diabetic nephropathy is the term used for collective lesions that often occur
together in the diabetic kidney. About 30–40% of all diabetics develop
nephropathy and is leading cause of chronic kidney disease (CKD) and
end-stage renal disease (ESRD). It is a leading cause of death and disability
in diabetes and is more common in type 1 DM than 2 DM. Renal changes in
diabetes mellitus are listed in Box 3.18.
Pathogenesis: Diabetic glomerulosclerosis represents a part of the
generalized diabetic microangiopathy that involves small vessels throughout
the body. Like other microvascular complications of DM, the pathogenesis of
diabetic nephropathy is related to chronic hyperglycemia.
Clinical features: The natural history of diabetic nephropathy follows a
fairly predictable sequence of events.Glomerular hyperperfusion  and renal hypertrophy develops in the first
years after the onset of DM. It is associated with an increase of the
glomerular filtration rate  (GFR). It shows nephromegaly (enlargement
of kidneys).
During the first 5 years of DM, thickening of the glomerular basement
membrane, glomerular hypertrophy, and expansion of mesangial volume
occur as the GFR returns to normal.
Microalbuminuria: After 5–10 years, many patients start excreting small
amounts of albumin in the urine. It is the earliest manifestation  of
diabetic nephropathy in which the urine has low amounts of albumin (>20

mg/day, but <300 mg/day). Microalbuminuria defined as the persistent
elevation of the urinary albumin excretion of 20–300 mg/L  (or 20–200
micrograms/min) in an early morning urine sample. It is also a well-
established marker for increased cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in
either type 1 or type 2 diabetics. Normal individual excrete albumin <20
mg/day. It indicates early and possibly reversible glomerular damage.
Type 2 diabetes is more likely to have microalbuminuria (or overt
nephropathy) at diagnosis. This is because of the long duration of
abnormal glucose metabolism in type 2 DM. Hence, patients with type 2
DM should be screened at the time of diagnosis for the presence of
microalbuminuria.Nephropathy with macroalbuminuria: Without specific interventions,
diabetics will develop overt nephropathy with macroalbuminuria
(>300 mg of urinary albumin per day), usually associated with
hypertension. From this stage, the renal disease is irreversible. There is a
steady decline in glomerular filtration rate at a rate of about 1
mL/minute/month. The stage of macroalbuminuria may progress to
nephrotic syndrome.End-stage renal disease: The overt nephropathy may progress to end-
stage renal disease. Patient develops azotemia, renal failure and uremia.
Different stages of diabetic nephropathy are mentioned in Table 3.23.
Table 3.23: Classification of diabetic nephropathy.
Stage Urinary albumin (mg/g Cr) or
urinary protein (g/g Cr)GFR (eGFR) (mL/min/1.73
m2)
Stage 1 (prenephropathy) Normoalbuminuria (<30) ≥30
Stage 2 (incipient
nephropathy)Microalbuminuria (30–299) ≥30
Stage 3 (overt nephropathy) Macroalbuminuria (≥300) or persistent
proteinuria (≥0.5)≥30
Stage 4 (kidney failure) Any albuminuria/proteinuria status <30
Stage 5 (dialysis therapy) Any status on continued dialysis
therapy
Causes of Microalbuminuria other than Diabetes
Essential hypertension: In hypertensive patients, microalbuminuria
predicts cardiovascular morbidity and mortality.

Screening for microalbuminuria: It can be done in a variety of ways.
Microalbuminuria can be assessed by radioimmunoassay or by using special
dipsticks.
Measurement of albumin-to-creatinine ratio: This is most easily
obtained with minimal collection errors. A ratio of >30 mg albumin/g
creatinine is considered elevated on a spot urine test.Albumin from a 24 hours urine sample: Urinary albumin >30 mg/24
hours is diagnostic.
Management
Prevention: Control of glycemia can reverse microalbuminuria in some patients. Stop smoking
and control dyslipidemia.
Management of diabetic nephropathy
–   Aggressive treatment of hypertension : Hypertension can accelerate nephropathy. The target
for blood pressure is below 130/80 mm Hg with an optimal target of below 120/80 mm Hg in
patients with proteinuria or renal insufficiency. This is likely to slow down the rate of
deterioration of renal failure considerably.
–   Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors or an angiotensin receptor II antagonist
is the drugs of choice. They can retard the progression of nephropathy at this stage of
microalbuminuria. These drugs should be given to normotensive patients with persistent
microalbuminuria and they reduce microalbuminuria. They can be used if creatinine is <3
mg/dL.
–   Other drugs include aliskiren, eplerenone, trandolapril, thiazide diuretics, calcium channel
blockers (Verapamil), cilnidipine, β-blockers and α-blockers can also be used.
–   Avoid oral hypoglycemic agents partially excreted via the kidney (e.g. glibenclamide and
metformin).
–   Low-protein diets: may be beneficial because high-protein diets can accelerate
glomerulosclerosis.
–   Pentoxifylline, fenofibrates lower proteinuria and maybe used as adjunct.
Ophthalmologic Complications of Diabetes MellitusQ. Write short essay/note on ocular complications of diabetes mellitus.
Diabetes can produce different lesions in the eye. These include:
1. Diabetic retinopathy (damage to the retina and iris) can lead to
blindness.
2. Cataract is denaturation of the protein and other components of the lens
of the eye and leads to opacity of lens. Cataract develops early in
diabetics than in the general population. Sustained very poor control of
diabetes and ketosis can cause an acute cataract (snowflake cataract).
Fluctuations in blood glucose level can cause refractive variability due to

osmotic changes within the lens (the absorption of water into the lens can
produce temporary hypermetropia). This clinically presents as fluctuating
difficulty in reading and it resolves with control of the diabetes.
3. External ocular palsies (refer Fig. 15.28): The 6th and the 3rd cranial
nerves (Tolosa-Hunt syndrome) are the most commonly affected. These
nerve palsies usually recover spontaneously within 3–6 months.
4. Glaucoma.
Diabetic Retinopathy (Figs. 3.11A and B)
Q. Write short essay/note on diabetic retinopathy.
Diabetic retinopathy (DR) is the most commonly diagnosed complication of
diabetes mellitus. In developed countries, it is one of the most common
causes of blindness between 30 and 65 years of age. Its prevalence increases
with the duration of diabetes and develops in ~60–80% of diabetics, about
15–20 years after diagnosis.
Figs 3.11A and B:  (A) Moderate nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy (NPDR) with hard exudates; (B)
Proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR).
Table 3.24: Features of diabetic retinopathy.
Nonproliferative/simple background (NPDR) Proliferative (PDR)
Develops late in the first decade or early in the
second decade
Increased capillary permeability
Marked retinal vascular microaneurysms,
capillary closure and dilatation
Hemorrhages: Dot (capillary microaneurysms)
and blot (leakage of blood into deeper retinalNew blood vessel
formation/neovascularization
Preretinal or subhyaloid hemorrhage
Vitreous hemorrhage
More numerous microaneurysms and
hemorrhages
Changes in caliber of venous vessel

layers)
Cotton wool spots/cytoid bodies (caused by
microinfarcts within the retina due to occluded
vessels)
Hard exudates (exudation of plasma rich in
lipids and protein)
Arteriovenous shunts and dilated veinsRetinal fibrosis/scar (retinitis proliferans)
Traction retinal detachment
Risk factors for diabetic retinopathy (Box 3.19)
Lesions of diabetic retinopathy (Table 3.24): Diabetic retinopathy (DR)
can be classified into two stages: (1) non-proliferative/simple background and
(2) proliferative (Table 3.24).
Diabetic macular edema (DME): In addition to proliferative and non-
proliferative diabetic retinopathy, patients may also develop clinically
significant macular edema (CSME). This can develop at any stage of DR and
is characterized by increased vascular permeability and hard exudates in the
central retina. CSME is the most common cause of loss of vision in diabetes
mellitus.Box 3.19:  Risk factors for diabetic retinopathy.
Diabetes mellitus
Of long duration
Poor glycemic control
With nephropathy/renal disease
Hypertension
Hyperlipidemia
Pregnancy
Others: obesity, smoking, puberty in type 1 DM
Investigations
Fundus fluorescein angiography (FFA): In this a fluorescent dye is
injected into a vein of upper arm and photographed in transit through the
retinal vessels. It helps to identify the extent of the potentially sight
threatening diabetic retinopathy.Optical coherence tomography (OCT): It is used to image the content of
the layers of the retina at the macula and to measure retinal thickness. It
helps in detecting macular edema and other macular abnormalities.
TreatmentPrevention: By intensive glycemic and BP control  in both type 1 or type 2 DM.

Screening:  Regular eye examinations in all patients with DM.
Diabetic retinopathy is treated by laser photocoagulation.
Proliferative retinopathy is usually treated with pan retinal laser photocoagulation . Pars plana
vitrectomy is performed for the treatment of non-resolving vitreous hemorrhage and retinal
detachment. Intravitreal hyaluronidase, chondroitinase, and plasmin has shown promise in clearing
vitreous hemorrhage
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) inhibitors  such as bevacizumab, ranibizumab, and
aflibercept are useful as adjunct therapy to panretinal photocoagulation and/or vitrectomy for
selected cases of PDR and DME.
Diabetic Neuropathy
Q. Write short essay/note on:
Different neurological complications/manifestations of diabetes
mellitus.
Classification, clinical manifestations and management of diabetic
neuropathy.
Diabetes can involve the peripheral nervous systems in a number of ways.
Box 3.20:  Classification of diabetic neuropathy.
Polyneuropathy
–   Symmetrical, mainly sensory and distal
–   Asymmetrical, mainly motor and proximal (including amyotrophy)
Mononeuropathy and mononeuritis multiplex
–   Cranial nerve lesions
–   Isolated peripheral nerve lesions
Autonomic (visceral) neuropathy
–   Cardiovascular
–   Gastrointestinal
–   Genitourinary
–   Sudomotor
–   Vasomotor
–   PupillaryPolyradiculopathies
–   Diabetic amyotrophy (lumbar polyradiculopathy)
–   Thoracic polyradiculopathy
–   Diabetic neuropathic cachexiaTreatment-induced neuropathy of diabetes
Risk factors: Similar to other complications of DM, the development of
neuropathy is related to the duration of diabetes and the degree of glycemic

control. Other risk factors are greater body mass index (BMI) and smoking.
Classification of diabetic neuropathy: There are various classifications of
diabetic neuropathy and one of them is presented in Box 3.20.
Polyneuropathy
Distal symmetric sensorimotor polyneuropathy
It is the most common form of diabetic neuropathy. It affects both motor
and sensory function  of the lower extremities. It can be divided into two
types:
–   Asymptomatic: It is a relatively asymptomatic form. It is diffuse,
distal, usually involves the lower extremities and later it may involve
the upper extremities with a ‘glove and stocking’ type of distribution.
–   Acute painful neuropathy: It is a diffuse, painful neuropathy and is
less common. It presents with burning or crawling or dull aching
sensation or excruciating, lancinating pain in the feet, shins and
anterior thighs. The pain is typically worse at night and pressure from
bedclothes may be intolerable and partially relieved by movement.
Hyperesthesia may be severe.In both forms, physical findings are: Loss of vibration sense, loss of
tendon reflexes in the lower limbs (especially ankle jerk) and ‘glove and
stocking’ impairment of all sensation.With progression patients may complain of a feeling of ‘walking on cotton
wool’ and loss of balance while washing the face (‘Washbasin sign’) or
walking in the dark owing to impaired proprioception. It may be
associated with involvement of other sensation like joint position, touch,
pain and temperature, later leading to weakness and wasting of muscles.Sequelae of neuropathy: Involvement of motor nerves to the small
muscles of the feet results in interosseous wasting. Unbalanced traction by
the long flexor muscles results in a characteristic shape of the foot, with a
high arch and clawing of the toes. This can lead to abnormal distribution
of pressure on walking, producing callus formation under the first
metatarsal head or on the tips of the toes. Complications include
unrecognized trauma, beginning as blistering due to an ill-fitting shoe and
neuropathic ulceration. Sometimes, neuropathic arthropathy (Charcot’s
joints) may develop in the ankle.

Asymmetrical Motor Diabetic Neuropathy (diabetic amyotrophy/Bruns-
Garland syndrome)
Q. Write short essay/note on diabetic amyotrophy.
Usually develops in older individuals with diabetes.
It presents with asymmetrical, severe and progressive weakness and
atrophy of the proximal (quadriceps) muscles of the lower limbs. It is
associated with severe pain , mainly on the anterior aspect of the leg, and
hyperesthesia and paresthesias.
Sometimes there may be marked wasting and weight loss (‘neuropathic
cachexia’).The patient may appear extremely ill and be unable to get out
of bed. Tendon reflexes may be diminished or absent on the affected
side(s).This neuropathy is probably due to the acute infarction of the lower motor
neurons of the lumbosacral plexus. Other lesions of this plexus (e.g.
neoplasms and lumbar disc disease) must be excluded, before a diagnosis
is made.It is seen in patients with poor glycemic control and resolves with
optimization of metabolic control.
Management is mainly supportive.
Mononeuropathy and Mononeuritis Multiplex
Mononeuropathy characterized by dysfunction of isolated cranial or
peripheral nerves is less common than polyneuropathy in DM.
Nerve involvement: Diabetic mononeuropathy can involve a single
peripheral or cranial nerve  and affect either motor or sensory function .
Usually affects 3rd, 6th, 4th (Tolosa-Hunt) or 7th (Bell’s palsy) cranial
nerves and the femoral and sciatic nerves  (in order of frequency). Third
nerve involvement is characterized by diplopia and normal pupillary
constriction to light (pupil-sparing). Rarely, other single nerves are
involved and produce paresis and paresthesias in the thorax and trunk
(truncal radiculopathies). Simultaneous involvement of more than one
nerve (mononeuropathy multiplex) may also occur.Presentation: Unlike the gradual progression of distal symmetrical and
autonomic neuropathies, the mononeuropathies present as rapid, severe
pain and motor weakness in the distribution of a single nerve. However,

eventually they recover.
Nerve compression palsies: Mononeuropathies can present with or
without nerve compression. Nerve compression is more common in
diabetes. Compression may affect the median nerve (presents the clinical
picture of carpel tunnel syndrome ), lateral popliteal nerve (foot drop ) or
less commonly the ulnar nerve (wrist drop ). Compression palsies may be
due to glycosylation and thickening of connective tissue and/or increased
susceptibility of nerves affected by diabetic microangiopathy.
Table 3.25: Clinical features of diabetic autonomic neuropathy.
System involved Clinical features
Cardiovascular Postural hypotension, resting tachycardia, fixed heart rate, impaired
Valsalva maneuver, painless myocardial infarction, sudden cardiac
death
Gastrointestinal Dysphagia (due to esophageal atony), abdominal fullness, nausea,
vomiting, gastroparesis, nocturnal diarrhea, constipation, fecal
incontinence
Genitourinary Difficulty in micturition, urinary incontinence, recurrent infection,
impotence, erectile dysfunction, retrograde ejaculation
Sudomotor Gustatory sweating, nocturnal sweat without hypoglycemia, fissures
in feet, anhidrosis
Vasomotor Feet feel cold (due to loss of skin vasomotor responses), dependent
pedal edema (due to loss of vasomotor tone and increased vascular
permeability)
Pupillary Decreased pupil size, delayed or absent reflexes to light, resistance to
mydriatics Argyl-Robertson pupil
Metabolic Hypoglycemia unawarenessAutonomic Neuropathy (Table 3.25)
Autonomic neuropathy may affect both the sympathetic and
parasympathetic nervous systems
DM-related autonomic neuropathy can involve one or more systems,
including the cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, genitourinary, sudomotor,
and metabolic systems (Table 3.25).It may result in loss of awareness of hypoglycemia and can cause
disabling postural hypotension.
Management
Strict glycemic control, Foot care

Mononeuropathies are usually self-limiting and do not require any specific therapy. Explanation
and reassurance about remission within months may be necessary.
Neuritic pain  of diabetic neuropathy may be treated with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(opiates-tramadol, oxycodone), tricyclic antidepressants (amitriptyline, imipramine), duloxetine,
venlafaxine mexiletine, valproate and anticonvulsants (e.g. phenytoin, carbamazepine, gabapentin
or pregabalin). Duloxetine is an antidepressant, potent dual reuptake inhibitor of serotonin and
noradrenaline is useful in refractory cases.Transepidermal nerve stimulation (TENS) : Beneficial in some patients.
Topical capsaicin  containing creams:  May be occasionally beneficial.
Orthostatic/postural hypotension:  Responds to sleeping with the head of the bed raised,
avoiding sudden upright position, full-length elastic support stockings and increased salt intake.
Rarely, fludrocortisone, α-adrenoceptor agonist (midodrine) are needed.
Gastroparesis:  Patient is advised to take frequent small meals and prokinetic agents. Dopamine
antagonists (metoclopramide, domperidone), erythromycin and gastric pacemaker; percutaneous
enteral (jejunal) feeding may be necessary in some cases.
Diarrhea: In diabetics often responds to diphenoxylate, loperamide or broad spectrum antibiotics
(e.g. tetracyclines). Rarely clonidine and octreotide may be needed.
Constipation: Can be treated by stimulant laxatives (senna).
Atonic bladder:  By intermittent self-catheterization.
Excessive sweating: By anticholinergic drugs (propantheline, poldine, oxybutinin), clonidine, or
topical antimuscarinic agent (glycopyrrolate cream)
Erectile dysfunction:  Treatment includes:
–   Psychological counselling; psychosexual therapy
–   Phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors: Oral therapy with sildenafil, vardenafil, tadalafil
–   Dopamine agonist (apomorphine) through sublingual route
–   Prostaglandin E 1 (alprostadil): Injected into corpus cavernosum or intraurethral administration
of pellets
–   Vacuum tumescence devices
–   Implanted penile prosthesi
Specific treatment to reverse neuropathyα-Lipoic acid: It is a natural cofactor of dehydrogenase complex and is an antioxidant (redox
modulating agent). It may ameliorate both somatic and autonomic diabetic neuropathies.
Aldolase reductase inhibitors (e.g. epalrestat): They decrease the flux of glucose through polyol
pathways, inhibit accumulation of sorbitol and fructose, and prevent reduction of redox potential.
However, they are not effective.
Carnitine  may be useful in few cases.
Methylcobalamin  may provide some benefit.
Ruboxistaurin, a protein kinase C beta inhibitor, is  an emerging treatment for diabetes
microvascular complications.
Dermatological Complications of Diabetes Mellitus (Box 3.21)
Q. Write short note on dermatological complications of diabetes
mellitus.

Box 3.21: Dermatological complications of diabetes mellitus.
Skin infections: Due to immune dysfunction, e.g. carbuncles and furuncles and intertrigo (Fig.
3.12)
Balanophostitis (Fig. 3.13)
Vaginal candidiasis/balanitis (Fig. 3.14): Due to immune dysfunction
Diabetic ulcers: Due to peripheral neuropathy and ischemia
Xanthomatoses: Due to hyperlipoproteinemia
Necrobiosis lipoidica diabeticorum (NLD)
Diabetic dermopathy (shin spots)
Tight waxy skin the dorsum of the hands with joint contractures in type 1 DM—digital sclerosis
Acanthosis nigricans
Acrocordans/skin tags: Marker of insulin resistance
Granuloma annulare
Diabetic blisters: Bullosis diabeticorum
Musculosketal Complications in Diabetes (Box 3.22)
Q. Write short note on musculoskeletal complications of diabetes.
Box 3.22: Musculosketal complications in diabetes.
Diabetic muscle infarction: Painful muscle swelling, usually in thigh
Neuropathic arthropathy (Charcot joint)
Carpal tunnel syndrome
Dupuytren’s contracture
Flexor tenosynovitis
Adhesive capsulitis (frozen shoulder)
Diabetic cherioarthropathy—‘prayer sign’, ‘table top test’
Diabetic sclerodactyly
Gestational Diabetes Mellitus (GDM)
Q. Write short essay/note on gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM), its
significance and management.
Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is defined as glucose intolerance
(diabetes) that develops or is first recognized during pregnancy.
Typically it is asymptomatic and usually remits after delivery. However,
there is an increased risk of type 2 diabetes in later life and maintaining a low
bodyweight and keeping physically active can reduce this risk.
Risk factors for GDM, low risk groups for GDM and importance of

diagnosis of GDM are mentioned in Boxes 3.23, 3.24 and 3.25 respectively.
Box 3.23: Risk factors that predispose to gestational diabetes mellitus.
Women with
Previous history of gestational diabetes
Obesity (overweight) and pregnancy at older age
History of large for gestational age babies
Ethnic groups at particular risk
Box 3.24: Low-risk groups for gestational diabetes mellitus.
Women with
Age below 25 years
Normal weight before pregnancy
Member of an ethnic group with a low prevalence of diabetes
No diabetes in first degree relatives
No history of abnormal glucose tolerance or poor obstetrical outcome
Box 3.25: Importance of diagnosis of gestational diabetes mellitus.
Fetal risk with GDM
Fetal macrosomia
Intrauterine fetal death
Respiratory distress
Hypoglycemic fetuses
Polyhydramnios
Hypocalcemia
Increased incidence of shoulder dystocia
Fetal hyperbilirubinemia
Transient tachypnea of the newborn
Risk for off springs of women with GDM: Increased risk of obesity and diabetes
Risk for women with GDM:  Increased risk of obesity and diabetes in future.
Increased incidence of preeclampsia
Cesarean section

Fig. 3.12: Intertrigo (intertriginous dermatitis) charcaterized by inflammation of skin folds.
Fig. 3.13: Balonophostitis.

Fig. 3.14:  Candida balanitis.
Oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT)
Diagnosis is based on an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) performed at
24–28 weeks of gestation in women with moderate to high risk.
Method: 100 g glucose is dissolved in 300–400 mL of water and
consumed over 5 minutes. The quantity of glucose is more than usual
glucose load of 75 g and is recommended because there is an increased
turnover of glucose in pregnancy.
Table 3.26: Criteria for diagnosis of gestational diabetes mellitus.
Time (Hour) Upper limit of normal values (mg/dL)
Whole blood (O’Sullivan) Plasma (Carpenter and
Coustan)
0 (fasting) 85 95
1 160 180
2 140 155
3 125 140
(Two or more of these values must be abnormal).

Criteria for diagnosis of GDM (Table 3.26)
Management
Aim: To normalise the maternal blood glucose and reduce excessive growth of fetus.
Insulin:  Initiate insulin therapy when target glucose levels exceed despite nutritional therapy.
Insulin does not cross the placenta.
Dietary modification:  Reduce the consumption of quick-acting refined carbohydrate. Treatment
for other patients with diet in the first instance, although most may require insulin at some stages
during pregnancy.
Many oral hypoglycemic drugs cross the placenta and should be avoided because of the potential
risk to the fetus. However, metformin or glyburide/glibenclamide  are considered safe to use in
pregnancy.
Follow-up
Though the sugar levels normalize after delivery, it is advised to repeat a OGTT 6 weeks postpartum.
Metabolic Syndrome
Q. Write short essay or note on:
Metabolic syndrome/insulin resistance syndrome and its
components.
Clinical diagnosis, risks and treatment of insulin resistance
syndrome (syndrome X).
Metabolic syndrome (also known as the insulin resistance syndrome, Reaven
syndrome, dysmetabolic syndrome, and syndrome X  syndrome) is a
proinflammatory, prothrombotic state that consists of a cluster of clinical
findings and laboratory abnormalities.
Table 3.27: Risks associated with metabolic syndrome.
Cardiovascular diseases (atherosclerotic
vascular disease, specifically coronary artery
disease)
Type 2 diabetes mellitus
Non-alcoholic fatty liver diseaseSleep disorders: obstructive sleep apnea
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS).
Hyperuricemia
Chronic kidney disease
Erectile dysfunctions
Clinical findings: Include obesity (central, abdominal, or visceral),
increased sympathetic nervous system activity, hypertension. Risk factors
associated with metabolic syndrome is listed in Table 3.27. These clinical
features include acanthosis nigricans, skin tags–acrocordans, ovarian
hyperandrogenism [polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)], and

lipodystrophy.
Laboratory abnormalities: Cardiovascular risk factors and includes
hyperglycemia, dyslipidemia (high TGs, low HDL), glucose intolerance,
insulin resistance (the common etiologic factor), hyperinsulinemia
(compensatory).Pathogenesis: The basic defect is insulin resistance.
–   Insulin resistance is the decrease/failure of target (peripheral)
tissues to insulin action.  Insulin is unable to produce its numerous
actions, in spite of unimpaired secretion from the β cells.
–   Main factors in the development of insulin resistance are combination
of genetic susceptibility and obesity. The obesity accompanying type 2
DM is central obesity and central adipose tissue is more ‘lipolytic’ than
peripheral sites. Insulin resistance is induced by free fatty acids,
adipokines, and chronic inflammation in adipose tissue.
–   Consequences of insulin resistance
♦   Decreased uptake of glucose in muscle results in post-prandial
hyperglycemia. The defects in the uptake are due to defect in the
receptors present in target tissues and usually at the post-receptor
level.
♦   Reduced glycolysis and fatty acid oxidation  in the liver.
♦   Inability to suppress hepatic gluconeogenesisClinical diagnosis (Box 3.26): Individual on medical treatment for
dyslipidemia or hypertension, and those with isolated systolic or diastolic
hypertension are included in the above criteria.
Box 3.26: Diagnostic criteria for metabolic syndrome.
Presence of at least three of the following
Abdominal obesity (waist circumference >80 cm in women and >90 cm in men
Body mass index >30 kg/m2 and/or waist/hip ratio >0.09 in men, >0.85 in women
Raised triglyceride (TG) levels (≥150 mg/dL) or on treatment for TG
Reduced high density lipoproteins- HDL cholesterol level (<40 mg/dL in males and <50 mg/dL in
females) or on treatment for HDL
Raised blood pressure (systolic ≥130 mm Hg or diastolic ≥85 mm Hg).
Raised fasting glucose level (110–125 mg/dL); type 2 DM or impaired glucose tolerance and/or
insulin resistance, denoted by hyperinsulinemia relative to glucose levels
Management

Currently there is no evidence that treatment of insulin resistance reduces mortality and morbidity in
metabolic syndrome. However, treatment of insulin resistance consists of:
Lifestyle changes and exercise
Diet: Low in calories and high in fibers
Reduction of weight
Treatment and control of diabetes, hypertension and lipid abnormalities.

Infectious Diseases

CHAPTER
4
PYREXIA (FEVER) OF UNKNOWN ORIGIN
Q. Define pyrexia of unknown origin (PUO). Discuss briefly your
approach to a case of PUO or fever of unknown origin (FUO).
Q. Describe types, investigation and differential diagnosis of a case of
pyrexia of unknown origin.
Q. Mention the etiology of pyrexia of unknown origin and discuss the
investigation in a case of pyrexia of unknown origin.
Definition
The definition of FUO (classical) was given by Petersdorf and Beeson in
1961. According to new classification, PUO is divided into four types:
1. Classic pyrexia of unknown origin  (PUO) is classically defined as:
Duration: Fever of at least 3 weeks duration.
Temperature: Daily temperature persistently elevated above 101°F
(38.3°C).
Remains undiagnosed  despite after a thorough history-taking,
physical examination, and the following obligatory (intelligent and
intensive) investigations (or at least three outpatient visits or 3 days in
hospital).No known immunocompromised state (e.g. HIV or other
immunosuppressing conditions).
2. Nosocomial PUO:
Temperature: Daily temperature persistently elevated above 101°F
(38.3°C) developing on several occasions.
In a hospitalized patient (>24 hours) who is receiving acute care

but no fever or incubating on admission .
It is mandatory that the cause of fever is not found at least on 3 days of
intelligent investigations, including at least 2 days incubation of
cultures.
3. Neutropenic PUO :
A temperature of >38.3°C (101°F) developing on several occasions.
Neutrophil count is below 500/mL  or is expected to fall to that level
in 1 or 2 days.
It is mandatory that the cause of fever is not found at least on 3 days of
intelligent investigations, including at least 2 days incubation of
cultures.4. HIV-associated PUO :
A temperature of more than 38.3°C (101°F) developing on several
occasions.
Duration of fever is more than 4 weeks for outpatients or more than 3
days for hospitalized patients.
HIV infection confirmed.
It is mandatory that the cause of fever is not found at least on 3 days of
intelligent investigations, including at least 2 days incubation of
cultures.
Etiology
Classic PUO is usually not due to a rare disease, but due to atypicalpresentation of common diseases. Common causes of prolonged fever are:
Infections (40% Cases)
Most common infections causing PUO are tuberculosis, malaria, typhoid,
HIV. Other causes are:
1. Bacterial
Abscesses: Most commonly in the subphrenic space, liver, right lower
quadrant, retroperitoneal space or the pelvis in women.
Tuberculosis (TB): Disseminatied tuberculosis occurring in
immunocompromised  patients, presents with more constitutional
symptoms than localizing signs. Chest X-ray may be normal.
Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are rare causes. Perinephric abscesses

occasionally fail to communicate with the urinary system resulting in a
normal urinalysis.
Infective endocarditis: Culture-negative endocarditis occurs in 5–
10% of endocarditis. The HACEK ( H. parainfluenzae, H. aphrophilus,
and H. paraphrophilus), Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans,
Cardiobacterium hominis, Eikenella corrodens, and Kingella spp.)
group are responsible for 5–10% cases of infective endocarditis and are
the most common causes of gram-negative endocarditis in individuals
without any abuse of intravenous drugs.Hepatobiliary infections: Cholangitis may develop without local
signs and with only mildly elevated or normal liver function tests
especially in the elderly patients.Osteomyelitis.
Brucellosis: Should be considered in patients with persistent fever and
a history of contact with cattle, swine, goats or sheep, or patients who
consume raw milk products.Borrelia recurrentis is responsible for tick borne relapsing fever.
Other spirochetal diseases that can cause PUO include Spirillum minor
(Rat-bite fever), Borrelia burgdorferi  (Lyme disease), and
Treponema pallidum (syphilis).
2. Viral
Herpes viruses, such as cytomegalovirus and Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV) can cause prolonged febrile illnesses with constitutional
symptoms without any significant organ manifestations, particularly in
the elderly.HIV: Prolonged fever may be the only manifestation in patients with
advanced HIV infection.
3. Fungi: Immunosuppression, the use of broad-spectrum antibiotics, the
presence of intravascular devices and total parenteral nutrition  all
predispose individual to disseminated fungal infections.
4. Parasites:
Malaria
Toxoplasmosis: It should be considered in febrile patients with lymph
node enlargement.

Trypanosoma, leishmania and amoeba species may rarely cause
PUO.
5. Rickettsial organisms: Coxiella burnetii  may cause chronic infections;
chronic Q fever or Q fever endocarditis may be identified in patients with
a PUO.
6. Psittacosis: Infection by the causative organism, Chlamydophila should
be considered in a patient with PUO who has a history of contact with
birds. Lepidopterism (fever with rash due to exposure to scales and toxic
fluids of adult moths, butterflies or its caterpillars).
Neoplasms
Primary or metastatic neoplasms constitute 20% of cases of PUO (Table 4.1).
Collagen Vascular Disease/Autoimmune Disease
Constitute 20% of cases of PUO (Table 4.1).
Table 4.1: Neoplasms and collagen vascular diseases causing
PUO.
Neoplasms-primary or metastatic (20% cases) Collagen vascular disease/autoimmune disease
(20% cases)
Hematological
–   Lymphoma
–   Chronic leukemia
Non-hematological
–   Renal cell cancer
–   Hepatocellular carcinoma
–   Pancreatic cancer
–   Colon cancer
–   Myelodysplastic syndrome
–   Sarcomas
–   Atrial myxoma
–   Malignant histiocytosisAdult onset Still’s disease, Macrophage
activation syndrome (MAS)/hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis (HLH)
Polymyalgia rheumatica
Temporal arteritis
Rheumatoid arthritis
Rheumatic fever
Inflammatory bowel disease
Reiter’s syndrome
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Vasculitides
–   Polyarteritis nodosa
–   Giant cell arteritis
–   Kawasaki disease
(PUO: pyrexia of unknown origin)
Psychogenic Fevers

Habitual hyperthermia: It is seen in young females, characterized by
temperatures of 99 °F to 100.5 °F that occurs regularly or intermittently
for years. No organic cause can be found.
Afebrile PUO: In this, patient always complaints of feverishness but the
temperature recorded is always less than <38.3°C.
Exaggerated circadian rhythm: Normal person usually have an evening
rise of temperature which is not normally apparent. In this condition, it
becomes evident.Hysterical fever: In this, the patient is thinks and believes that he is
always having fever.
Malignant hyperthermia: It is a rare life-threatening condition triggered
by exposure to certain drugs used for general anesthesia (especially
all volatile anesthetics), nearly all gaseous anesthetics, and neuromuscular
blocking agent like succinylcholine.Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS): It is a rare, life threatening,
neurological disorder, most often caused by an adverse reaction
to neuroleptic or antipsychotic drugs. It presents with muscle
rigidity, fever, and autonomic instability.
Periodic Fevers
For example, Familial Mediterranean fever.
Miscellaneous
Constitute 10% cases (Table 4.2).
Table 4.2: Miscellaneous causes of PUO (10% cases).
Drugs: penicillin, phenytoin, captopril,
allopurinol, erythromycin, cimetidine, etc. All
drugs can cause fever except DIGITALIS
Hyperthyroidism, Pheochromocytoma,
Addison’s disease
Alcoholic hepatitis
Sarcoidosis
Inflammatory bowel diseaseDeep venous thrombosis/pulmonary
thromboembolism
Hemolytic anemia
Thyroiditis
Granulomatous hepatitis
Cyclic neutropenia
Kikuchi–Fujimoto disease
Cerebrovascular accidents (CVA)—
Intracranial bleeds
(PUO: pyrexia of unknown origin)

Undiagnosed (10% Cases)
About 10–15% of patients remain undiagnosed despite extensive
investigations and in 75% of these the fever resolves spontaneously. In the
remainder, other signs and symptoms make the diagnosis clear.
Clinical Approach to PUO
History Taking
1. Onset:
Acute: Malaria, pyogenic infection
Gradual: TB, typhoid fever
2. Character: High grade fever is seen in urinary tract infections (UTI),
malaria, thrombosis, drug fever.
3. Pattern (Fig. 4.1):
Sustained/persistent: Typhoid fever, drugs
Intermittent fever:
–   Daily spikes: Malaria, abscess, tuberculosis (TB), Schistosomiasis
–   Double quotidian, Twice-daily spikes: Leishmaniasis, gonococcal
endocarditis, adult onset Still’s disease
–   Saddle back fever: Leptospirosis, dengue, borrelia
–   Relapsing/recurrent fever: Non-falciparum malaria, brucellosis,
Hodgkin’s lymphoma
4. Antecedents: Prior to onset of fever:
Dental extraction: Infective endocarditis
Urinary catheterization: UTI, bacteremia

Fig. 4.1:  Patterns/types of fever.
5. Associated symptoms:
Chills and rigors: Bacterial, rickettsial and protozoal disease
(malaria), influenza, lymphoma, leukemia, drug-induced
Night sweats: TB, Hodgkin’s lymphoma
Loss of weight: Malignancy, TB
Cough and dyspnea: Miliary TB, multiple pulmonary emboli, AIDS
patient with PCP (Pneumocystis pneumonia), CMV (Cytomegalovirus)
Headache: Giant cell arteritis, typhoid fever, sinusitis, meningitis,
drug fever
Joint pain: Rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE),
vasculitis, adult onset Still’s disease
Abdominal pain: Cholangitis, biliary obstruction, perinephric abscess,
Crohn’s disease, dissecting aneurysm, gynecological infection
Bone pain: Osteomyelitis, lymphoma
Sore throat: Infectious mononucleosis, retropharyngeal abscess,
streptococcal infection
Dysuria, rectal pain: Prostatic abscess, UTI
Altered bowel habit: Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), typhoid

fever, schistosomiasis, amebiasis
Skin rash: Gonococcal infection, polyarteritis nodosa (PAN), non-
Hodgkin’s lymphoma (NHL), dengue fever, connective tissue
disorders.
6. Review past medical history: Malignancy (e.g. leukemia, lymphoma,
hepatocellular carcinoma), HIV infection, diabetes mellitus, inflammatory
bowel disease, collagen vascular disease [e.g. systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE), rheumatoid arthritis (RA)], giant cell arteritis,
tuberculosis, heart disease (e.g. valvular heart disease)7. Past surgical history: Post-splenectomy/post-transplantation, prosthetic
heart valve, catheter, AV fistula, recent surgery/operation
8. Drug history
Immunosuppressive drug/corticosteroid
Anticoagulants
Before the fever: Drug fever occur within 3 months after starting,
taking drugs may cause hypersensitivity and low grade fever, usually
associated with rash.
–   Due to the allergic reaction , direct effect of drug which impairs
temperature regulation (e.g. phenothiazine), antiarrhythmic drug
(e.g. procainamide, quinidine); antimicrobacterial agent (e.g.
penicillin, cephalosporin, hydralazine), phenytoin.After the fever: May modify clinical pictures, mask certain infection,
e.g. subacute bacterial endocarditis (SBE), antibiotic allergy.
9. Family history: Whether anyone in family has similar problem (e.g.
tuberculosis, familial Mediterranean fever)
10. Social history
Travel: Amebiasis, typhoid fever, malaria, schistosomiasis
Residential area: Malaria, leptospirosis, brucellosis
Occupation
–   Farmers, veterinarian, slaughter-house workers = Brucellosis
–   Workers in the plastic industries = polymer-fume fever
–   Contact with domestic/wild animal/birds : Brucellosis, psittacosis
(pigeons), leptospirosis, Q fever, toxoplasmosis
Diet history

–   Unpasteurized milk/cheese = Brucellosis
–   Poorly cooked pork = Trichinosis
IVDU (intravenous drug user) = HIV-AIDS related condition,
endocarditis
Sexual orientation = HIV, sexually transmitted disease (STD), pelvic
inflammatory disease (PID)
Close contact with TB patients.
Physical Examination (Table 4.3)
Table 4.3: Various physical examination in pyrexia of unknown
origin (PUO).
General Hands Arms
Pattern of fever (continuous,
intermittent, remitting, relapsing)
Patient is ill/not ill
Weight loss (presence indicates
chronic illness)
Skin rashStigmata of infective
endocarditis
Vasculitis changes
Clubbing
Presence of arthropathy
Raynaud’s phenomenonDrug injection sites
(IVDU)
Epitrochlear and axillary
nodes (lymphoma,
sarcoidosis, focal
infectionSkin rash, nodules
Intravenous cannula—
phlebitis
Head and neck Chest
Feel temporal arteries (tender and
thickening)
Eyes: Iritis/conjunctivitis
(connective tissue disease—Reiter
syndrome), jaundice (ascending
cholangitis)Fundi: Choroidal tubercle (miliary
TB), Roth’s spot (infective
endocarditis) and retinal
hemorrhage (leukemia)Lymphadenopathy
Butterfly rash: SLE
Mucous membranes—
petechiae
Seborrheic dermatitis
(HIV)
Mouth ulcers (SLE)
Buccal candidiasis
Teeth and tonsils
infection (abscess)
Parotid enlargement
Ears: Otitis mediaBony tenderness:
Sternum (acute
leukemia)CVS: Changing
murmurs
(endocarditis)tumor plop
(atrial myxoma), rubs
(pericarditis)Respiratory: Signs of
pneumonia, TB,
empyema and lung
carcinoma
Abdomen OthersTenderness
Hepatomegaly (abscess, hepatoma,
metastasis)Per-rectal
examination:
Mass/tenderness inNervous system
–   Signs of meningism
(chronic TB,

Splenomegaly (hemopoietic
malignancy, endocarditis, malaria)
Renal enlargement (renal cell
carcinoma)
Testicular enlargement (seminoma)
Penis and scrotum: Discharge/rash
Inguinal ligament:
Lymphadenopathyrectum/pelvis (abscess,
carcinoma, prostatitis)
Vaginal examination:
Collection of pelvic
pus/pelvic inflammatory
diseaseLocomotor system:
Arthralgia/arthritis,
synovitis, ulcers,
Raynaud’s phenomenonmeningitis)
–   Focal neurological
signs (brain abscess,
mononeuritis
multiplex in
polyarteritis nodosa)
Investigations (Tables 4.4, 4.5 and Box 4.1)
Table 4.4: Laboratory investigations in pyrexia of unknown
origin.
Stage 1: Screening tests Stage 2: Laboratory investigationsFull blood count with peripheral smear
ESR and CRP
Renal function tests
Liver function tests
Blood culture
Serum virology for HIV, dengue, leptospira,
widal test
Urinalysis and culture
Blood culture
Sputum culture and sensitivity
Stool routine and occult blood
Chest X-ray
Mantoux test
Ultrasound abdomen, pelvis, neck (if
adenopathy, thyroid)
Malarial smear in endemic areasRepeat blood counts, chemistry
Protein electrophoresis
CT (chest, brain, abdomen, pelvis)
Autoantibody screen (ANA, RF, ANCA,
anti-ds DNA)
ECG
Thyroid function tests
Bone marrow examination with culture
Lumbar puncture
Coagulation workup
Serum ferritin (adult onset Still’s disease)
Consider PSA, CEA, LDH
Temporal artery biopsy
Paul Bunnell test and brucella agglutination
test
Weil Felix reaction
Table 4.5: Various radiological investigations and its usefulness
in PUO.
Radiological investigations Usefulness in the diagnosis of
Chest X-ray Tuberculosis, malignancy, Pneumocystis
pneumonia
CT of abdomen or pelvis with contrast agent Abscess, malignancy
MRI of brain Malignancy, autoimmune disorders

PET scan Malignancy, inflammation
Transthoracic or transesophageal
echocardiographyBacterial endocarditis
Galium 67 scan Infection, malignancy
Indium-labelled leukocytes Occult septicemia
Technetium Tc 99m Acute infection and inflammation of bone and
soft tissue
Venous Doppler study Venous thrombosis
Treatment
Treat the underlying cause identified after investigations.
Use empirical broad-spectrum antibiotics.
Therapeutic trial of aspirin/steroids.
Naprosyn challenge for malignancy/lymphoma.
Empirical antitubercular treatment.
Box 4.1:  Stage 3: Laboratory investigations in PUO.
Echocardiography
PET scan (Indium-labelled WBC scan)
IVU (intravenous urogram)
Liver biopsy
Exploratory laparotomy
Bronchoscopy
BACTERIAL INFECTIONS
Streptococcal Infections
Streptococci are gram-positive cocci 1 µm in diameter, non-motile and non-
sporing. Many strains are capsulated.
Various products secreted by streptococci, which aid in their pathogenicity
include streptolysin O and S, deoxyribonucleases, hyaluronidase and
erythrogenic toxins.
Streptococcal Pharyngitis
Incubation period is 2–4 days.
Clinical features: Presents with abrupt onset of sore throat, dysphagia,
headache, malaise, anorexia, and fever. The posterior pharyngeal wall is
red and edematous. The tonsils are enlarged, red and covered with

yellowish exudate, which can be easily removed with a swab. Anterior
cervical lymph nodes are enlarged and tender.
Complications: Rheumatic fever and poststreptococcal
glomerulonephritis are two major immunologically triggered
complications of streptococcal infection of the upper oropharyngeal
regions.
Treatment:  Pharyngitis responds readily to penicillin, erythromycin, cephalosporins (first generation
given orally) or clindamycin 600–900 mg given 8th hourly.
Scarlet Fever
Characterized by the development of an erythematous rash  on the second
day of illness. The primary lesion is in the throat. The rash is seen over the
neck and trunk, the palms and soles are generally spared. The rash blanches
on pressure. The rash subsides with extensive desquamation after 4–5 days.
Treatment
Streptococcal lesions respond promptly to penicillin. A single intramuscular injection of benzathine
penicillin G 600,000 units for children less than 25 kg and 1.2 million units for all others.
Phenoxymethylpenicillin (penicillin V) 250 mg orally four times daily for 7-10 days is also equally
effective. Erythromycin 250 mg 6 hourly for 7–10 days is given to patients allergic to penicillin. If
suppuration develops, surgical drainage of the pus may be required.Erysipelas
Acute spreading infection  of the skin and the subcutaneous tissue by
streptococci. Face is commonly affected. The disease sets in abruptly with
malaise, chills, headache and vomiting. The skin lesions are erythematous
with clear advancing margins which may show vesicles. The part is tender
and local lymph node enlargement may occur.
Streptococcal ImpetigoIt is inflammation of the skin characterized by isolated pustules which
become crusted. Sites of predilection are around the mouth and nostrils.
If left untreated they may ulcerate to produce shallow ulcers with crusts or
scabs which may lead to pigmentation and scarring. This stage is called
ecthyma.
Cellulitis

This is spreading inflammation of the subcutaneous tissue due to entry of the
organism through the abrasions of the skin. There is pain, tenderness,
erythema, fever, and often regional lymphadenopathy.
Lymphangitis
Acute lymphangitis may follow local trauma. This condition presents in the
form of linear red streaks radiating from the site of entry to the draining
lymph nodes.
Streptococcal Bacteremia
Irrespective of the focus of entry and primary lesion, streptococcal
bacteremia gives rise to metastatic foci of infection such as suppurative
arthritis, osteomyelitis, peritonitis, endocarditis, meningitis, or visceral
abscesses.Necrotizing Fasciitis (Syn: Streptococcal Gangrene) (Fig. 4.2)
This is a progressing destructive lesion of the subcutaneous tissue leading
to necrosis of fascia and adipose tissue, but often sparing the skin. The
organisms enter through trivial wounds, but within 24 hours the part is hot,
swollen, tender and edematous. The edema and violaceous hue spreads in
all directions.
Fig. 4.2:  Necrotizing fasciitis—due to Streptococcus.
It is more common in diabetes, immunocompromised individuals and
those with local conditions impairing the vitality of the part, e.g. vascular
occlusions, chronic edema and infective lesions. Increase in the fascial
compartmental pressure further jeopardises the vascularity. Within 48

hours bullae develop, which go on to gangrene within 4–5 days. The
gangrenous area gets demarcated. General symptoms include severe
prostration, toxemia, mental clouding and delirium. If the diagnosis is
missed, mortality is high.
Streptococcal Myositis
This is an uncommon lesion. Infection reaches the muscles by the
bloodstream. Onset is with severe pain and swelling of muscles. Muscle
compartment syndromes may develop. If unrecognized, mortality is over
80%.It should be differentiated from spontaneous gas gangrene. Presence of
superficial crepitus favors the diagnosis of gas gangrene.
Treatment:  Includes the administration of broad-spectrum antibiotics and early surgical
debridement.
Pneumonia and Empyema
Streptococcal pneumonia usually follows a viral infection, and it manifests as
bronchopneumonia. In many cases empyema develops as a complication.
Streptococcal Toxic Shock Syndrome
Infection by group A streptococcus may lead to vascular collapse and organ
failure. M-protein which is a constituent of the cell wall is the virulence
factor, which plays the major role in the pathogenesis of toxic shock
syndrome. It forms large aggregates with fibrinogen, in blood and tissues.
These activate polymorphonuclear leucocytes intravascularly and this leads to
the production of toxic shock syndrome.
Other Pathogenic Strains of Streptococci
Group B streptococcus (Syn: Streptococcus agalactiae)
This is a major pathogen found in the female genital tract, rectum and also
throat. Chorioamnionitis, septic abortion  and puerperal sepsis may occur
during pregnancy. Urinary tract infection may occur in both sexes.
Hematogenous spread may result in endocarditis, pneumonia, empyema,
meningitis and peritonitis. Immunocompromised hosts and elderly subjects
are more susceptible.

Streptococcus viridans
Viridans streptococci account for more than 40% cases of infective
endocarditis. Streptococcus mutans which colonizes dental plaques is an
important cause of dental caries.
Enterococci
Causes urinary tract infections, biliary tract infections, septicemia, peritonitis,
infective endocarditis and abdominal suppuration.
Staphylococci
Q. Write short note on:
Diseases caused by Staphylococci.
Drugs used for treating Staphylococcal septicemia.
Staphylococcus aureus: Causes pyogenic lesions such as boils,
carbuncles, wound infection, abscesses, impetigo, mastitis, osteomyelitis,
pneumonia, septicemia and pyemia.
Coagulase negative staphylococci : It causes infection of cardiac and
vascular prostheses, endocarditis, ventriculitis (cerebral), peritonitis in
continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis, septicemia, and cystitis.
Various diseases caused by Staphylococci are listed in Table 4.6.Staphylococcus epidermidis is a common infective agent in implanted
prosthetic devices. Most of the infections are acquired from hospital.
Table 4.6: Diseases caused by staphylococci.
Superficial Lesions
Furuncle, carbuncle, impetigo, ecthyma,
sycosis barbae
Follicular Impetigo of Bockhart
The scalded skin syndrome (Syn: pemphigus
neonatorum, Ritter’s disease, toxic epidermal
necrolysis) (Fig. 4.3)Staphylococcal pneumonia
Osteomyelitis/septic arthritis
Staphylococcal bacteremia
Staphylococcal food poisoning
Endocarditis
Toxic shock syndrome
Tropical pyomyositis
Treatment of Staphylococcal Infections
Antistaphylococcal antibiotics of the first choice:
–   Oxacillin (methicillin)
–   Cephalosporins of first generation (cefazolin, cephalothin)

Antistaphylococcal antibiotics of the second choice: For MRSA/VRSA
–   lincosamides (e.g. clindamycin), glycopeptides (vancomycin, teicoplanin),
quinupristin/dalfopristin, chloramphenicol, minocycline, rifampin, trimethoprim
sulfamethoxazole, fosfomycin, linezolid, daptomycin, tigecycline, dalbavancin.
–   Oritavancin, Telithromycin, Ceftobiprole medocaril anti-MRSA cephalosporin antibiotics.
Fig. 4.3:  Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome.
Community-acquired Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus (CA-MRSA)
Q. Write short note on community-acquired methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus (CA-MRSA).
It is a type of staphylococcal bacteria that is resistant to certain antibiotics,
such as methicillin, oxacillin, penicillin and amoxicillin. It was first
identified in 1968.
The infection does not occur in individuals who are hospitalized or had
any medical procedure. On the other hand,HA-MRSA occurs in the
hospital setting.Outbreaks of CA-MRSA have occurred among categories such as: athletic
teams (e.g. football, wrestling, rugby, fencing), military barracks,
correctional facilities, dormitories, daycares and schools.Factors that favor for MRSA transmission  (5 Cs)
–   Crowding
–   Compromised skin (abrasions, cuts)
–   Contaminated surfaces

–   Frequent, skin-to-skin Contact
–   Lack of Cleanliness
Feature: It tends to cause more aggressive skin and soft tissue infections,
necrotizing pneumonia, septic shock and bacteremia.
Treatment  of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus  (MRSA) (Table 4.7).
Table 4.7: Treatment of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus.
Drug Traditional dosage
Doxycycline (mild cases oral) 100 mg IV or per oral 12 hourly
Trimethoprim sulfamethoxazole (mild cases oral) 160 mg per oral 12 hourly
2.5 mg/kg IV 12 hourly
Clindamycin 300–400 mg per oral 6 hourly
600–900 mg IV 8 hourly
Daptomycin 4 mg/kg IV per day
6 mg/kg IV per day
Linezolid 600 mg per oral or IV 12 hourly
Minocycline 100 mg IV or per oral 12 hourly
Quinupristin-dalfopristin 7.5 mg/kg IV 12 hourly
Telavancin 10 mg/kg IV per day
Tigecycline 100 mg IV (initial) then 50 mg IV 12 hourly
Vancomycin 1 g IV 12 hourly
PNEUMOCOCCAL INFECTIONS
Diseases caused by pneumococci are listed in Box 4.2.
Box 4.2:  Diseases caused by pneumococci.
Pneumococcal pneumonia
Extrapulmonary pneumococcal lesions
–   Pneumococcal meningitis
–   Pneumococcal peritonitis
Treatment of Pneumococcal Infections
Pneumococci are generally susceptible to penicillin, but resistant strains are frequent. It is
advisable to send the sputum for sensitivity tests before starting specific therapy. Benzyl penicillin

is the drug of choice for uncomplicated pneumococcal infections.
Multiple-drug-resistant pneumococci respond to vancomycin 2 g/day given IV in divided doses or
cefotaxime or ceftazidime. Levofloxacin is also effective.
Meningococcal Infections
Meningococcal Meningitis (Syn: Cerebrospinal Fever)
Meningococcemia may be fulminant or chronic.
Fulminant meningococcemia: This is characterized by abrupt onset,
severe constitutional disturbances, peripheral vascular collapse, shock, and
sometimes myocarditis. In some cases the illness may progress rapidly so
that toxemia and shock may occur within hours. These features are
collectively called Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome. This syndrome is
caused by hemorrhage into the adrenal glands resulting in acute adrenal
failure. Toxic vasculitis aggravates the hypotension. Complications
include endocarditis, allergic polyarthritis, pneumonia and osteomyelitis.
TreatmentPenicillin G is the antibiotic of choice and should be administered intravenously in a dose of 24
million units daily in divided doses. Addition of glucocorticoids early in treatment favors prompt
recovery and prevents complications considerably.
Ampicillin in a dose of 200–400 mg/kg body weight daily is also equally effective. The third
generation cephalosporins, especially cefotaxime and ceftriaxone are equally effective.
Diphtheria
Q. Discuss the clinical manifestations, complications, diagnosis and
management of diphtheria.
Diphtheria is a nasopharyngeal (respiratory diphtheria) and/or skin
infection (cutaneous diphtheria) caused by Corynebacterium diphtheriae.
Corynebacterium diphtheriae is a gram-positive bacillus.
Corynebacterium diphtheriae remains localized at the site of infection but
releases a powerful soluble exotoxin that damages the heart muscle and
the nervous system.
Mode of Transmission
It is through airborne/droplet infection from active cases or carriers.
Infection may also transmit through skin lesions.
Incubation period: 2–7 days.

Pseudomembrane
The diagnostic pathologic feature is mucosal ulcers coated by
pseudomembrane. The pseudomembrane has a well-defined edge which
appears as ‘wash-leather’, elevated, firm, grayish-green (black in advanced
stages) adherent membrane. It is surrounded by a zone of inflammation.
Clinical Features
Its manifestations may be local (due to the membrane) or systemic (due to
exotoxin).
Insidious in onset with a sore throat and fever being the usual
manifestation. The fever is moderate but there is usually marked
tachycardia.
Respiratory diphtheria
Pharyngeal diphtheria: It is characterized by marked tonsillar and
pharyngeal inflammation and the presence of a pseudomembrane. There
may be regional often tender lymphadenopathy (cervical lymph nodes),
and along with marked edema of submandibular areas produces the so-
called ‘bull-neck’ appearance (swelling of the neck). Pharyngeal
diphtheria is associated with the greatest toxicity.Laryngeal diphtheria: It is usually represents extension of the membrane
from the pharynx. Extension and sloughing of membranes may produce
fatal airway obstruction. It usually presents with a husky voice, a brassy
cough and later dyspnea and cyanosis due to respiratory obstruction.Nasal diphtheria: It is restricted to the nasal mucosa and is characterized
by the presence of a unilateral, serosanguineous (frequently blood-stained)
nasal discharge.
Cutaneous diphtheria
It is uncommon but occurs in individuals with poor personal hygiene and
with burns. It produces round, deep, ‘punched-out’ skin ulcers with
undermined edges and is covered by a gray-yellow or gray-brown adherent
membrane. The ulcers occur more commonly on the lower and upper
extremities, head and trunk. Constitutional symptoms are not common.
ComplicationsAirway (laryngeal) obstruction: It may occur with advanced diphtheria.

Airway obstruction may be either due to the sloughed pseudomembrane or
extension of the pseudomembrane to the larynx or into the
tracheobronchial tree (bronchopulmonary diphtheria). It is mainly
observed in children because of their small airways.
Cardiac complications: These include myocarditis with arrhythmias,
cardiac failure and ECG changes. They often develop weeks after initial
episode of diphtheria. These are usually reversible.
Neurological complications occur in 75% of cases.
–   Palatal palsy may develop after 10 days.
–   Polyneuropathy with weakness and paraesthesia may develop 3–5
weeks after the onset of diphtheria.
–   Paralysis of accommodation may manifest as difficulty in reading
small print.
–   Encephalitis can occur rarely.
Other complications include pneumonia, renal failure, encephalitis,
cerebral infarction and pulmonary embolism.
Diagnosis
Clinical diagnosis
Confirmation of diagnosis:
–   Demonstration of Corynebacterium diphtheriae  on methylene blue-
stained preparations.
–   Bacterial culture of Corynebacterium diphtheriae on Loeffler’s
medium and toxin studies (Elek test).
Management
Patients should be hospitalized with close monitoring of cardiac and respiratory function. Patient
should be isolated  and strict bed rest.
Diphtheria antitoxin  is the only specific treatment. It is produced from hyperimmune horse
serum and it neutralizes circulating toxin
–   It must be given as early in the course of diphtheria as possible without awaiting the result of a
throat swab. Because any delay in administration can be dangerous because toxin once fixed to
the tissues can no longer be neutralized by antitoxin.
–   Dose:  It is administered intravenously over 60 minutes after an initial test dose to exclude any
allergic reaction. 20,000 to 40,000 units for pharyngeal/laryngeal disease of <48 hours
duration, 40,000 to 60,000 units for nasopharyngeal disease, and 80,000 to 120,000 units for
>3 days of illness or diffuse neck swelling (“bull neck”).
–   Adverse reactions:  It can cause two types of reactions, an immediate anaphylactic reaction
and delayed serum sickness. The immediate anaphylactic reaction is treated with adrenaline

and an antihistamine.
Antibiotics should be given concurrently to eliminate C. diphtheriae and thereby remove the
source of toxin production. Benzylpenicillin (1200 mg 4 times daily IV) or amoxicillin (500 mg 3
times daily) is given for 2 weeks. Patients allergic to penicillin are given erythromycin (500 mg
four times daily for 14 days).
Tracheostomy or intubation may be needed for respiratory distress.
Immunization:  Primary diphtheria does not produce immunity against infection. Hence,
following recovery all sufferers should be immunized with diphtheria toxoid. Close contacts
should be protected by erythromycin prophylaxis and also by immunization. Vaccines include
DPT (diphtheria, pertussis, tetanus) and DT (diphtheria, tetanus).Contact prophylaxis:  Single dose of penicillin G benzathine (600,000 units intramuscularly—
IM) or oral erythromycin (500 mg four times daily for 7–10 days).
TETANUS
Q. Write a short essay/note on tetanus.
Tetanus is due to infection by toxin secreting clostridium namely
Clostridium tetani. The organism is found in soil derived from animal and
human excreta.
Mode of infection: Infection enters the body through a contaminated wound
(injury may be trivial). It can also develop as complication in intravenous
drug misusers. Neonatal tetanus may develop following contamination of the
umbilical stump, often after dressing the area (unhygienic practices) with
dung (e.g. in many developing countries) or site of circumcision, causing
tetanus neonatorum.Q. Write a short note on the actions of tetanospasmin.
Pathogenesis: During circumstances unfavorable to the growth of
Clostridium tetani , it forms spores and remain dormant for years in the soil.
Spores germinate and organism multiplies only in the anaerobic conditions.
Thus, it may multiply in areas of tissue necrosis or wherever the oxygen
tension is reduced by the presence of other organisms (e.g. aerobic
organism). Clostridium tetani  is not invasive and remain localized. Its clinical
manifestations are due to the potent neurotoxin (exotoxin) called
tetanospasmin.
Incubation period: Varies from 2 days to several weeks after injury. Shorter
the incubation period, the more severe the attack and the worse the prognosis.

Clinical Features
Q. Write a short essay/note on the clinical features of tetanus.
Generalized tetanus is the most common form of tetanus.
Lockjaw: General malaise is rapidly followed by the most important
symptom namely trismus. It is due to spasm of the masseter muscles,
which causes difficulty in opening the mouth and in masticating.
Risus sardonicus: When the tonic rigidity involve the muscles of the face,
neck and trunk, contraction of the frontalis and the muscles at the angles
of the mouth produces characteristic grinning expression known as ‘risus
sardonicus’.Opisthotonus: Varying degree of rigidity develops in the muscles at the
neck and trunk. The back is usually slightly arched (‘opisthotonus’) and
the abdominal wall appears board-like.Severe disease:
–   If the disease is severe, painful, violent, exhausting, reflex spasms
(convulsions) develop, usually within 24–72 hours of the initial
symptoms and lasts for a few seconds to 3–4 minutes. The interval
between the first symptom and the first spasm is known as the ‘onset
time’.
–   The spasms can be spontaneous or may be induced by stimuli such
as movement or noise or by light. Laryngeal spasm can impair
respiration; esophageal and urethral spasm can produce dysphagia and
urinary retention, respectively. Patients are mentally alert.
–   Autonomic involvement may produce cardiovascular complications
(e.g. tachycardia, a labile blood pressure, sweating and cardiac
arrhythmias).Death: Spasms gradually increase in frequency and severity and death
may occur from exhaustion, hypoxia, cardiac arrest, asphyxia, respiratory
failure or aspiration pneumonia or exhaustion. Mild cases with rigidity
usually recover.
Local tetanus is a milder form of the disease in which the pain, stiffness,
increased tone or spasms of the muscles develop only near the infected
wound. Prognosis is good and recovery usually occurs if treatment is
commenced at this stage.

Cephalic tetanus: Uncommon but fatal. It usually develops due to entry of
C. tetani  through the middle ear. Cranial nerve abnormalities (e.g. seventh
nerve) are usual.
Neonatal tetanus is usually develops due to infection of the umbilical stump.
Characterized by failure to thrive, poor sucking, grimacing and irritability
followed by intense rigidity and spasms. Mortality is almost 100%. It can be
prevented by immunizing all women of childbearing age, and providing clean
delivery facilities.
Investigations/DiagnosisDiagnosis is usually made on clinical grounds.
C. tetani: Rarely possible to isolate from wounds (original locus of entry).
Differential diagnosis: Phenothiazine over dosage, strychnine poisoning,
meningitis and tetany.
Q. Write a short essay/note on the treatment of tetanus.
Management/Treatment of Tetanus
Suspected tetanus
Care of the wound:  Clean the wound and debrided if necessary, to remove the source of toxin.
Human tetanus immunoglobulin:  In the dose of 250 units should be given along with an
intramuscular injection of tetanus toxoid. If the patient is already immunized a single booster dose
of the tetanus toxoid is given; otherwise the full three dose course of adsorbed vaccine is given.
Established tetanus
Management of established disease should be started as soon as possible.
Prevent further toxin production:  Debridement of wound and antibiotics (see below).
General supportive medical and nursing care. Patient is isolated in a quiet, well ventilated and
darkened room. Maintain hydration and nutrition and treat secondary infections.
Control of spasm:  Nurse in a quiet room, avoid unnecessary stimuli. Benzodiazepines/IV
diazepam are used to control spasms and sedate the patient. If spasms continue, paralyze patient
and ventilate. Baclofen may be useful.
Intubation and mechanical ventilation:  If the airway is compromised.
Magnesium sulfate infusion:  Reduces the need for antispasmodics.
Antibiotics and antitoxin:  Given even in the absence of an obvious wound. Drug of choice is
intravenous metronidazole. Other antibiotic include penicillin (Benzylpenicillin 600 mg IV 4 times
daily) and cephalosporins.
Neutralization of absorbed toxin:  Human tetanus immunoglobulin (HTIG) 3000 to 6000 IU
should is given by intramuscular injection to neutralize any circulating toxin. If HTIG is not
available, immune equine tetanus immunoglobulin 10,000 IU should be given intramuscularly: but
there is a high incidence of severe allergic reactions.If the patient recovers active immunization should be instituted, as immunity following tetanus is
incomplete.

Anthrax
Q. Write short essay on anthrax.
Anthrax is a zoonotic disease caused by Bacillus anthracis.
Bacillus anthracis is a gram-positive bacillus with a central spore. It
produces toxins and is responsible for the clinical features of disease that
most closely correlated with its virulence.
Mode of Transmission
It is through direct contact (inoculation of the spores) with an infected animal
particularly herbivores. Infection is most frequent as an occupational disease
in farmers, butchers and dealers in wool and animal hides. Spores of Bacillus
anthracis can also be ingested or inhaled. Deliberate release of anthrax spores
is an important bioterrorist weapon.
Incubation period: 1–10 days.
Clinical Manifestations
It depends on the route of entry of the anthrax spores.
Cutaneous anthraxQ. Write short essay on cutaneous anthrax and malignant pustule.
It is the most common type of anthrax. It follows inoculation of spores
into the subcutaneous of the exposed skin. Occupational exposure to
anthrax spores during processing of hides and bone products results in
cutaneous anthrax.Skin lesions (Hide porter’s disease) begin as a small, itching,
erythematous, maculopapule on an edematous hemorrhagic base. The
lesion is initially painless despite edema. It enlarges to form a vesicle
filled with sero-sanguinous fluid, and is surrounded by gross edema
(‘malignant pustule’). The vesicle ulcerates and dries to form a central
depressed thick black ‘eschar ’ surrounded by blebs. Despite marked
edema, pain is infrequent.It is self-limiting illness in the majority of patients, but occasionally
perivascular edema and regional lymphadenopathy may be associated with
marked toxemia.

Inhalational anthrax (Woolsorter’s disease)
Q. Write short essay on inhalation anthrax and Woolsorter’s disease.
It is extremely rare and follows inhalation of spores into the lung
producing ‘Woolsorter’s disease’.
Bioterrorism-related anthrax also due to inhalation of spores.
It begins with fever, non-productive cough, dyspnea, headache and
retrosternal discomfort. Patient develops bronchopneumonia. Symptoms
of septicemia may develop 3–14 days following exposure. Pleural
effusions (hemorrhagic) are common and meningitis may occur.Chest X-ray shows broncho-pneumonia, widening of the mediastinum and
pleural effusions.
Without rapid and aggressive treatment at the onset of symptoms, the
mortality ranges from 50 to 90%.
Gastrointestinal anthrax
It is associated with ingestion of undercooked, contaminated meat
products.
The cecum is involved and it manifests as a severe gastroenteritis. The
symptoms include nausea, vomiting, anorexia, and fever followed in 2–3
days by severe abdominal pain and bloody diarrhea.Toxemia, shock and death may develop rapidly.
Diagnosis
Demonstrating the organism: A stained smear of fluid taken from the
edge of a skin lesion may demonstrate the organism. The organism may
also be demonstrated in stools, laryngeal secretions, sputum and CSF.Culture of blood and other body fluids: Bacillus anthracis can be cultured
in mice, rabbits or guinea pigs.
Serological examination: ELISAs for detecting antibodies to both the
organism and a toxin.
Chest X-ray may show mediastinal widening, bronchopneumonia and
pleural effusion.
Treatment
Systemic anthrax with meningitis:  Ciprofloxacin (400mg TDS) PLUS meropenum plus
linezolid/clindamycin.

Anthrax related to bioterrorism:  Ciprofloxacin is the drug of choice. Dose is 400 mg IV
ciprofloxacin BID. Once the patient stabilizes, ciprofloxacin is given orally in a dose of 500 mg
BID. Duration of treatment is 60 days.
Raxibacumab, Obiltoxaximab:  40-80 mg/ kg Human monoclonal antibody directed against the
protective antigen has been shown in animal studies to improve survival in inhalation anthrax.
Anthrax Immunoglobulin is available to treat inhalational anthrax.
Prevention and Control
Prophylaxis:
–   Ciprofloxacin (500 mg twice daily) is recommended for individuals with high risk of exposure
to anthrax spores.
–   Doxycycline (100 mg BID) for 60 days.
Vaccination of animals and persons at risk.
When an infected animal dies, it should be burned and the area in which it was housed must be
disinfected.
Plague
Q. Write short essay/note on plague.
Plague is caused by a small gram-negative, non-motile bacillus namely
Yersinia pestis.
11 Yersinia species—3 human pathogens namely Y. pestis, Y.
pseudotuberculosis, Y. enterocolitica.
One of three WHO quarantinable diseases.
Plague is also called as ‘black death’. Historically, 3 plague pandemics
have caused more than 200 million deaths, including the Black Death
epidemic in 14th century Europe (Justinian 541 AD, Black Death 1346,
China 1855).Use for biological warfare.
Source of Infection
The main reservoirs are woodland rodents (sylvatic rats) that spread infection
to the domestic rat species (Rattus rattus) and finally infected rat fleas
(Xenopsylla cheopis). These fleas bite humans when there is a sudden
reduction in the rat population.
Route of Infection
Rat flea bite: Most common route in humans is after bite of a plague-
infected rat flea.
Direct contact with infected tissues or fluids from sick or dead plague-

infected animals. Hunters and trappers can develop plague from handling
rodents.
Droplet infection: Plague pneumonia or by laboratory exposure.
Incubation period: 3–6 days (Shorter in pneumonic plague).
Clinical Features
Type of plague: Four clinical forms are recognized: bubonic, septicemic,
pneumonic and cutaneous.
Bubonic plague
Most common form of the disease and occurs in about 90% of infected
individuals.
Onset is usually acute/sudden, with a high fever, rigor, chills, severe
headache, dry skin, myalgia, nausea, vomiting and when severe,
prostration. This is rapidly followed painful lymphadenopathy.
Characteristically these lymph nodes are tender and suppurate in 1–2
weeks. Most common site for lymphadenopathy is the inguinal region or
axilla. The swollen lymph nodes and surrounding tissue constitute the
characteristic ‘bubo’ called so because they are rarely fluctuant.Other manifestations include apathy, confusion, fright, anxiety, oliguria or
anuria, tachycardia, toxemia, and hypotension. The spleen is usually
palpable.Without treatment, complications such as secondary septicemia, secondary
pneumonia and meningitis may occur. Mortality rate for untreated cases is
60%.
Septicemic plagueIt may be primary without signs of primary disease (primary septicemic
plague) or secondary as a complication of untreated bubonic plague or
pneumonic plague (secondary septicemic plague).Primary septicemic plague presents as an acute fulminant infection
characterized by high fever, chills and malaise, but without any lymph
node enlargement. Elderly individuals are more prone. The patient is toxic
and may develop gastrointestinal symptoms, such as nausea, vomiting,
abdominal pain and diarrhea. Patients may develop hypotension, septic
shock, renal failure, ARDS and disseminated intravascular coagulation
(DIC).

Gangrene of acral regions (tip of the nose or the fingers and toes) may
develop due to thrombosis of small artery in advanced stages (hence
named Black Death).
Left untreated, it deteriorates rapidly and the mortality approaches 100%.
Pneumonic plague
It may occur as a primary infection in the lung or as secondary infection
(as a complication of the bubonic and septicemic plague—secondary
pneumonia).Primary form: Develops within 1–6 days of exposure. It begins suddenly
with features of a fulminant pneumonia. Patient develops malaise, high
fever, vomiting, abdominal pain, diarrhea and marked prostration. Soon
followed by cough, dyspnea, copious blood-stained, frothy, highly
infective sputum marked respiratory distress/failure, cyanosis and septic
shock. Without antibiotics, death occurs in almost all patients within 2 or 3
days.Chest X-ray: Shows bilateral infiltrates that may be nodular and progress
to an ARDS-like picture.
Cutaneous plague
It presents either as a pustule, eschar or papule or an extensive purpura. It can
develop necrosis and gangrene.
Investigations and Diagnoses
Diagnosis is based on clinical, epidemiological and laboratory findings.
Demonstration of organism: For rapid diagnosis, smears are prepared
from blood, sputum, bubo aspirate (lymph node aspirate) and
cerebrospinal fluid. They are stained with Gram, Giemsa or Wayson’s
stains (contains methylene blue) and examined under microscopy. Y.
pestis is seen as bipolar staining coccobacilli, giving a ‘safety pin’
appearance.Culture of organism: From blood, sputum and bubo aspirates.
Serological diagnosis: A presumptive diagnosis in an appropriate clinical
setting is possible by a rapid antigen detection test (by
immunofluorescence, using Y. pestis F1 antigen-specific antibodies).Septicemic plague: Often associated with laboratory findings of DIC.

Chest X-ray: In pneumonic plague, it shows evidence of multilobar
consolidation, cavities or bronchopneumonia.
Blood: WBC count 20,000/mm2 and/or thrombocytopenia in about 50%
of patients.
Treatment/Management
If the diagnosis is suspected on clinical and epidemiological grounds, urgent treatment is required
even before the results of culture studies are available.
1. First choices
Streptomycin: 30 mg/kg per day IM (up to a total dose of 2 g) in two divided doses for 10
days.
Gentamicin  as effective OD dosing and less toxic.
2. Second choices
Tetracyclines: Doxycycline
Fluoroquinolones: Ciprofloxacin, Levofloxacin, Ofloxacin, Moxifloxacin
Chloramphenicol: 1st choice for meningitis +/- aminoglycoside
Supportive treatment of ARDS, DIC, and shock.
Prophylaxis
Control of rats and flea
Avoid handling and skinning of wild animal in endemic areas.
Prevention of human-to-human transmission:  Patients with plague pneumonia should be
isolated until at least 4 days of antibiotic treatment have been administered. For the other types of
the plague, patients should be isolated for the first 48 hours or until clinical improvement begins.
Attendants must wear gowns, masks and gloves and health care workers should use high-
efficiency respirators.
Chemoprophylaxis:  Close contact with a patient with pneumonic plague should receive
postexposure antibiotic prophylaxis (doxycycline 100 mg or ciprofloxacin 500 mg twice daily) for
7 days.
Vaccine: A partially effective formalin-killed vaccine is available for those who travel to plague-
endemic areas and individuals at occupational risk.
Botulism
Q. Write a short essay/note on botulism.
Botulism is caused by neurotoxin (botulinum) produced by Clostridium
botulinum.
It produces a neurotoxin which is the most potent poison known and cause
disease after ingestion of even picogram (as low as 0.05 g) amounts. There
are seven types of toxins which are labeled as A to G.
Mode of Infection

Ingestion: It can contaminate many foodstuffs such as canned or bottled
foodstuff, in which it can multiply. Most cases of botulism are due to
consumption of contaminated food being served undercooked.
Contaminated honey causes in infant botulism, in which the organism
colonizes the gastrointestinal tract.Inoculation: Wound botulism can develop in injection drug-users.
Incubation period: Two hours to 8 days.
Classification
Food-borne botulism: It occurs due to ingestion of toxin present in the
contaminated food (fish, canned food) and it is the most common type of
botulism.Infantile botulism: It develops due to ingestion of spores, which
germinate in the gut and produce toxin.
Wound botulism: It follows the contamination of wounds, street heroin
injection contaminated with C. botulinum. Other types are inhalational and
iatrogenic botulism.
Clinical FeaturesFood-borne botulism
Initial symptoms are related to gastrointestinal symptoms such as nausea
and diarrhea. These are rapidly followed neurotoxic effects of toxin. The
toxin causes mainly bulbar and ocular palsies (difficulty in swallowing,
blurred or double vision, ptosis), progressing to symmetrical descending
limb weakness, diaphragmatic paralysis, respiratory paralysis and death.
No sensory deficits seen except blurring of vision.Absence of fever and patients are alert, remains responsive, though mild
drowsiness may be present.
Heart rate is normal or slow and blood pressure is normal.
Parasympathetic dysfunction: Rare and may produce dry mouth, paralytic
ileus and dilated, nonreactive pupils.
Infantile botulism
Characterized by onset of constipation, followed by weakness in sucking,
crying or swallowing. Later there is progressive bulbar and muscle
weakness of the extremities.

Wound botulism
It is similar to food-borne botulism except that GI upset does not occur.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of botulism is usually based on clinical features.
Detection of toxin: In blood (foodborne) or stools (infant botulism) or in
the contaminated food.
Culture of organism from wound.
Differential diagnosis: GB (Guillain-Barré) syndrome, myasthenia gravis,
tick paralysis, diphtheria and hypermagnesemia.
Treatment
It is mainly general supportive care with mechanical ventilation, prevention of secondary infection
and administration of antitoxin (not available in India). Equine serum heptavalent botulism
antitoxin and human-derived botulism immune globulin are available in United States.
Antibiotics are of no much use. However, penicillin G anad metronidazole are used. The overall
mortality is high, but those who survive the acute paralysis fully recover.
Whooping Cough
Q. Describe the etiology, clinical features, complications, diagnosis and
management of whooping cough.
Whooping cough (pertussis) is an acute infection of the respiratory tract
caused by Bordetella pertussis. Bordetella pertussis is a gram-negative
coccobacillus.
The term pertussis means ‘violent cough’ which is the most prominent
feature of the illness.
Mode of spread: Pertussis is highly contagious and spreads by droplet
infection.
Incubation period: 7–10 days.
Age group:  Classic case is seen in childhood, with 90% occurring below 5
years of age.
Clinical Features
Catarrhal phase
This first stage is highly infectious characterized by upper respiratory catarrh

with rhinitis, lacrimation (conjunctivitis), low-grade fever and an
unproductive cough. This stage lasts about 1–2 weeks.
Paroxysmal phase
It is called so because of the characteristic paroxysms of coughing.
Whoop: During this stage, the cough becomes spasmodic, more frequent
and severe with repetitive bouts of 5–10 coughs. The coughing paroxysms
episode may be terminated by a classic inspiratory audible whoop. The
whoop is due to rapid inspiration against a closed glottis at the end of a
paroxysm. It is observed only in younger patients in whom the lumen of
the respiratory tract is narrowed due to mucus secretion and mucosal
edema. These paroxysms usually terminate in vomiting. Early paroxysmal
stage is also infectious.Other features include conjunctival suffusion and petechiae and
ulceration of the frenulum of the tongue. Lymphocytosis is observed.
This stage lasts for about 2 weeks and may be associated with many
complications (Table 4.8).
Table 4.8: Complications of pertussis.
Respiratory Other complications
Apnea (in children)
Bronchopneumonia
Atelectasis
Bronchiectasis
(sequelae)
Rib fractures
PneumothoraxEncephalitis
Convulsions (due to
cerebral anoxia)
Conjunctival
hemorrhageSubdural hematoma
Direct inguinal hernia
Rectal prolapse
Weight loss
Convalescence phase
It follows the paroxysmal phase during which slow resolution of whoop
occurs. This phase can last 1–3 months, and cough may persists for several
weeks to months.
Complications (Table 4.8)
Diagnosis
Clinical diagnosis is not difficult if the classic symptoms, characteristic
whoop and a history of contact with an infected individual are present.

Blood: Peripheral blood may show lymphocytosis.
Culture of nasopharyngeal secretions is the gold standard for diagnosis.
B. pertussis DNA detection by PCR assay.
Direct fluorescent antibody test.
Management
Antibiotics
Erythromycin for 7–14 days is the recommended treatment.
CDC recommends azithromycin for five days (500 mg day 1, followed by 250 mg day 2 through
5) or clarithromycin (500 mg twice daily for seven days).
Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole reduces pertussis transmission and is an alternative treatment for
patients who are allergic to macrolides.
Cough suppressants are not effective.
Others: Steroids, antihistamines, β-agonists and immunoglobulins are not beneficial.
Prevention
Isolation of patient:  Patients should be isolated to prevent contact with others, e.g. in hostels and
boarding schools.
–   Catarrhal phase: If antibiotics have been given during catarrhal phase, patient is infectious until
5 days after starting antibiotics.
–   Paroxysmal phase: Patient is contagious till 3 weeks after the paroxysmal stage ends if not
treated during catarrhal stage.
Chemoprophylaxis:  Risk of transmission of B. pertussis  within households is high. Hence, close
contacts of patients should receive macrolides, especially if they are not vaccinated.
Active immunization:  Pertussis is an easily preventable disease with active immunization by
DPT vaccine. Immunity begins to decline 4–12 years after vaccination, and may make adolescent
and adult susceptible to infection. Rarely, the vaccine can produce convulsions and neurological
damage. Currently acellular effective vaccines with few adverse reactions are available. A triple
vaccine containing tetanus toxoid, reduced diphtheria toxoid and acellular pertussis (Tdap) is
available for use in adolescents and adults.
Enteric Fever
Q. Describe the etiology, clinical features, investigations, diagnosis,
complications and treatment of typhoid fever.
Q. Write short note on enteric fever (typhoid and paratyphoid fever).
Enteric fever is the general term, which includes both typhoid and
paratyphoid fever. It is an acute systemic illness characterized by fever,
headache and abdominal discomfort.
Causative Agent
Enteric fevers are caused by Salmonella typhi  and Salmonella paratyphi .

Salmonella are gram-negative, flagellate, motile, non-sporulating,
facultative anaerobic bacilli (rods). Boiling or chlorination of water and
pasteurization of milk destroy the bacilli.
Typhoid fever (enteric) is an acute systemic disease caused by infection
with Salmonella typhi  (also known as Salmonella enterica serovar Typhi).
Paratyphoid fever is a clinically similar but milder disease caused by
Salmonella paratyphi  (Salmonella enterica serovar Paratyphi A, B or C).
Source of Infection
Humans are the only natural reservoir and include:
1. Patient suffering from disease: Infected urine, feces, or other secretions
from patients.
2. Chronic carriers of typhoid fever: S. typhi  or S. paratyphi  colonizes in
the gallbladder, urinary bladder, or biliary tree.
Mode of transmission: From person-to-person contact.
Ingestion of contaminated food  (especially dairy products) and shellfish
or contaminated  food, mild or water. Chronic carriers, often food
handlers transmit the disease.
Direct spread: Rare by finger-to-mouth contact  with feces (fecal-oral
route), urine, or other secretions is rare.
Incubation period: Usually 10–14 days and for paratyphoid it is shorter.
Pathogenesis
The typhoid bacilli (Salmonella) are ingested through contaminated
food or water are  able to survive in gastric acid of the stomach and
reach mucosa of small intestine.
In the small intestine, they penetrate the ileal mucosa, reach the
submucosa and are phagocytosed by the macrophages in the Peyer’s
patches.
They are carried to the mesenteric lymph node via lymphatics and enter
the bloodstream via the thoracic duct causing bacteremia.
They colonize reticuloendothelial tissues (liver, gallbladder, spleen, bone
marrow), and multiply further and re-enter bloodstream causing massive
bacteremia (occurs towards the end of incubation period) and disease
clinically manifests.

In the intestine, the bacilli are localized to the Peyer’s patches and
lymphoid follicles of the terminal ileum. They cause inflammation,
plateau-like elevations of Peyer’s patches and necrosis, which results in
characteristic oval typhoid ulcers.
Clinical Features
Onset is gradual and nonspecific. Patients usually present with fever,
anorexia, headache, abdominal pain, bloating, nausea and vomiting.
Fever: The temperature rises in a step-ladder fashion (step-ladder fever)
to 40–41 °C for 4 or 5 days in some cases. The hallmark of typhoid fever
is continuous, persistent fever, often lasting 4–8 weeks in untreated
patients.Early intestinal manifestations include constipation (especially in adults)
or mild diarrhea (in children).
Physical findings
In the early stages abdominal tenderness, hepatosplenomegaly,
lymphadenopathy and a scanty maculopapular rash (‘rose spots’) are
found.Rose spots or ‘rose-red spots’: These are small 2–4 mm, pale-red
maculopapular lesions on the skin that fade/blanch on pressure appear on
the chest and abdomen, which occur during first week and usually last
only 2–3 days. They result from bacterial embolism and Salmonella can be
cultured from the biopsy of these lesions.
Mild hepatosplenomegaly: Spleen is soft and palpable (around the 7th–
10th day) may be accompanied by tender hepatomegaly.
Relative bradycardia: The pulse is often slower than would be expected
from the height of the fever.
Intestinal manifestations: By the end of 1st week, constipation is
succeeded by diarrhea and abdominal distension, with tenderness in the
right iliac fossa. The stools are loose and greenish in color and
characteristically described as ‘pea-soup’. Intestinal complications often
develop in the 3rd of 4th week of illness.
If untreated by the end of 2nd week: Patient may be profoundly ill.
By 3rd week: Toxemia increases and patient may develop coma and die.
The 4th week of the illness is characterized by gradual improvement.

Complications of Typhoid (Box 4.3)
Q. Write short note on complications of typhoid fever.
Box 4.3:  Complications of typhoid.
General complications:  Toxemia, dehydration, peripheral circulatory failure, DIC.
Intestinal complications:  The most common intestinal complication is ileus. Perforation  of
typhoid ulcer and hemorrhage from the ulcer may occur at the end of the second week or during
the third week of the illness.
Extraintestinal complications:
–   Neurological:  Delirium (muttering delirium) , psychosis, seizures, coma vigil, catatonia,
meningitis, encephalopathy, GB syndrome peripheral neuritis and deafness.
–   Miscellaneous: Myocarditis , endocarditis, pericarditis, pneumonia, cholecystitis,
pyelonephritis, glomerulonephritis, osteomyelitis, arthritis, periostitis, hepatitis,
thrombophlebitis. Patients with sickle cell disease are susceptible to Salmonella
osteomyelitis.
Carrier state: Persistence of bacilli in the gallbladder or urinary tract  may result in passage of
bacilli in the feces or urine and causes a ‘carrier state’ which is the source of infection to others.
After clinical recovery, about 5–10% will continue to excrete S. typhi  for several months and they
are termed convalescent carriers.
Laboratory Diagnosis (Box 4.4)
Q. Write short note on:
Laboratory diagnosis of typhoid fever.
Widal test.
Box 4.4:  Laboratory diagnosis of typhoid fever.
Total leukocyte count:  It shows leukopenia with relative lymphocytosis. Eosinophils are
usually absent.
Isolation of Bacilli:
–   Blood culture:  This is the “Gold Standard “ investigation for diagnosis of typhoid. The
maximum positivity of blood culture is in first week of fever in 90% of patients and remains
positive in second week till the fever subsides. Blood culture rapidly becomes negative on
treatment with antibiotics. During early phase, bone marrow culture aspirate is more sensitive
than blood culture, even after a brief prior antibiotic treatment.
–   Stool cultures: It is almost as valuable as blood culture and become positive in the third week.
–   Urine culture: It reveals the organism in approximately 25% of patients by third week.Widal test/reaction:  Classic Widal test measures agglutinating antibodies against  O, H and Vi
antigens  of S. typhi  and H antigens of S. paratyphi A and B, but lacks sensitivity and specificity.
Widal test (immunological reactions) becomes positive from end of the first week till fourth
week. There are many false-positive (anamnestic reaction) and occasional false-negative Widal
reactions. Vi antigen is alone detected in the carrier state. The mean sensitivity, specificity, NPV
and PPV of Widal test remains below 80%. Therefore, Widal test should not be used as a

diagnostic tool to rule out typhoid fever unless supported by invasive clinical pictures and other
confirmatory tests.
Other serologic tests: They are available for the rapid diagnosis of typhoid fever with a higher
sensitivity.
Molecular methods:  PCR detects flagellin, somatic gene and Vi gene.
Q. Write short note on:
Treatment and prevention of typhoid fever
Chronic carrier state in typhoid
New drugs with dosage and duration used to treat enteric fever.
Treatment
General management: These include bed rest, isolation, and maintenance of nutrition and fluid
intake.
Antibiotic therapy: Several antibiotics are effective in enteric fever and various drug regimens
are presented in Table 4.9. It must be guided by culture and sensitivity report.
Multidrug resistant strains:  Certain strains of S. typhi  (especially in India) are resistant to
chloramphenicol, amoxicillin and cotrimoxazole are called as multidrug resistant strains. These
should be treated with ciprofloxacin.
NARST-nalidixic acid resistant Salmonella typhi : Sometimes, strains that are sensitive to
ciprofloxacin in vitro may not respond to ciprofloxacin. They are usually resistant to nalidixic acid
when tested in vitro (NARST-nalidixic acid resistant Salmonella typhi ). These patients need
treatment for longer duration with ciprofloxacin or with ceftriaxone.
Corticosteroids:  It is indicated in patients with severe toxemia, central nervous system
manifestations and DIC. Intravenous dexamethasone is given in the dose of 3 mg/kg as a loading
dose, followed by 1 mg/kg every 6 hourly for 24 hours.
Treatment of complications:  Intestinal perforation and hemorrhage occur in the 3rd or 4th week
of illness are managed accordingly.
Carrier state in typhoid
Asymptomatic carrier state:  About 3–5% of patients develop long-term asymptomatic carrier
state. Many carriers does not give history of typhoid fever and are probably had an undiagnosed
mild infection.
Chronic carriers:  These carriers are usually older than 50 years and females with gallstones. S.
typhi  resides in the gallbladder, urinary bladder and even within the gallstones. They are
intermittently excreted into the stool, thereby contaminating water or food. Vi antigen is positive
in carriers.
Chronic carriers should be given ciprofloxacin/ampicillin for 4 weeks. Cholecystectomy may be
needed in some patients.
Prevention
Improved sanitation and living conditions:  It is most important method to prevent typhoid
fever. These measures include good hygiene, clean water, proper sewage disposal and proper
water treatment. Travellers are advised to avoid drinking untreated water, ice in drinks and eating
ice creams.
Vaccination:  Three available typhoid vaccines are:

Inactivated injectable:  two in number
–   Heat-killed, phenol-extracted, whole-cell vaccine—because of several adverse reactions, this is
not used at present.
–   Vi-polysaccharide-parenteral administration in individuals >2 years; single dose.
Oral live attenuated vaccines:  Ty21a, a live, attenuated vaccine containing the S. typhi  strain
Ty21a is oral administered in individuals >6 years; one capsule every other day for 3 doses.
Table 4.9: Various antibiotic regimens in typhoid fever.
Drug Dosage and duration of treatment
Ceftriaxone 75 mg/kg/day for 7–14 days
Chloramphenicol 3–4 g/day till the fever subsides, followed by 2 g/day, for a
total duration of 14 days.
Amoxicillin 4–6 g/day in four divided doses of 14 days
Cotrimoxazole Trimethoprim 640 mg + sulfamethoxazole 3200 mg in two
divided doses daily for 14 days
Ciprofloxacin 500–750 mg twice daily for 14 days
Ofloxacin 400–800 mg/day for 14 days
Cefotaxime 50–75 mg/kg/day for 7–14 days
Cefixime 20 mg/kg/day for 10–14 days
Azithromycin 1 g once a day for 7 days
Aztreonam 50–100 mg/kg/day for 14 days
Food Poisoning
Q. List the causes of food poisoning. Discuss briefly the manifestations,
diagnosis and management of food poisoning.
Food poisoning is an illness contracted by eating contaminated food .
In most cases, food that causes food poisoning is contaminated by
bacteria, such as salmonella or Escherichia coli ( E. coli ), or a virus, such
as the norovirus. Some toxins can cause food poisoning within a short
time. Vomiting is the main symptom of food poisoning.
Box 4.5 lists the food infection vs intoxication.
Each year about 6.5–33 million foodborne illness occurs. Campylobacter
cause 1–6 million cases/year. Salmonella causes 2–4 million
illnesses/year. E. coli  causes about 21,000 cases each year.
Box 4.5:  Food infection vs intoxication.
Food infection

–   Bacteria are consumed
–   Body reacts by raising temperature—fever
–   Longer incubation
Food intoxication
–   Toxin contaminated food is eaten
–   Shorter incubation
Causes of Food Poisoning (Table 4.10)
Table 4.10: Causes of food poisoning.
Infective (bacteria or their toxins)
Due to toxin
–   Preformed toxins, e.g. Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus cereus
–   Enterotoxins released in the intestine, e.g. Vibrio cholerae, E. coli, Clostridium perfringens,
Clostridium difficile
Due to intestinal mucosal damage
–   Invasion of mucosa, e.g. roovirus
–   Invasion and destruction of mucosa, e.g. Shigella, Yersinia enterocolitica, Salmonella,
Entamoeba histolytica, Bacillus anthracis .
Noninfective
Allergic type, e.g. shellfish.
Non-allergic type, e.g. scombrotoxin (fish), fungi (Amanita Phalloides).
Chemicals, e.g. detergents, pesticides.
Various organism causing food poisoning and their symptoms are
summarized in Table 4.11.
Table 4.11: Various organism causing food poisoning and their symptoms.
Organism Incubation Symptoms Foods
Campylobacter jejuni 2–5 days Diarrhea, vomiting,
headache, fever,
muscle painPoultry, dairy products,
water
Salmonella enteriditis 12–36 hours Abdominal cramps,
headache, fever,
nausea, diarrheaPoultry, meat, eggs and
egg products, sliced
melons
Escherichia coli 3–4 days Diarrhea, vomiting,
mild feverUndercooked ground
beef, unpasteurized
cider
Listeria monocytogenes 3 to 70 days Flu-like, meningitis,
encephalitis,Unpasteurized milk, ice
cream, ready-to-eat,

spontaneous abortion lunch meats
Clostridium
perfringens10–12 hours Abdominal pain,
nausea, diarrhea
fever, headache,
vomiting usually
absentStews, gravies, beans
Clostridium botulinum
(intoxication)4 hours to 8 days Vomiting; constipation;
diplopia, dysphagia,
dysarthria, paralysis,
deathBaked potatoes, fish,
garlic/oil mixtures,
low-acid canned foods
Staphylococcus aureus
(intoxication)1 to 7 hours Nausea, retching,
abdominal cramps,
diarrheaReady-to-eat, reheated
foods, dairy products,
protein foods
Bacillus cereus
(intoxication)30 min. to 6 hours
(emetic)or 6 to 15
hours (diarrheal)Nausea, vomiting,
watery diarrheaRice products, starchy
foods, casseroles,
puddings, soups
Hepatitis A 10–50 days Sudden fever,
vomiting, jaundiceWater (ice), shellfish,
ready-to-eat, fruit
juices, vegetables
Norwalk virus 10–50 hours Nausea, diarrhea,
headache, mild feverWater, shellfish, raw
vegetables and fruits
Rotavirus 1–3 days Vomiting, diarrhea,
mild feverReady-to-eat, water
and ice
Giardia lamblia 3–25 days Fatigue, nausea, weight
loss, abdominal crampsWater, ice, raw
vegetables
Cryptosporidium
parvum1–12 days Severe diarrhea, may
have no symptomsWater, raw foods,
unpasteurized cider,
ready-to-eat
Clinical Feature and Diagnosis
The symptoms will be different depending on what type of contamination is
responsible. Common symptoms of food poisoning are listed in Box 4.6.
ManagementThe symptoms of food poisoning subside in 2 to 3 days.
The goal of treatment is to replace fluids and electrolytes lost through vomiting and diarrhea. If
dehydration is severe and cannot be managed at home, patient needs to be admitted, intravenous
saline and supportive treatment (antiemetics, antipyretics, probiotics, antimotility agents) advised.
Antibiotics to be used sparingly only in infective cases.
Box 4.6:  Common symptoms of food poisoning.
Severe vomiting
Diarrhea

Headache
Fever
Abdominal pain
Tiredness
DYSENTERY
Dysentery is defined as an acute inflammation of the large intestine (colitis)
characterized by diarrhea with blood and mucus in the stools. Two causes are
bacillary and amebic infections.
Bacillary Dysentery (Shigellosis)
Q. Write short essay on the etiology, clinical presentation, diagnosis and
management of acute bacillary dysentery.
Q. Write short essay on clinical features of Shigellosis
Bacillary dysentery is an acute necrotizing infection  of the distal small
bowel and colon  caused mostly by one of Shigella species. Shigella
species that cause colitis are classified into four major subgroups namely:
dysenteriae (most virulent), flexneri , boydii  and sonnei . Bacillary
dysentery is one of the most common causes of bloody diarrhea. Other
organisms causing bacillary dysentery include E. coli  O157:H7,
Salmonella, Campylobacter, etc.
Shigella produces toxin (endotoxin as well as an exotoxin) that has
cytotoxic, neurotoxic, and enterotoxic effects. When inflammation is
severe, ileus, toxic megacolon, gross hemorrhage, and perforation may
develop.Source of infection: Humans are the only natural reservoir.
Mode of transmission: By ingestion through fecal-oral route or via
fecally contaminated water and food. It can be acquired by oral contact
with any contaminated surface (e.g. clothing, towels, unwashed hands
after defecation or skin surfaces) or flies.Incubation period: It ranges from 1 to 3 days.
Clinical Features
Severity of infection: Disease severity varies from mild to severe. S.
sonnei  produces mild infection, S. flexneri  infection is usually more

severe, and S. dysenteriae  may produce fulminating infection resulting in
death within 48 hours.
Symptoms start 24–48 hours after ingestion and usually presents as
frequent small quantity of stools containing blood, mucus and purulent
exudate with little fecal material (dysentery). This is accompanied by
fever, colicky abdominal pain and tenesmus. Severe cases may show signs
of systemic toxicity, dehydration and electrolyte disturbances.Physical examination may show tenderness over the colon in the left iliac
fossa and hyperactive bowel sounds.
Complications (Table 4.12)
Diagnosis
Stool culture is required for confirmation of Shigella infection.
Sigmoidoscopy shows red and swollen mucosa covered by mucopus on
the surface. The submucous veins are obscured.
Enzyme immunoassay used for detecting Shiga toxins in stools.
PCR for Shigella DNA in stools.
Table 4.12: Complications of bacillary dysentery.
Intestinal Extraintestinal
Rectal prolapse
Toxic megacolon
Colonic perforationBacteremia
Meningismus, seizures
Transient peripheral neuropathy
Reiter syndrome
Hemolytic-uremic syndrome (HUS)
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
Management
Fluid and electrolyte deficits should be corrected by oral rehydration therapy or, if diarrhea is
severe, by intravenous replacement of water and electrolyte loss.
Antibiotic therapy: Infections caused by S. dysenteriae and S. flexneri  should be given
ciprofloxacin (500 mg twice daily for 3 days). Second-line agents include azithromycin and
ceftriaxone.
Antidiarrheal medication  should be avoided. Codeine or loperamide may be given to control
diarrhea in adults without dysentery.

Fig. 4.4:  Pathogenesis of amebiasis.
Amebiasis
Q. Discuss the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features, diagnosis,
investigations, complications and treatment of amebic
dysentery/intestinal amebiasis.

Etiology
Amebiasis is an infection caused by protozoan Entamoeba histolytica
E. histolytica has three distinct stages:
1. Trophozoite stage: Amebic trophozoites are seen in the stools of
patients with acute symptoms.
2. Precyst stage: In the colon, the trophozoite develops into a cyst
through an intermediate form termed the precyst.
3. Cyst stage: Amebic cysts are the infecting stage and are found only
in stools. They are spherical and have thick chitin walls, and usually
four nuclei.Source of infection: Humans are the only known reservoir for E.
histolytica. It is reproduced in the colon of infected individual and passes
in the feces.
Mode of infection: It is acquired by fecal-oral route  through ingestion
of materials contaminated with human feces containing E. histolytica.
Pathogenesis of amebiasis is depicted in Figure 4.4.
Incubation period: About 2–6 weeks.
Amebic Colitis
Q. Write a short note on amebic colitis/intestinal amebiasis.
Amebic colitis can present in two forms: Amebic dysentery and non-
dysenteric amebic colitis.
Amebic Dysentery
Pathogenesis
The amebic cysts are passed in the stool of infected individuals and the
cysts can contaminate water, food, or fingers. These cysts are tetra-
nucleated and can remain viable for weeks to months. However, these are
destroyed in temperature below 5°C or above 40°C.Amebic dysentery results from ingestion (fecal-oral transmission) of E.
histolytica cysts. Amebic cysts colonize the epithelial surface of the
terminal ileum and  undergo further nuclear division, and release
trophozoites. The trophozoites are carried to the large intestine and may
colonize any part of the large intestine, but most frequently in the cecum

and ascending colon causing amebic colitis. They produce the
characteristic ‘flask-shaped’ amebic ulcers with a narrow neck and broad
base. These patients pass both cysts and trophozoites in the stool.
Most often, the amebic infection remains subclinical. However, antibody
response usually occurs even without local invasion. These asymptomatic
patients should be treated to prevent transmission of infection to others
and development of amebic colitis at a later period.Ameboma is a common complication of amebic dysentery. It is a
localized granuloma which presents as a palpable mass in the rectum or
causes a filling defect in the colon on radiography.Trophozoite may penetrate blood vessels and reach the liver through
portal vein. In the liver they multiply and produce amebic liver abscesses
in about 40% of patients with amebic dysentery. The liquid contents of
this abscess have a characteristic pinkish color, which may later change to
chocolate-brown (like anchovy sauce).They can also travel to lungs and brain.
Clinical features of intestinal amebiasis (amebic dysentery)
Q. Write short essay on the clinical features and treatment of intestinal
amebiasis.
It may produce dysentery of varying severity. It presents with
intermittent diarrhea consisting of foul smelling (offensive), loose, watery
stools that may contain mucus and blood. Sometimes diarrhea alternate
with constipation.
Other symptoms include abdominal pain/cramp (especially right lower
quadrant which may simulate acute appendicitis), flatulence and weight
loss. Sometimes it is accompanied by systemic symptoms such as
headache, fever, nausea and anorexia. Less commonly, it may present as
acute amebic dysentery, resembling bacillary dysentery or acute ulcerative
colitis.Physical examination: There may be tenderness over the cecum (amebic
typhlitis), ascending colon and over the left iliac fossa (amebic point or
Manson-Barr point) and tender hepatomegaly.
Complications (Table 4.13)
Diagnosis

Microscopic examination of stool: Presence of motile trophozoites
containing red blood cells (hematophagous trophozoites) in fresh sample
of stool will confirm the diagnosis. If a fresh stool sample cannot be
examined immediately, it should be preserved with a fixative such as
polyvinyl alcohol or kept cool (4°C). Presence of amebic cysts alone does
not imply disease.Sigmoidoscopy and barium enema may show the characteristic ‘flask-
shaped’ ulcers with normal surrounding mucosa. The aspirated material or
scrapings from the ulcer or biopsy of the ulcer may show the trophozoites.
Colonic exudate obtained by sigmoidoscopy may microscopically show
trophozoites.Serologic tests: Indirect hemagglutination test, ELISA or counter
immunoelectrophoresis can detect antibodies in the blood. They are more
useful in extraintestinal amebiasis.Amebic fluorescent antibody test is positive in about 90% of patients with
liver abscess and in 60–70% with active colitis.
Detection of E. histolytica antigen or DNA in a stool sample.
Diagnosis of amebic liver abscess: It is often suspected on clinical grounds
(discussed on pages 848-9).
Table 4.13: Complications of amebiasis.
Intestinal complications Extraintestinal complications
Massive hemorrhage
Ameboma
Perforation and peritonitis
Toxic megacolon in fulminant cases
Postdysenteric colitis
Rectovaginal fistula
Chronic infection with stricture formationAmebic liver abscess
Pleuropulmonary amebiasis
Hepaticobronchial fistula
Amebic pericarditis
Cutaneous amebiasis
Non-dysenteric Amebic Colitis
Usually presents as recurrent bouts of diarrhea with or without mucus, but
without any visible blood.
Stools examination  shows E. histolytica cysts or non-hematophagous
trophozoite (trophozoites with no ingested RBCs).

Table 4.14: Differences between amebic dysentery and bacillary dysentery.
Features Amebic dysentery Bacillary dysentery
Macroscopic
Number of motions 6–8 motions/day Over 10 motions/day
Amount of stool Relatively copious Relatively small
Odour Offensive No odour
Nature Blood and mucus mixed
with fecesBlood and mucus, no feces
Color Dark red Bright red
Reaction Acidic Alkaline
Consistency Not adherent to the
containerAdherent to the container
Microscopic
RBC In clumps Discrete or in rouleaux
Pus cells Few Numerous
Macrophages, Ghost cells Very few Numerous
Eosinophils, Pyknotic bodies Present Scarce
Causative agent Trophozoites of E.
hsitolyticaMotile bacteria
Charcot-Leyden crystals Present Absent
Q. Write a short note on treatment of amebiasis.
Treatment
Invasive intestinal amebiasis:
–   Metronidazole 500–750 mg three times daily for 7–10 days or long-acting nitroimidazoles like
tinidazole or ornidazole (both in doses of 2 g daily for 3 days). Other options include
secnidazole or nitazoxanide (500 mg twice daily for 3 days).
–   After treatment of the invasive disease, luminal amebicide such as diloxanide furoate,
diiodohydroxyquin or paromomycin should be given to clear luminal cysts or parasite.
Alternative agents include iodoquinol, and nitazoxanide.Hepatic amebiasis  (refer pages 848-9).
Q. Write short note on uses of metronidazole.
Box 4.7 lists the uses of metronidazole.
Box 4.7:  Uses of metronidazole.
Amebiasis
Giardiasis
Trichomonas vaginalis

Anerobic bacterial infections
Pseudomembranous enterocolitis
Ulcerative gingivitis
Helicobacter pylori  gastritis/peptic ulcer
Differences between amebic dysentery and bacillary dysentery (Table
4.14).
Q. Enumerate the differences between amebic dysentery and bacillary
dysentery.
Brucellosis
Q. Write short essay/note on brucellosis (abortus fever; Malta fever;
undulant fever; Mediterranean fever). Name species that cause
brucellosis.
Brucellosis (Malta fever, undulant fever, Mediterranean fever, Rock fever
of Gibraltar) is a zoonotic disease.
Brucellosis is an infection caused by one of the four species of Brucella:
Brucella melitensis (goats, sheep and camels), Brucella abortus (cattle),
Brucella suis (pigs) and Brucella canis (dogs). Brucella is a gram-negative
organism.
Natural reservoir of brucellosis is animals.
Mode of Infection
Ingestion: Infected animals may excrete Brucella  in their milk, and
human infection is acquired by ingesting contaminated dairy products
(especially unpasteurized raw milk), uncooked meat.
Direct infection: Animal urine, feces, vaginal discharge and uterine
products may act as sources of infection and they may enter humans
through abraded skin.Inhalation of infectious aerosols
–   Pens, tables, slaughter houses
–   Conjunctival splashes, injection
Person-to-person transmission is very rare, particularly mother-to-
child.
Clinical Features

Q. Write short essay on clinical features and treatment of brucellosis.
Brucellosis involve many organ systems and has a very insidious onset with
varying clinical signs. The most common sign in all patients is an
intermittent/irregular fever with variable duration, which is termed as
undulant fever.
Acute brucellosis (<2 months)
Incubation period of acute brucellosis is 1–3 weeks.
Acute onset in nearly 50% cases and presents with fever, malaise,
headache, chills, fatigue, weakness, backache, generalized myalgia and
night sweats. Patients also have anorexia, lose weight, cough and
arthralgias.Fever: It is classically high swinging undulant pattern with rigors,
although continuous and intermittent patterns may be seen.
Physical findings are non-specific and include splenomegaly (20% of
cases may lead to hypersplenism and thrombocytopenia),
lymphadenopathy (15% cases) and hepatomegaly (10% cases), sacroiliitis
and arthritis.A few may develop localized brucellosis in the form of osteomyelitis,
splenic abscess, epididymo-orchitis, pneumonia, meningoencephalitis
pleural effusion and endocarditis.
Subacute brucellosis (2–12 months)
Features are similar to acute form, but less severe.
Chronic brucellosis (>12 months)This is characterized by low-grade fever easy fatigability, myalgia,
arthralgia, occasional bouts of fever and neuropsychiatric manifestations
(e.g. depression).
Splenomegaly is usually observed.
Bone and joint complications are the most common complications and
include uveitis, sacroiliitis, spondylitis, peripheral arthritis, osteomyelitis
and bursitis.
Diagnosis
Culture: Definitive diagnosis depends on the isolation of the Brucella.
Serological tests may also aid diagnosis and are of greater value in

chronic disease. In Brucella agglutination test, a four-fold or greater rise
in titer of agglutination antibody (IgM) is highly suggestive of brucellosis.
Raised serum IgG level indicates current or recent infection; a negative
test excludes chronic brucellosis.
Other tests include ultrasound and CT, bone radiographs, radionuclide
scans and species-specific PCR tests.
Treatment
Regimen A: Doxycycline 100 mg PO BID for 6 weeks + streptomycin 1 g IM qd (means one a
day) for the first 14–21 days
Regimen B: Doxycycline 100 mg PO BID + rifampin 600 to 900 mg (15 mg/kg) PO qd for 6
weeks
Prevention and Control
Careful attention to hygiene when handling infected animals, eradication of infection in animals
and pasteurization of milk.
No vaccine is available for humans.
Cholera
Q. Write a short essay/note on cholera and cholera sicca.
Cholera is an acute illness caused by the curved, flagellated, halophilic
gram-negative bacillus, Vibrio cholerae.
Vibrio cholerae colonizes in the small intestine. It causes explosive, severe
watery diarrhea with rapid depletion of extracellular fluid and electrolytes.
Vibrio cholerae: It is killed by temperatures of 100°C in a few seconds but
can survive in ice for up to 6 weeks. The major pathogenic strain has a
somatic antigen (O1) and has two biotypes: classical and El Tor. New
classical toxigenic strain, serotype O139 (Bengal serogroup) is still
major cause of cholera in our country.
Mode of Transmission
By the feco-oral route: Infection spreads via the stools or vomitus of
symptomatic patients. Contaminated drinking water is the major source of the
dissemination, although contaminated foodstuffs (shellfish and food
contaminated by flies), and hands of contact carriers may contribute in
epidemics.
Incubation period  is about 12–48 hours.

Pathogenesis
In the small intestine Vibrio cholerae proliferates and produces a powerful
exotoxin. The exotoxin causes massive secretion of isotonic fluid into the
intestinal lumen.
Cholera toxin also releases serotonin (5HT, 5 hydroxy tryptamine) from
enterochromaffin cells in the gut. This activates a neural secretory reflex
in the enteric nervous system.V. cholerae also produces other toxins (zona occludens toxin, ZOT and
accessory cholera toxin, ACT) and are responsible for pathogenesis of
cholera.Severe depletion of extracellular fluid produces hypotension, metabolic
acidosis and hypokalemia.
In severe cases, massive fluid loss may lead to hypovolemic shock and
acute tubular necrosis resulting in renal failure.
Clinical Features
Majority with cholera may have a mild illness that cannot be distinguished
clinically from diarrhea due to other infective causes. Severe cases,
present abruptly with severe, painless, watery diarrhea without pain or
colic, followed by vomiting (vomiting may be absent).Rice-water stool: Following the evacuation of normal gut fecal contents,
characteristic ‘rice water’ stool is passed, consisting of clear fluid with
flecks of mucus.Loss of fluid and electrolytes: Leading to intense dehydration with
muscular cramps. The features of hypovolemic shock include cold,
clammy and wrinkled (‘washer women’ skin) skin with loss of skin turgor,
tachycardia, hypotension and peripheral cyanosis. Features of dehydration
include sunken eyes, hollow cheeks and a diminished urine output. The
blood pressure drops, and the pulse becomes rapid and thready. Death
from acute circulatory failure may occur unless fluid and electrolytes are
promptly replaced. Rapid improvement occurs with proper treatment.Cholera sicca: Occasionally, a very severe form of the cholera occurs
with accumulation of fluid into the dilated bowel. This kills the patient
before typical gastrointestinal symptoms appear. It is called as ‘cholera
sicca’.

Diagnosis
Clinical diagnosis can be easily made during an epidemic. Otherwise, the
diagnosis requires bacteriological confirmation.
Stool examination: ‘Hanging drop’ preparation  of the freshly passed
stool shows the characteristic rapidly motile (shooting star motility) V.
cholerae (this is not diagnostic, as Campylobacter jejuni  may give a
similar appearance).
Culture of the stool or a rectal swab can isolate and identify the V.
cholerae and also establish antibiotic sensitivity.
Q. Write a short essay/note on treatment of cholera.
Treatment/Management
1. Appropriate and effective rehydration therapy:  Maintenance of circulation by replacement of
water and electrolytes is the mainstay of treatment.
Intravenous therapy is required if there is severe dehydration. Ringer-Lactate is the best fluid
for intravenous replacement and should contain sodium chloride 5 g/L, potassium chloride 1
g/L and sodium bicarbonate (4 g/L) (‘Dhaka solution’). Initial fluid deficit should be replaced
within 3–4 hours. Patients with severe cholera may need 200–300 mL/kg of isotonic fluids in
the initial 24 hours. It should be continued till the patient is hemodynamically stable and
vomiting subsides.Oral rehydration: Once the vomiting stops and the patient is hemodynamically stable, fluid
should be given orally up to 500 mL hourly. Oral rehydration solutions (ORS)  are based on the
observation that glucose (and other carbohydrates) increases absorption of sodium and water in
the small intestine, even in the presence of secretory loss due to toxins.Oral rehydration solutions with resistant starch, based on either rice or cereal, shorten the
duration of diarrhea and improves prognosis.
Total fluid needed may exceed 50 L over a period of 2–5 days. Accurate assessment can be
made by the use of a ‘cholera cot’, which has a reinforced hole under the patient’s buttocks,
beneath which a graded bucket is placed.
2. Antibiotics:  Three days treatment with tetracycline 500 mg 6 hourly, a single dose of doxycycline
300 mg or ciprofloxacin 1 g in adults or cotrimoxazole one tablet daily reduces the duration or
excretion of V. cholerae. It also reduces the total volume of fluid required for replacement. Other
alternative drugs include erythromycin, and furazolidone.
3. In children, zinc supplementation may reduce the severity of diarrhea.
Prognosis  is good with adequate treatment and there is gradual return to normal of clinical and
biochemical parameters within 1–3 days.
ProphylaxisVaccination:  It is recommended by the WHO during potential or actual outbreak situations.
–   Parenteral vaccination with a killed suspension (WC-rBS) of V. cholerae has some protective
role.
–   Both live attenuated and whole cell killed vaccine (both oral) are available. Oral vaccines
containing killed V. cholerae and the B subunit of cholera toxin are of limited efficacy.
Chemoprophylaxis by tetracycline 500 mg twice a day for 3 days. Mass single-dose vaccination

along with tetracycline is also advised.
Leprosy
Q. Discuss the etiology, clinical features, diagnosis and management of
Hansen’s disease (leprosy).
Definition: Leprosy (Hansen’s disease) is a chronic , granulomatous , slowly
progressive, destructive infection affecting skin and nerves, caused by
Mycobacterium leprae.
Mode of transmission: 1. Inoculation/inhalation and 2. Intimate contact
Incubation period: Generally 2–7 years.
Bacteriological Considerations
Mycobacterium leprae is an acid and alcohol fast, intracellular bacillus.
Lepra bacilli survive and grow better at a temperature below that of the
internal organs (close to 30°C rather than 37°C). Hence, it affects sites
such as skin, peripheral nerves, the mucosa of the upper airways, and other
tissues (bone, eyes, testis and some viscera).Mycobacterium leprae can be grown in the foot-pads of mice and nine
banded armadillos, cannot be cultured on artificial media or in cell
culture.
Classification (Fig. 4.5)
Q. Write short note on classification of leprosy.
In the early stage, disease may be indeterminate, and may either
spontaneously undergo remission or develop into overt leprosy.
A. Ridley and Jopling (1966) classification: It depends on the
clinicopathological spectrum of the disease, which is determined by the
immune resistance of the host.
Tuberculoid leprosy (TT): It is the polar form that has maximal
immune response. It is characterized by single or few sharply
demarcated skin lesions with predominant peripheral nerve
involvement. The bacilli are usually absent or difficult to demonstrate.Borderline tuberculoid (BT): In this type the immune response falls
between BB and TT.

Borderline leprosy (BB): It exactly falls between two polar forms of
leprosy.
Borderline lepromatous (BL) has the immune response that falls
between BB and LL.
Lepromatous leprosy (LL): It is the other polar form with least
immune response. This is characterized by extensive, diffuse and
bilaterally symmetrical skin lesions that contain numerous bacilli. The
peripheral nerves are better preserved than in the tuberculoid form.Indeterminate type: When the biopsy sample shows definite
diagnostic evidence of leprosy (both nerve involvement and acid-fast
bacilli) but clinically not fitting to the leprosy spectrum.B. WHO classification:
Paucibacillary: All cases of tuberculoid leprosy and some cases of
borderline type.
Multibacillary: All cases of lepromatous leprosy and some cases of
borderline type bacilli are present in large numbers, and hence the term
multibacillary (MB).
Fig. 4.5: Classification of leprosy.

Clinical Features
Tuberculoid leprosy (TT)
Q. Write short essay on clinical features of tuberculoid leprosy.
Skin lesions: The early features consist of one or few, localized, well-
demarcated, dry, elevated, hypoesthetic, red or hypopigmented  macule
(Fig. 4.6A). Later, the lesions become larger, margins elevated and
circinate or gyrate. Fully developed lesions are anesthetic and show loss of
sweat glands and hair follicles.
Figs. 4.6A and B:  Lesions of tuberculoid leprosy: (A) Hypoigmented macules on face; (B) Visible
greater auricular nerve thickening.
Nerve involvement occurs early and is the dominating feature in
tuberculoid leprosy. It is usually asymmetric and the involved nerves (Fig.
4.6B) are thickened and palpable. Routinely, the nerves such as ulnar,
peroneal (lateral popliteal) and greater auricular nerves should be palpated.
Sometimes, TT may present with only nerve involvement without any skin
lesions (neural leprosy or pure neuritic leprosy). Consequences
(complications) of nerve involvement are:
–   Sensory nerve involvement produces sensory dysfunctions like glove
and stocking anesthesia (more common in LL), chronic non-healing
plantar ulcers, and repeated injuries to hands and feet (leading to
autoamputation of fingers or toes).
–   Motor nerve involvement produces muscle weakness, wasting and
later paralysis followed by contractures. Nerve involved and their
consequences are as follows:
♦   Ulnar nerve: Claw hand (main en griffe) (Fig. 4.7)

Fig. 4.7: Bilateral claw hand.
♦   Median nerve: Ape hand (main de singe)
♦   Lateral popliteal nerve: Foot drop
♦   Posterior tibial nerve: Claw toes or hammer toes.
–   Autonomic involvement produces anhidrosis or hyperhidrosis.
–   Cranial nerve involvement: Facial nerve is commonly affected and
results in facial paralysis, lagophthalmos, exposure keratitis and
corneal ulcerations (may lead to blindness). Trigeminal nerve
involvement may develop early causing loss of corneal reflex. Greater
auricular nerve (Fig. 4.6B), supraorbital, supratrochlear and
infraorbital nerves are also thickened.Lepromatous leprosy (LL)
Q. Write short essay on:
Clinical features of multibacillary/lepromatous leprosy
Complications of lepromatous leprosy.
Nasal symptoms are the early features of LL and include anosmia, nasal
stuffiness, crust formation and blood-stained nasal discharge.
Skin lesions include multiple, symmetric, macules, papules, plaques or
nodules. The macules are often hypopigmented. The borders of the lesions
are ill-defined, centers indurated, raised and convex (‘inverted saucer’
appearance). There is also diffuse infiltration between the lesions. The
nodular skin lesions may ulcerate. The lesions are more common on the
face (cheeks, nose and eyebrows) (Fig. 4.8A), ears, wrists, elbows,

buttocks and knees. With progression, the nodular lesions in the face and
ear lobes (Fig. 4.8B) may coalesce to produce thickening of face and
corrugated forehead. This produces a lion like appearance known as
leonine facies (Fig. 4.8C). This may be accompanied by loss of eyebrows
and eyelashes.
Fig. 4.8A to C:  Lesions of lepromatous leprosy: (A) Facial involvement; (B) Nodular lesions on
ear; (C) Leonine facies.
Nerve involvement of major nerve trunks is less prominent in LL. In
advanced disease, loss of sensation with ‘glove and stocking’ anesthesia
is common. Mononeuritis multiplex can also occur.
Lepromatous leprosy without visible skin lesions but with diffuse dermal
infiltration and a demonstrable thickening of dermis is called diffuse
lepromatosis.
Bone involvement: It may develop in hands, feet (phalanges, metatarsals
and tarsal bones) and skull. It causes slow absorption of distal phalanges
resulting in shortening of fingers. In the skull, it may produce atrophy of
the anterior nasal spine (leading to nasal collapse) and atrophy of
maxillary alveolar process (causing loosening and loss of upper incisors).
These changes in the skull produce ‘facies leprosa’.Other features:
–   Bilateral edema of legs and ankles.
–   Saddle nose: Swollen and broad nose, septal perforation and nasal
collapses produces saddle nose deformity.
–   Teeth: Loosening of upper incisor teeth which may later fall off.
–   Anterior chamber of the eye  involvement results in keratitis,

iridocyclitis and blindness.
–   Upper airways: Chronic nasal discharge, laryngitis, palatal perforation
and hoarseness (voice change).
–   Testes: Usually severely involved, leading to destruction of the
seminiferous tubules, testicular atrophy, impotence, infertility and
gynecomastia.
–   Painless lymphadenopathy involving inguinal and axillary lymph
nodes.
–   Renal lesions: Secondary glomerulonephritis, interstitial nephritis,
pyelonephritis and renal amyloidosis.
Complications of lepromatous leprosy are summarized in Table 4.15.
Table 4.15: Complications of lepromatous leprosy.
Permanent nerve damage with sensory loss (usually begins in extremities)
–  Leading to skin ulcers
–  ‘Glove and stocking’ anesthesia
–  Mononeuritis multiplex.
Infection of skin ulcers
Disfiguration of the face (leonine facies)
Eye damage:  Keratitis, iridocyclitis and blindness
Upper airways:
–  Nasal damage: Anosmia, nasal stuffiness, crust formation and blood-stained nasal discharge.
–  Laryngitis, palatal perforation and hoarseness (voice change).
Muscle weakness:  Claw-like hands or an inability to flex the feet
Bone involvement:
–  Hands and feet: Slow absorption of distal phalanges (shortening of fingers).
–  Skull: Nasal collapse and atrophy of maxillary alveolar process, saddle nose
Testes:  Testicular atrophy, impotence, infertility and gynecomastia.
Renal lesions: Secondary glomerulonephritis, interstitial nephritis, pyelonephritis and renal
amyloidosis
Borderline leprosy
Clinical features are poorly defined and it overlaps with features of other
subtypes.
Reactions in Leprosy or Lepra Reactions
Immunity in leprosy may change spontaneously or following treatment. The
course of leprosy may be interrupted by lepra reactions which comprise

several common immunologically mediated inflammatory states. There are
two types of lepra reactions. Both types of reactions can occur in untreated
patients, but more often develop as complications of chemotherapy.
Type I lepra reaction
Q. Write short note on:
Lepra reactions and their management
Erythema nodosum leprosum (ENL).
Borderline leprosy (BT, BB or BL) is the most unstable form of leprosy
where immune status may shift up or down and type I reaction occur in
50% of these patients. These are delayed hypersensitivity reactions and may
be of two types:
Downgrading reaction or reversal reaction
Downgrading reaction: If type I lepra reactions precede the initiation of
appropriate antimicrobial therapy, they are termed as downgrading
reactions. It is associated with decrease of immunity and histologically the
disease moves (usually from borderline) towards lepromatous leprosy.Upgrading/reversal reaction: If type I lepra reactions occur after the
initiation of antimicrobial therapy, they are termed as reversal reactions. It
is associated with improved immunity and histologically the disease
moves (usually from borderline) towards tuberculoid leprosy. It develops
usually in the first months or years after the initiation of therapy but may
also occur after several years.
Manifestations: Existing skin lesions (i.e. macules, papules, and plaques)
develop classic signs of inflammation in the form of erythema and swelling
and new skin lesions may appear. Peripheral nerves inflammation (i.e.
neuritis) causes pain and exquisitely tenderness of nerves. Irreversible nerve
damage may occur suddenly (24 hours) unless the reaction is treated
promptly.
Type lepra reaction or erythema nodosum leprosum
It occurs mostly in lepromatous  leprosy (BL/LL) particularly within 2 years
of institution of chemotherapy. It develops due to wide spread immune-
complex deposition (type III hypersensitivity reactions) and over production
of tumor necrosis factor (TNF-α).

Manifestations
Crops of painful, tender inflamed, red, subcutaneous papules or plaque
(on the face and limbs) that resolve spontaneously in a few days to a week
but new crops may appear.
Severe reactions may be accompanied by low-grade fever, malaise,
lymphadenopathy symptoms of neuritis and arthralgia.
Other features include uveitis, iritis, orchitis, myositis,
glomerulonephritis, edema, anemia, leukocytosis and abnormal liver
function tests.
Diagnosis of Leprosy
Q. Write short note on lepromin test.
Clinical diagnosis is by cardinal sign of leprosy: Hypopigmented/reddish
patches with loss of sensation and thickening of peripheral nerves.
Slit-skin smears: The smears are made from skin lesions (earlobes and
dorsum of the ring or middle finger) by scraped-incision method and the
dermal material (fluid obtained) on to a glass slide and stained for AFB. It
is useful in borderline Lepromatous (BL) and LL.Nasal secretions for acid-fast bacilli (AFB) from LL show numerous
bacilli.
Lepromin test: Lepromin is an antigen extract of dead M. leprae. The test
is performed like the tuberculin test by intradermal injection of lepromin
but is read after 4 weeks. It is not a diagnostic test for leprosy. It is used
for classifying the leprosy based on the immune response. It is
interpreted  as follows:
–   Lepromatous leprosy shows negative lepromin test due to
suppression of cell-mediated immunity.
–   Tuberculoid leprosy shows positive lepromin test because of delayed
hypersensitivity reaction.
–   Borderline leprosy:  Negative or weakly positive responses.Skin biopsy: Involvement of peripheral nerves in a skin biopsy taken
from the affected area is pathognomonic, even in the absence of bacilli.
Lepra bacilli can be demonstrated in LL and BL types by Fite-Ferraco
stain.

Serological test is not sensitive or specific enough for diagnosis.
–  Hypergammaglobulinemia is common in LL and can give false-positive
serological tests (VDRL, rheumatoid factor and antinuclear
antibodies).
–  IgM antibodies to PGL-1 (phenolic glycolipid-1) may be found in 95%
of LL and in 60% of TT. However, these antibodies may also be
present in normal individuals.
PCR testing for M. leprae  DNA: Detection of M. leprae  DNA is possible
in all types of leprosy using the polymerase chain reaction, but not
sensitive or specific enough for diagnosis. It can be used to assess the
efficacy of treatment.
Q. Write short essay on:
Management of multibacillary/lepromatous leprosy
WHO regimen of treatment of leprosy
Drug therapy/treatment of leprosy
Treatment of borderline/lepromatous leprosy.
Treatment
Drugs
Main drugs available include dapsone (100 mg), rifampicin (600 mg), clofazimine (100 mg),
ethionamide (500 mg) and thiacetazone (150 mg). Other drugs effective against leprosy are
ofloxacin, minocycline and clarithromycin.
Side effects of various drugs are as follows:
–   Dapsone:  Hemolysis, agranulocytosis, hepatitis and exfoliative dermatitis.
–   Clofazimine:  They are mainly found in the skin (e.g. reddish pigmentation of skin, ichthyosis)
and intestinal tract (e.g. diarrhea, cramping abdominal pain).
Treatment regimens for leprosy
There are two recommended regimens for multibacillary and one for paucibacillary leprosy (Table
4.16).
Table 4.16: Treatment (WHO) regimens for leprosy.
Multibacillary leprosy (MB):  Treatment is for 1 year
Regimen 1
Dapsone 2 mg/kg daily (maximum 100 mg)
Clofazimine 50 mg daily or 100 mg three times a week
Rifampicin, 450 mg (for patients <35 kg) or 600 mg (for patients <35 kg), on 2 consecutive days
in a month

Regimen 2
Dapsone 100 mg daily (self-administered)
Clofazimine 50 mg daily (self-administered) + 300 mg once a month (supervised)
Rifampicin 600 mg once a month (supervised)
Paucibacillary leprosy (PB)
Dapsone 100 mg given daily
Rifampicin 600 mg given once a month under supervision
Duration of treatment is 6 months, and the patient should be followed up for 5 years
Box 4.8 lists the dapsome resistance cases.
Box 4.8:  Dapsone resistance cases.
Clofazimine alone or
Clofazimine + ethionamide 500 mg daily and rifampicin given on the first 2 days of each month.
Treatment of lepra reactions is listed in Box 4.9.
Box 4.9:  Treatment of lepra reactions.
During lepra reactions, the chemotherapy for leprosy is maintained.
1. Type 1 lepra reaction (reversal reaction):
–   Mild cases:  Aspirin 600 mg 6 hourly.
–   Severe cases: Start with prednisone 40–80 mg daily and reduce gradually over 3–9 months.
2. Type 2 lepra reaction (erythema nodosum leprosum)
–   Mild cases:  Aspirin 600 mg 6 hourly
–   Severe cases: Prednisone 1 mg/kg/day. If there is no response to steroids, add clofazimine (300
mg/day) or thalidomide (100 mg 4 times daily). The doses are slowly reduced over 1–3 months.
If there is involvement of eyes, 1% hydrocortisone drops or ointment and 1% atropine drops is
given.
Leptospirosis
Q. Write short essay on the etiology, clinical features, complications,
investigations/laboratory diagnosis, complications and treatment of
leptospirosis.
Q. Write a short note on leptospirosis.
Leptospirosis is a globally important zoonotic disease caused by the
spirochaete Leptospira interrogans.
Synonyms: Autumn fever, seven-day fever, Canefield fever, Swamp fever,
Weil’s disease, rice-field fever, Swineherd’s disease.

Etiology
Leptospira consists of two species: (1) pathogenic Leptospira interrogans
(now designated L. interrogans  sensulato) and (2) saprophytic/ free-living
Leptospira biflexia (now designated L. biflexia sensulato).
Leptospirosis is the term used for an infection with any of the subtypes or
subgroups of Leptospira interrogans.
Epidemiology: Leptospirosis is the most widespread important zoonosis in
the world.
Source of Infection
Leptospirosis is ubiquitous in wildlife and in many domestic animals.
Reservoirs of organisms include rodents (most frequent), foxes, skunks, dogs
and domestic livestock. Many animals shed the organism into the urine in
massive numbers for long period but infection is asymptomatic in these
animals. Outbreaks of leptospirosis may occur with flooding.Mode of Transmission
Direct contact: Human infection occur either by direct contact with urine
or tissue of an infected animal. Transmission may occur through cuts,
abraded skin, and mucous membranes (nasopharynx, oral mucosa,
conjunctiva, vagina).Prolonged immersion in contaminated water favors
invasion, as the spirochete can survive in fresh water for months and for
up to 24 hours in sea water.Ingestion  of contaminated water, soil or vegetation.
Incubation period  is usually 1–2 weeks (7–14 days) but ranges from 1 to 30
days.
Pathogenesis (Fig. 4.9)
Typically illness has two phases (biphasic illness)
1. Leptospiremic (initial/first) phase is named so because leptospirae are
present in the blood and CSF during this phase. After entry of the
organisms into the human, they proliferate and disseminate through blood
into all organs (leptospiremic phase). The organisms can survive in the
nonimmune host. They evade complement-mediated killing, resist
ingestion and killing by neutrophils, monocytes and macrophages.2. Immune (second) phase: During the immune phase, the antibodies

appear and leptospires disappear from the blood. However, the organism
persists in various organs including liver, lung, kidney, heart, and brain.
Fig. 4.9: Pathogenesis of leptospirosis.
Clinical Features
Q. Write a short note on the signs and symptoms of Weil’s disease.
Most patients with mild leptospirosis are asymptomatic and do not seek
medical attention.
1. Leptospiremic phase: It lasts for up to a week. It produces a nonspecific
illness and commonly encountered symptoms include:
Fever:  Usually high-grade with chills and rigors. May be accompanied
by malaise, weakness.
Severe headache: retro-orbital or occipital.
Myalgia: Muscle pain occurs in most patients and is severe. The
muscles of the thighs and lumbar areas (calf and back) show severe
tenderness and may show cutaneous hyperesthesia (causalgia).Conjunctival suffusion/congestion (Fig. 4.10) is very helpful, notable
sign for detecting the disease. It is characterized by pericorneal

reddening or hyperemia (redness without exudate) without
conjunctivitis.
Fig. 4.10: Conjunctival suffusion and jaundice in leptospirosis.
Other less common features include anorexia, nausea, vomiting,
abdominal pain, cough, pharyngitis, uveitis lymphadenopathy,
hepatosplenomegaly and skin rashes.2. Immune (second) phase
In many patients, the first (leptospiremic) phase is followed by a
period of apparent recovery, after which the symptoms worsen again
for another 2–5 days (immune phase).During the second phase, meningitis and iridocyclitis are more
common.
Meningitis: Presence of headache, fever, neck stiffness may suggest
meningitis. The CSF is usually show normal number of cells in the
first 7 days of illness, although the organisms may be seen. With the
onset of antibodies (during immune phase) in the serum aseptic
meningitis develops in about 90% of patients, with abnormalities in
CSF (refer investigations below).Other manifestations which are less frequent include change in the
level of consciousness, encephalitis, cranial nerve palsies and acute
dilatation of the gallbladder with cholecystitis.
Weil’s Syndrome
Q. Write a short note on Weil’s syndrome.
Weil’s syndrome is not a specific subgroup of leptospirosis, but indicates
severe leptospirosis. It can develop during the second (immune) phase of

leptospirosis or as a progressive illness.
Components of Weil’s syndrome
It is dramatic life-threatening event, characterized by:
1. Jaundice: The first manifestation of severe leptospirosis is usually
jaundice. It develops between 5th and 9th days. Jaundice is deep and is
not due to hepatocellular damage, but probably due to cholestasis or
sepsis. Hepatic dysfunction such as acute hepatitis and sometimes
fulminant may develop.2. Renal failure: Primarily due to impaired renal perfusion and acute
tubular necrosis. It presents as oliguria or anuria (acute renal failure) with
the presence of albumin, blood and casts in the urine.3. Hemorrhagic manifestations are common, and include purpura,
petechiae appearing on oral, vaginal or conjunctival mucosa and large
areas of bruising. In severe cases there may be epistaxis, hemoptysis,
hematemesis and melena (due to gastrointestinal bleeding), hemorrhage
into adrenal glands, pleural, pericardial or subarachnoid spaces
(subarachnoid hemorrhage). Thrombocytopenia is common cause of
hemorrhagic manifestation.4. Pulmonary syndrome: Adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS),
pulmonary hemorrhage, pneumonia, effusion.
5. CNS: Meningoencephalitis, subarachnoid hemorrhage, seizures.
6. Other features: DIC, hemolytic anemia, myocarditis and arrhythmias,
and multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS).
Investigations
Urine examination:
–  During early part of the illness shows microscopic hematuria, pyuria
and proteinuria.
–   Demonstration of organism:  The tightly coiled spirochete may be
visualized in the urine by phase contrast or dark-field microscopy.
Blood:
–   Total leucocyte count may vary, but polymorphonuclear leukocytosis
(neutrophilia of more than 70%) with shift to left is very frequent.
–   Anemia may develop due to intravascular hemolysis, azotemia and
blood loss caused by hemorrhage.

–   Thrombocytopenia in severe infection.
–   Elevated markers of inflammation: Raised erythrocyte
sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein level.
–  Raised blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and hyperkalemia occur with
renal failure.
–   Coagulation studies may show a prolonged prothrombin time which is
reversible with vitamin K administration.
–   Creatinine phosphokinase (CPK) are elevated in 50% of patients
during the first week of illness. This helps in differentiating
leptospirosis from viral hepatitis.
–   Liver function tests show raised AST and ALT (up to five times
normal), conjugated hyperbilirubinemia and raised alkaline
phosphatase. Marked elevations of bilirubin and mild elevated
transaminases level are characteristically found in Weil’s syndrome.Chest radiograph  may reveal patchy bronchopneumonia and a small
pleural effusion.
Electrocardiographic abnormalities include bradycardia, low voltage
and nonspecific ST-T wave changes.
CSF examination: It may be abnormal in up to 90% of patients. Cell
counts are increased (but <500/mm3) with predominance of neutrophils.
Protein levels may be normal or raised and glucose level is normal. In
severe jaundice, xanthochromia can be seen.
Serological tests:
–   IgM antibodies may be detected in blood by microscopic
agglutination test (MAT), during the immune (second) phase of illness.
IgM ELISA and immunofluorescent techniques are easy to perform
and rapid immunochromatographic tests are specific but are of
moderate sensitivity in the first week of disease.
–   Demonstration of leptospiral antigen  by radioimmunoassay or
ELISA.Culture: Diagnosis can be confirmed by culture (on Fletcher’s medium)
of the blood or CSF during the first week (leptospiremic phase) of illness
or of the urine from the second week onwards. It may take several weeks.Detection of leptospiral DNA by PCR in blood during early symptomatic
disease and in urine from the eighth day of illness.

Modified Faine’s Criteria (Table 4.17) includes clinical, epidemiological
and laboratory criteria. A score of more than 26 indicates current
leptospirosis.
Table 4.17: Modified Faine’s Criteria 2012 for the diagnosis of
leptospirosis.
Part A: Clinical data Score
Headache 2
Fever 2
Fever >39°C 2
Conjunctival suffusion 4
Meningism 4
Myalgia 4
Conjunctival suffusion + meningism + myalgia 10
Jaundice 1
Albuminuria/nitrogen retention 2
Hemoptysis/dyspnea 2
Part B: Epidemiological factors
Rainfall 5
Contact with contaminated environment 4
Animal contact 1
Part C: Bacteriological and Laboratory Findings
Isolation of leptospira in culture – Diagnosis certain  
PCR 25
Positive serology  
ELISA IgM positive 15
SAT positive 15
Other rapid tests 15
MAT – single positive in high titer 15
MAT – Rising titer /seroconversion (paired sera) 25
Presumptive diagnosis of leptospirosis is made of:
Part A or Part A and Part B score : 26 or more
Part A, B, C (Total) : 25 or more
A score between 20 and 25 suggests leptospirosis as a possible diagnosis.

Treatment
Antibiotic therapy: Leptospirosis is highly susceptible to a broad range of antibiotics. Early
antibiotic therapy may prevent the development of major organ system failure or lessen its severity,
but it should be given whatever the stage of the infection.
Mild disease:  Oral treatment with following for 7 days effective when started within 4 days of
onset of symptoms.
–  Doxycycline (100 mg orally twice daily) or
–  Ampicillin (750 mg four times daily)
–  Amoxicillin (500 mg four times daily)
–  Azithromycin (500 mg once daily).Severe leptospirosis should be treated with intravenous penicillin as soon as the diagnosis is
considered.
–  Intravenous penicillin (1.5 million units intravenous 6 hourly) or
–  Ceftriaxone 1 g twice a day IV
–  Cefotaxime 1 g IV four times a day.
Treatment of complications/general care of the patient
–  Blood product transfusion for hemorrhage, anemia and thrombocytopenia.
–  ARDS may require mechanical ventilation. Renal failure may require dialysis. Intravenous
corticosteroid is useful for the vasculitic nature of severe leptospirosis, particularly in the
setting of pulmonary hemorrhage.
Melioidosis
Q. Write short note on Melioidosis.
Melioidosis (Whitmore disease) is caused by Burkholderia pseudomallei;
which is an aerobic, gram-negative motile bacillus, with ‘safety pin’
appearance. It is an opportunistic pathogen found in water and moist soil
and produces exotoxin.
Mode of Transmission
Contact with contaminated soil or water: It is the most common route
of acquiring the disease.
Other routes include aspiration or ingestion of contaminated water and
inhalation of dust from soil. Transmission between infected animals and/or
infected people is very rare. Person-to-person transmission may rarely
occur through sexual contact with an individual with prostatic infection.
Incubation period  varies from two days to months to many years. B. pseudomallei can survive in phagocytic cells. Hence, melioidosis can result
after a latent period.

Risk factors: Immunosuppressive events or chronic diseases such as
diabetes, chronic alcohol use, chronic renal disease, and chronic lung disease.
Clinical Features
Most infections are asymptomatic.
Acute pulmonary infection: It is the most common form which
resembles tuberculosis with presentations of lobar or multilobar
pneumonia, necrotizing lesions, and pleural effusions.
Focal infection: Melioidosis can be limited to a focal infection. Localized
lesions may occur in the skin (as a result of infected wounds) or various
internal organs (as a result of septicemic spread). Many times focal
infections become chronic conditions like lymphadenopathy, parotitis,
cystitis, osteomyelitis, prostatitis, spondylitis and septic arthritis.Severe systemic form: It manifests as severe septicemic form. This can
be non-disseminated (only involving one organ) or disseminated. Rarely
melioidosis can produce encephalomyelitis.
Diagnosis
It is difficult and has been called the great imitator (especially
tuberculosis) because there are no pathognomonic lesions. Any organ can
be affected and the lesions have no distinguishing characteristics.
Isolation of the organism from blood, sputum, tissues or wound exudates
by culture can help to diagnose the disease.
Serological tests for titers may also be used for diagnosis. Serological
tests available include agglutination tests, indirect hemagglutination,
complement fixation, immunofluorescence and enzyme assays. Improved
methods for rapid diagnosis are being evaluated.
TreatmentSystemic antibiotics: Initial intensive therapy with one of the following regimens:
–  Ceftazidime (2 g IV every six hours)
–  Meropenem (1 g IV every eight hours)
–  Imipenem (1 g IV every six hours)
Addition of TMP-SMX (trimethoprim sulfamethoxazole) twice daily during the intensive phase and
to be continued for 2–3 months.
Surgical drainage of skin wounds can be effective for localized infection.
Long-term treatment  and multiple drugs will be necessary for chronic and severe cases.
Relapses, as soon as 6 months after treatment, are common.

RICKETTSIAL DISEASES
Rickettsiae are obligate intracellular gram negative parasites.
Most are zoonoses spread to humans by arthropods (except Q fever).
Rickettsiae replicate within the cytoplasm of endothelial cells and smooth
muscle cells of capillaries, arterioles and small arteries causing necrotizing
vasculitis.
Most are febrile infections with a characteristic rash.
An eschar is the characteristic lesion that develops at the site of
inoculation.
Among the major group of rickettsioses, the commonly reported diseases
in India are: (1) Scrub typhus, (2) Murine (endemic) typhus, (3) Indian tick
typhus and (4) Q fever (Table 4.18).
Table 4.18: Examples of rickettsial diseases and their features.
Diseases Rickettsial agent Insect
vectorMammalian
reservoirClinical features
Typhus Group
Epidemic
typhusR. prowazekii Louse Human Fever/chills, myalgia, headache,
rash (No eschar) all over body
except palm, sole and face
Murine
typhus
(Endemic
typhus)R. typhi Flea Rodents Fever, myalgia, headache, rash
(No eschar), trunk, extremities,
milder form of illness
Scrub
typhusR. tsutsugamushi Mite Rodents Fever, headache, rash with
eschar * cigarette burn sign
(Figs. 4.11A and B),
lymphadenopathy
Spotted Fever Group
Indian tick
typhusR. conorii Tick Rodent, Dog Fever, headache, rash with
eschar , first appear on wrist and
ankle
Rocky
mountain
spotted
feverR. rickettsii Tick Rodents,
DogsFever, headache, rash (No
eschar)—first appear on wrist
and ankle, palms and soles
involved, systemic
complications—respiratory,
cardiovascular, central nervous,
renal and hepatic system

Rickettsial
poxR. akari Mite Mice Mild illness, fever, headache,
vesicular rash with eschar,
lymphadenopathy, resemblance
to chicken pox
Others
Q fever C. burnetii Nil Cattle,
sheep, goatsFever, headache, fatigue,
pneumonia, endocarditis, no
rash
Trench
feverRochalimaea/Bartonella
quintanaLouse Human Fever, splenomegaly, bone
pains, maculopapular rash.
* In scrub typhus, the eschar begins as a small papule, then enlarges, undergoes central necrosis, and
eventually acquires a blackened crust with an erythematous halo that resembles a cigarette burn. The
eschar resembling ‘cigarette burn mark’  is seen in 95% of cases and is most important diagnostic clue
of scrub typhus.
Box 4.10 lists the investigations in rickettsial disease.Box 4.10: Investigations in rickettsial disease.
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
Serological tests
–   Indirect fluorescent antibody (IFA) test  (Titer ≥ 1: 200)
–   Complement fixation test
–   Weil Felix Test
–  IgM ELISA test: Highly specific test.
Fig. 4.11A and B:  (A) Multiple eschar with rash in typhus;(B) Cigarette-burn sign—eschar in typhus.
Treatment
Tetracycline is the drug of choice.
Doxycycline 100 mg BID PO × 7–15 days.
Chloramphenicol 500 mg qid PO × 7–15 days.
IV Chloramphenicol 150 mg/kg per day for 5 days.
Coxiella endocarditis : Combination therapy
–  Tetracycline + Co-trimoxazole

–  Tetracycline + Rifampici
VIRAL INFECTIONS
Measles (Rubeola)
Q. Discuss the etiology, clinical features, complications and prevention
of measles (rubeola).
Measles virus, the cause of measles is an RNA virus of the genus
Morbillivirus in the family Paramyxoviridae.
Measles is highly contagious; approximately 90% of susceptible
household contacts acquire the disease.
Maximal dissemination of virus occurs by droplet spray during the
prodromal period (catarrhal stage).
Clinical Features
Measles has three clinical stages
1. Incubation stage
This stage lasts for about 6–21 days to the first prodromal symptoms
and another 2–4 days to the appearance of the rash.
Period of infectivity is from 4 days before and 2 days after  the onset
of rash. Patients with compromised immunity can shed virus for the
entire duration of illness.
Fig. 4.12A and B:  (A) Koplik spots—pathognomonic of measles which appears as grayish
white dots on the buccal mucosa; (B) Maculopapular rashes in measles.
2. Prodromal stage with an enanthem (Koplik spots) and mild symptoms
Usually lasts 3–5 days and is characterized by low-grade to moderate

fever, dry cough, coryza and conjunctivitis.
Q. Write short note on Koplik’s spot.
Koplik spots (Fig. 4.12A): Pathognomonic sign of measles are
grayish white dots, usually as small as grains of sand, that have slight,
reddish areolae; occasionally they are hemorrhagic.
–   Usually tends to occur opposite the lower molars but can spread
irregularly over the rest of the buccal mucosa.
–   Rarely, they are found within the midportion of the lower lip, on
the palate, described as ‘grains of salt on a red background’ and on
the lacrimal caruncle.
–   They appear usually within 12–18 hours and disappear rapidly.
–   Koplik’s spots begin to slough when the exanthem appears.
–   The conjunctival inflammation and photophobia may suggest
measles before Koplik spots appear. In particular, a transverse line
of conjunctival inflammation , sharply demarcated along the
eyelid margin , may be of diagnostic assistance in the prodromal
stage.
3.  Final stage with a maculopapular rash (Exanthem) (Fig. 4.12B)
accompanied by high fever.Usually starts as faint macules on the upper lateral parts of the neck,
behind the ears along the hairline, posterior parts of the cheek.
Individual lesions become increasingly maculopapular as the rash
spreads rapidly over the entire face, neck, upper arms, and upper part
of the chest within approximately the first 24 hours.During the succeeding 24 hours, the rash spreads over the back,
abdomen, entire arm, and thighs.
As it finally reaches the feet on the 2nd–3rd day, it begins to fade on
the face. Associated lymphadenopathy, conjunctivitis and pharyngitis.
In hemorrhagic measles (black measles), bleeding may occur from the
mouth, nose, or bowel.
Complete absence of rash (modified measles) is rare  except:
–  In patients who have received immunoglobulin (Ig) during the
incubation period.
–  In some patients with HIV infection.

–  Occasionally in infants younger than 9 months of age who have
appreciable levels of maternal antibody.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is usually apparent from the characteristic clinical picture;
laboratory confirmation is rarely needed.
Testing for measles IgM antibodies is recommended in some situations.
Measles IgM is detectable for 1 month after illness, but sensitivity of IgM
assays may be limited in the first 72 hours of the rash illness.
Complication (Table 4.19)
They are more common in older children and adults.
Treatment
There is no specific antiviral therapy and it is entirely supportive .Antipyretics  (acetaminophen or ibuprofen) for fever
Bed res
Maintenance of an adequate fluid intake
Vitamin A supplementation: Recommended by the American Academy of Pediatrics for
children:
–  From 6 months to 2 years of age who are hospitalized for measles and its complications.
–  Older than 6 months of age with measles and immunodeficiency.
–  Recommended regimen as a single dose of:
♦   100,000 IU orally for children 6 months to 1 year
♦   200,000 IU for children 1 year and above
♦   Children with ophthalmologic evidence of vitamin A deficiency should be given additional
doses the next day and 4 week later. Treatment of secondary bacterial infections: Prompt identification and treatment of secondary
bacterial infections (with appropriate antibiotics).
Measles encephalitis:  Aerosolized and IV ribavirin may be useful.
Prevention
Passive immunization  with intramuscular injection of human normal immune globulin (0.25
mL/kg; maximum: 15 mL) is effective for prevention and attenuation of measles within 6 days of
exposure. Indications for passive immunization are mentioned in Table 4.20.
Active immunization:  It is achieved by giving subcutaneous injection live attenuated measles
virus. All children aged 12–15 months should be given measles vaccination. It can be given
simultaneously in combination with rubella and mumps vaccines (MMR vaccine). Further MMR
dose is given at the age of 4 years. This vaccination offer protection for at least 15 years.
Contraindications for measles vaccination are listed in Box 4.11.
Box 4.11: Contraindications for measles vaccine.

Pregnant women
Children with primary immunodeficiency
Untreated tuberculosis, cancer, or organ transplantation
Those receiving long-term immunosuppressive therapy
Severely immunocompromised HIV-infected children
Table 4.19: Complications of measles.
Due to virus replication
Acute laryngotracheobronchitis (croup) in young children
Giant-cell pneumonitis in immunocompromised children
Due to secondary bacterial infections
Common
Otitis media
Bronchitis
Bronchopneumonia
Gastroenteritis
Others
Noma/cancrum oris
–  Gangrenous stomatitis
–  Diarrhea due to undernutrition
Less common:
Transient hepatitis
Myocarditis
Conjunctivitis
Keratitis
Corneal ulcers
Postinfectious: Rare CNS complications
Early: Postmeasles encephalomyelitis
Late: Measles inclusion body encephalitis (MIBE) and subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE)
Others
Guillain-Barré syndrome
Hemiplegia
Cerebral thrombophlebitis
Retrobulbar neuritis
Exacerbate underlying Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Measles pneumonia in HIV-infected patients is often fatal
Table 4.20: Indications for passive immunization.

Prophylaxis for susceptible household and nosocomial contacts younger than 1 year of age
Immunodeficient patients (including HIV infected persons previously immunized with live
attenuated measles vaccine)
Pregnant females
If measles is diagnosed in a household member, to be given to all unimmunized children in the
household
Debilitated children, especially those with a malignant disease
Patients with active tuberculosis
Rubella (German Measles)
Q. Write short note on:
Rubella (German measles, 3 day measles)
Rubella syndrome and congenital rubella syndrome.
Rubella is infection caused by a Rubella virus which is an enveloped
RNA virus and member of the Togaviridae family. The name is derived from
the Latin, meaning little red.
Mode of spread via respiratory droplet infection: Maximum infectivity
from up to 10 days before the onset to 2 weeks after the onset of the rash.
After an incubation period of 14–21 days, the primary symptom of rubella
virus infection is the appearance of a rash (exanthema) on the face which
spreads to the trunk and limbs and usually fades after three days.The skin manifestations are called ‘blueberry muffin  lesions.’
Clinical Features
Depends on age of the patient and divided into acquired and congenital
rubella. Symptoms are mild or absent in children under 5 years.
1. Acquired rubella
Prodromal or catarrhal phase: Characterized by malaise, fever,
headache, and mild conjunctivitis. Lymphadenopathy (particularly
suboccipital, postauricular and posterior cervical lymph nodes) may be
observed during the second week after exposure. Forschheimer spots
(small petechial lesions on the soft palate) are suggestive but not
diagnostic. Splenomegaly may be found.Eruptive or exanthematous phase: Occurs within 7 days of the initial
symptoms. Characterized by pinkish red, macular rashes first appear
behind the ears and on the forehead and then spread downwards to the

trunk and limbs. These rashes usually last for 2 to 3 days. May be
associated with polyarthritis and generalized lymphadenopathy which
may persist for 2 weeks.
Complications are rare. These include secondary bacterial infection of
lung, arthralgia (commoner in females), hemorrhagic manifestations due
to thrombocytopenia and postinfectious encephalitis.
2. Congenital rubella syndrome
It is the most serious consequence of rubella virus infection of mother
during first trimester pregnancy. Box 4.12 lists the classical triad of
congenital rubella syndrome.
Box 4.12: Classical triad of congenital rubella syndrome.
Cataract
Cardiac abnormalities
Deafness
Mode of spread: From the transplacental transmission of the virus
from an infected mother to the fetus.
Consequences (Table 4.21): The complications of rubella infection of
the mother include miscarriage, fetal death, premature delivery or live
birth with congenital defects. Infants infected with rubella virus in
utero may have many defects. Most common are related to the eyes,
ears, and heart. This combination of severe birth defects is known as
congenital rubella syndrome.
Table 4.21: Congenital malformations associated with rubella
syndrome.
Congenital heart diseases: Patent ductus arteriosus, ventricular septal defect, pulmonary
stenosis
Eye diseases:  Corneal clouding, cataracts, chorioretinitis, microphthalmia, blindness
CNS:  Mental retardation, microcephaly
Deafness
Others:  Hepatosplenomegaly, myocarditis, interstitial pneumonia and metaphyseal bone
lesions.
–   First trimester infections lead to abnormalities in 85% of cases
and greater damage to organs.

–   Second trimester infections lead to defects in 16%. > 20 weeks of
pregnancy fetal defects are uncommon.
3. Expanded rubella syndrome additionally includes the following
manifestations:
Hepatosplenomegaly
Thrombocytopenic purpura
Intrauterine growth retardation
Myocarditis
Interstitial pneumonia
Humoral and cellular immunodeficiency.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is clinically made. However, laboratory diagnosis is needed
especially in pregnancy.
Detection of rubella specific IgM by ELISA in serum, confirmed by
demonstration of IgG seroconversion (or a rising titer of IgG) in a serum
taken 14 days later.Detection of viral genome in throat swabs (or oral fluid), urine and the
products of conception (in the case of intrauterine infection).
Treatment
No specific therapy is available.
Symptom based treatment is given for various manifestations such as fever and arthralgia.
Prevention
Passive immunization:  Human immunoglobulin can reduce the symptoms but does not prevent
the teratogenic effects.
Active immunization:  Active immunization is by giving live attenuated rubella vaccine.
–   Aim of vaccination: To reduce the frequency of infection and thereby decrease the chance of
exposure to infection by susceptible pregnant females.
–   Indications: Should be given to all children at the age of 15 months along with mumps and
measles vaccine (MMR vaccine). A second dose is given to young females between the age of
11 to 13 years and all seronegative females of child-bearing age.
–   Contraindications
♦   Contraindicated during pregnancy or if there is a likelihood of pregnancy within 3 months
of immunization. It is because of likely risk of vaccine-virus induced fetal damage.
♦   Patients with immune deficiency diseases or those on immunosuppressive drugs.
Mumps

Q. Write short essay/note on mumps and its prevention.
Mumps is an acute systemic viral infection caused by paramyxovirus
(RNA virus) and is characterized by swelling of the parotid glands.
Mode of spread: The virus is transmitted by the respiratory route (1) by
droplet infection, (2) by direct contact or (3) through saliva and fomites.
Humans are the only natural hosts of the mumps virus. The peak
infectivity is 2–3 days before the onset of the parotitis and for 3 days
afterwards.Incubation period  is about 15–20 days (average 18 days).
Clinical Features
Q. Write short essay/note on clinical manifestations of mumps.
Primarily affects school-aged children and young adults (peaks at 5–9 years
of age) and is uncommon before 2 years of age.
Prodromal symptoms: Nonspecific and includes malaise, low-grade
fever, myalgia, anorexia, headache, anorexia, and tenderness at the angle
of the jaw.Parotid gland enlargement: Prodromal symptoms are followed by severe
pain over the parotid glands due to parotitis. Parotitis produces either
unilateral or bilateral parotid swelling (75% of cases). It is accompanied
by obliteration of the space between the earlobe and the angle of the
mandible. The chief complaints at this stage are difficulty in eating,
swallowing and talking. Submandibular gland involvement is less
frequent.
Complications of Mumps (Table 4.22)
Table 4.22: Complications of mumps.Epididymo-orchitis (30%) in adults can lead to infertility
Oophoritis
Mumps pancreatitis
Mumps meningitis (5 to 10%), encephalitis. CSF reveals a lymphocytic pleocytosis
Mumps myocarditis
Others: Mastitis, hepatitis, polyarthritis, transient hearing loss, labyrinthitis, and
electrocardiographic abnormalities
Abortion (if infection occurs in the first trimester of pregnancy)

Thrombocytopenic purpura
Q. Write short essay/note on complications of mumps.
Treatment
Mumps is generally a benign, self-resolving illness.
Treatment is symptom-based and supportive. Adequate nutrition and mouth care. Analgesics to
relieve pain.
Prevention
MMR vaccine: To be given at the age of 15 months.
Diagnosis
On the basis of the clinical features. In atypical cases diagnosis is
confirmed by following investigations:
–   Serological test: Demonstration of a mumps-specific IgM response in
a blood or oral fluid during infection is diagnostic.
–   Demonstration virus: Culture of virus or identification by genome
(PCR) or antigen detection assays, from saliva, throat swab, urine and
CSF.
Herpes Viruses Infecting Humans
Q. Write short note on common herpes viruses infecting humans.
Enumerate the diseases caused by them.
Herpes viruses are double-stranded DNA viruses. The various diseases
caused by them are listed in Table 4.23.
Table 4.23: Disease caused by various herpes viruses in human beings.
Virus Diseases
Herpes simplex  
Type 1 Herpes labialis (herpes febrilis/cold sore—Fig. 4.13A),
keratoconjunctivitis, dendritic corneal ulcer, pulp space infections
(whitlows), encephalitis with temporal lobe involvement, genital
herpes (40%), pneumonitis, tracheobronchitis, ulcerative stomatitis,
esophagitisType 2 Genital herpes (60%), neonatal infections
Cytomegalovirus Congenital infections (intrauterine growth retardation), perinatal
infections, infections in the immunocompromised patients
(pneumonitis, retinitis)

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) Infectious mononucleosis, Burkitt’s lymphoma, nasopharyngeal
carcinoma, hairy leukoplakia in AIDS patients
Varicella-zoster virus Chicken pox, herpes-zoster (shingles)
Human herpes virus 6 Exanthem subitum (sixth disease), Roseola subitum-slapped cheek
appearance (Fig. 4.13B)
Human herpes virus 7 Exanthem subitum (sixth disease)
Human herpes virus 8 Kaposi’s sarcoma, multicentric Castleman’s disease
Figs. 4.13A and B:  (A) Herpes labialis/febrilis caused by herpes simplex type 1 virus; (B) Roseola
subitum-slapped cheek appearance in human herpes virus 6 infection.
Infectious Mononucleosis (Glandular Fever)
Q. Write short essay/note on etiology, clinical features, investigations,
complications and treatment of infectious mononucleosis (glandular
fever).
Etiology
Caused by Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). It is a herpes virus that infects and
replicates in B lymphocytes in the submucosal lymphoid tissue of
nasopharynx and oropharynx.Age: Peak incidence in 14–16 years for females and 16–18 years for
males. Subclinical infection is very common.
Mode of transmission  is largely through saliva (e.g. kissing hence the
nickname kissing disease).
Incubation period: 7–10 days.
Clinical Features
Usually presents with non-specific prodromal symptoms followed by the
classical triad of (1) fever, (2) severe pharyngitis and tonsillitis, and (3)
lymphadenopathy (particularly posterior cervical lymph node enlargement
but sometimes generalized) and hepatosplenomegaly.

Other features: Petechial rashes on palate and maculopapular skin rash, the
latter develops in 90% of patients who have received ampicillin or
amoxicillin (inappropriately) for the sore throat.
Gianotti-Crosti syndrome: A symmetrical rash on the cheeks with,
multiple erythematous papules, which may coalesce into plaques, and
persists for 15–50 days.
Investigations
Peripheral blood smear: In >90% of cases ⅔ are lymphocytes, 20–40%
atypical lymphocytes. The atypical lymphocytes are large, with larger
eccentric and folded nuclei with a lower nuclear-to-cytoplasm ratio.
Liver function tests: Raised liver enzymes
Serological Tests
–   Demonstration of heterophile antibodies: The following tests will be
useful for demonstration of heterophile antibodies.
♦   Paul Bunnell test is characteristically positive: Sheep red blood
cells agglutinate in the presence of heterophile antibodies.
♦   Monospot test is a sensitive slide test: Horse red cells agglutinate
on exposure to heterophile antibodies.
–   Demonstration specific antibodies against EBV antigens: These are
demonstrated by ELISA.
♦   Antibody against viral capsid antigens (anti-VCA): These
antibodies are initially of IgM type and later of IgG type (which
persists for life).
♦   Antibodies to Epstein-Barr nuclear antigen (EBNA): This can be
demonstrated by polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
Complications of EBV Infection (Table 4.24)
Table 4.24: Complications of EBV infection.
Chronic fatigue syndrome.
Hematological complications:
–  Hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia.
–  Aplastic anemia, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura of hemolytic-uremic syndrome,
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).
Glomerulonephritis, interstitial nephritis, hepatitis, myocarditis, pericarditis.

Splenic rupture.
Cardiac: Myocarditis, pericarditis.
Hepatic: Reyes syndrome.
Skin: Ampicillin associated rash (Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction), oral hairy leukoplakia.
Neurologic complications, e.g. meningitis, encephalitis, transverse myelitis and Guillain-Barré
(GB) syndrome.
Airway obstruction due to marked enlargement tonsils/severe pharyngeal edema.
EBV Associated Oncogenesis (Table 4.25)
Treatment
Infectious mononucleosis is usually a self-limiting disease  and majority requires no specific
treatment  and recovery rapidly.
Symptomatic treatment  includes rest, acetaminophen, etc.
Corticosteroids are indicated when there is neurological complications (e.g. meningitis,
encephalitis, severe hemolysis, marked thrombocytopenia and marked tonsillar enlargement
causing respiratory obstruction.
Table 4.25: EBV associated oncogenesis.
Benign EBV-associated proliferationsOral hairy leukoplakia, primarily in adults with AIDS
Lymphoid interstitial pneumonitis, in children with AIDS.
Malignant EBV-associated proliferations
Nasopharyngeal carcinoma
Burkitt lymphoma
Hodgkin disease
Lymphoproliferative disorders
Leiomyosarcoma in immunodeficient including AIDS
Chickenpox (Varicella)
Q. Discuss the clinical features, complications and management of
chickenpox.
Chickenpox is caused by ubiquitous and extremely contagious primary
infection with varicella-zoster virus (also called as human herpes virus 3).
It is usually a benign illness of childhood (5 to 9 years of age).
Varicella zoster virus (VZV) is a dermotropic and neurotropic virus and is
a member of the family Herpesviridae.
It causes two distinct clinical entities: varicella (chickenpox) and herpes
zoster (shingles). Primary infection is chicken pox and usually occurs in

childhood. The virus remains latent; which reactivate later in life giving
rise to herpes zoster.
Mode of Transmission
By droplet infection from the upper respiratory tract.
Direct contact with discharge from ruptured lesions on the skin.
Humans are the only reservoirs of VZV. Chicken pox is contagious till
pustules disappear.
Incubation period  is about 10–21 days.
Clinical Features
Distribution of skin lesions: Chicken pox presents with characteristic
rash on the 2nd day of illness that first appears on the trunk followed by
the face (Fig. 4.14A), and finally on the limbs. Maximum lesions are
found on the trunk and minimum on the periphery of the limbs (centripetal
distribution).Appearance of skin lesions:
–  Rash appear first as small pink macules and progress to papules,
vesicles (Fig. 4.14B) and pustules within 24 hours. Finally these
lesions dry up and form scabs.
–  New lesions develop in crops every 2–4 days and each crop is
associated with fever. Thus, lesions at all stages of development are
seen in any area at the same time.
–  Infectivity lasts from up to 4 days before the lesions appear till the last
vesicles crust over.
–  In immunocompromised patients the skin lesions are hemorrhagic and
are numerous. Dissemination to other organs is quite common.Enanthem are rash/small spots on the mucous membranes (Fig. 4.14C)
may also be seen.

Figs. 4.14A and C:  Lesions in chickenpox: (A) Involvement of face and body; (B) Vesicles; (C)
Chickenpox exanthema (widespread) and enanthem (rash/small spots on the mucous membranes).
Complications of Chickenpox (Table 4.26)
Table 4.26: Complications of chickenpox.
Secondary bacterial infection of skin lesions
CNS (rare)
–  Cerebellar ataxia
–  Encephalitis
–  Aseptic meningitis
–  Transverse myelitis
–  Guillain-Barré syndromeVaricella pneumonia (interstitial)Myocarditis
Acute glomerulonephritis
Corneal lesions
Arthritis, osteomyelitis
Bleeding diatheses
Hepatitis
Reye’s syndrome with aspirin use
Perinatal varicella
Congenital varicella (extremely uncommon)
Q. Write short note on complications of chickenpox/varicella.
Diagnosis
Mainly clinical, by recognition of the skin rash.
If needed, it may be confirmed by:
–  Detection of antigen (direct immunofluorescence) or DNA (PCR) of
fluid aspirated from vesicles.
–  Serology is used to identify seronegative individuals at risk of infection
–  Isolation of virus by culture of vesicular fluid.
–  Tzanck smear: Prepared by scraping of the base of the vesicular lesion.

It shows multinucleated giant cells and epithelial cells with
eosinophilic intranuclear inclusion bodies. Its sensitivity is low (60%).
Q. Write short note on treatment of chickenpox/varicella.
Management
No treatment is needed in majority of patients.
Medical management of immunologically normal patient is by prevention of avoidable
complications. These include good hygiene (daily bathing), meticulous skin care (to avoid
secondary bacterial infection).
Avoid aspirin use in children to prevent Reye’s syndrome.
Symptomatic treatment for itching/pruritus includes antihistamines and local calamine lotion.
Secondary bacterial infection is managed with local antiseptic or systemic antibiotics (e.g.
cloxacillin).
Antiviral Therapy
Not required for uncomplicated primary VZV infection in children.
Drugs used: Antiviral drugs that are used include acyclovir (15 mg/kg by mouth five times daily),
valacyclovir (1 gm three times daily) or famciclovir (250 mg three times daily) and famciclovir
(500 mg TID) for 5–7 days.Indications:  Though in healthy children, antiviral drugs may reduce the duration of disease when
administered within 24 hours of symptoms. However, they are usually not recommended but are
indicated in the following cases:
–  For uncomplicated chickenpox when the patient presents within 24–48 hours of onset of
vesicles.
–  All patients with complications.
–  Immunocompromised patients and pregnant women, regardless of duration of vesicles. More
severe disease in immunocompromised patients requires initial parenteral therapy.
Immunocompromised patients may shed virus for a prolonged period and may require
prolonged treatment.
Prevention
Three methods for the prevention of VZV infections are:
1. Live attenuated vaccine:  It is given to prevent chicken pox in immunocompetent children and
adults who are at a high risk of infection. It is contraindicated in pregnant or
immunocompromised patients.
2. Passive prophylaxis using zoster immune globulin (ZIG) or varicella-zoster immune
globulin (VZIG):It may be given to individuals who are susceptible, those patients having high risk of severe
disease or complication of chicken pox (e. g. immunocompromised, steroid treated or pregnant
women with history of significant exposure). It should be given within 96 hours of exposure.It is given prophylactically to newborn infants, infant whose mother develops chicken pox
within 5 days before or within 48 hours after delivery.
3. Antiviral therapy:  As prophylaxis to individuals at high risk and not eligible for vaccine or after
96 hours of exposure. They significantly reduce the severity of disease if not completely
preventive.

Shingles (Herpes Zoster)
Q. Write short essay on clinical features, diagnosis and management of
herpes zoster.
Initial infection with VZV produces chicken pox. After this initial infection,
VZV persists in latent form in the dorsal root ganglion of sensory nerves or
cranial nerve ganglia. Shingles arises from the reactivation of his latent virus
later in life.
Clinical FeaturesAge: It may occur at any age but most common in the elderly.
Skin lesions: The onset of the skin rash is usually preceded (3–4 days
before discrete vesicles occur in the skin) by severe pain (burning
discomfort) in the affected dermatome. Though rash is similar to
chickenpox, classically they are unilateral and restricted to a sensory
nerve (i.e. dermatomal) distribution (Fig. 4.15A). This is associated with a
brief dissemination of virus causing viremia and can produce distant
satellite ‘chickenpox’ lesions. Virus is from freshly formed vesicles may
also cause chickenpox in susceptible contacts. Chickenpox may be
contracted from a patient suffering from shingles but not vice versa.
Occasionally, paresthesia may develop without rash (‘zoster sine
herpete’).
Figs. 4.15A and B:  (A) Herpes zoster–dermatomal involvement; (B) Ramsay Hunt syndrome.
Dermatome involved: Most commonly involves thoracic dermatomes

or ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve (vesicles may develop on
the cornea and can produce corneal ulceration leading to blindness).
Bowel and bladder dysfunction may develop with sacral nerve root
involvement. Occasionally it may cause cranial nerve palsy, myelitis or
encephalitis.
Complications of Shingles (Herpes Zoster)
Q. Write short note on complications of herpes zoster.
Herpes zoster ophthalmicus, leading to loss of vision
Ramsay Hunt syndrome (Fig. 4.15B): It develops due to geniculate
ganglion involvement and characterized by involvement of cranial nerves
(V and VII). A triad of (1) ipsilateral facial paralysis/palsy (ipsilateral loss
of taste and buccal ulceration), (2) ear pain, and (3) vesicles/rashes in the
external auditory canal and auricle is seen. It may be mistaken for Bell’s
palsy.Postherpetic neuralgia is seen in  10–15% of people with shingles. It
results in troublesome persistent pain for 1–6 months or longer, following
healing of the skin rash. It is more common in elderly patients.
Granulomatous cerebral angiitis is a cerebrovascular complication. It
leads to a stroke-like syndrome in patients with shingles, especially in an
ophthalmic distribution.
Q. Write short note on drugs used for the treatment of herpes zoster.
Management
Early therapy with aciclovir or related agents (refer treatment of chicken pox above on page
153) reduce both early- and late-onset pain, especially in patients above 65 years.
Postherpetic neuralgia: Analgesics  along with amitriptyline  25–100 mg daily or gabapentin
(start with 300 mg daily and slowly increasing to 300 mg twice daily or more). Capsaicin cream
(0.075%) may be of some help.
Human Papillomaviruses
Q. Write short note on human papillomavirus.
Human papillomavirus (HPV) is a non-enveloped, double-stranded DNA
virus with strong tropism for stratified squamous epithelial cells of skin and
mucous membranes.

Types of HPV
High-risk types cause dysplastic lesions and invasive carcinoma in the
cervix (e.g. HPV-16, HPV-18).
Low-risk types are responsible for condylomata acuminata (genital wart)
and low-grade cervical lesions (e.g. HPV-6, HPV-11).
Mode of Infection
Direct contact: Usually mode of infection via direct contact with skin or
mucous membrane lesion.
Sexual contact: Anogenital HPV are usually transmitted sexually. Most
important risk factor is number of sexual partners.
Autoinoculation
Incubation period  for genital HPV varies from weeks to months.
Lesions/Diseases Caused by HPV (Table 4.27)
Majority of HPV infections are subclinical and about 80% resolves
spontaneously within 12 months.
Table 4.27: Lesions/diseases caused by HPV.
Verrucae plantaris
Sites: Hands (verrucae palmaris) and feet
(verrucae plantaris)
Color: Skin colored
Nature: Flat or dome-shaped papules, surface
rough and hyperkeratotic
Usually asymptomaticAnogenital malignancies:  Caused by high-risk
HPV
Intraepithelial neoplasms: Cervix, vulva,
vagina, anus and penis.
Penile carcinoma
Cervical carcinoma: Squamous cell carcinoma
Verrucae plana
Sites: Mainly face, hands or distal forearms
Nature: Flat, reddish or skin-colored papulesOral lesions: Asymptomatic or cause papilloma
Head and neck cancers:
Sites: Oropharynx, tonsils, base of tongue and
soft palate
Condyloma acuminatum
Cause: Low risk HPV
Sites: External (Fig. 4.16) or internal genitalia,
perianal, the anal canal, perineum
Nature: Multiple, flat or raised exophytic
papillomas, may be with pedicle or broad
based, usually self-limitedPeriungual warts
Site: At nail fold; often painful
Skin cancers (squamous cell carcinoma and
basal cell carcinoma)HPV may act synergistically with ultraviolet
light
Usually not caused by high-risk HPV

Fig. 4.16: Condyloma acuminatum on the external genitalia of male.
Diagnosis
On clinical presentation and appearance.
Biopsy: Necessary to confirm dysplasia or carcinoma.
Acetic acid test: HPV infections can be visualized after application of 3 –
5% acetic acid with a cotton swab. HPV-positive lesions appear white
within 5 minutes.
Endoscopic examination (colposcopy, proctoscopy): To visualize
condyloma, dysplasia and carcinomas.
Molecular methods: To detect HPV viral DNA (e.g. hybrid capture 2
DNA test).
PCR to detect HPV viral DNA.
Treatment/Therapy
No specific antiviral treatment available
Verrucae
–   Keratolysis: Mechanical removal with a sharp knife and application of salicylic acid: lactic
acid: collodion (1:1:4). Vaseline is applied to the surrounding normal skin to prevent its
corrosion by chemicals.
–   Cryotherapy:  Liquid nitrogen is used to freeze warts.
Anogenital warts
–   Podophyllotoxin: Application causes death of infected cells. It is applied by patient himself at
home twice/day for 3 consecutive days in cycles of several weeks. Serious systemic side
effects can develop if it is applied to large areas and absorbed systemically. It is
contraindicated during pregnancy.
–   Imiquimod: Induces the production of antiviral cytokines (e.g. interferon and tumor necrosis

factor-α). A 5% cream to be applied thrice weekly for up to 4 months.
–   Ablation: Either by surgery, laser and electrocauterisation.
–   Cryotherapy by using liquid nitrogen.
–   Trichloroacetic acid:  Topical application of 50–90% trichloroacetic acid produces
coagulation of cell protein and cell death.
–   5-Flurouracil  can be applied as cream.
HPV Vaccines
HPV vaccines induces high titers of antibodies which can neutralize infectious viruses. They can
prevent about 70% of cervical dysplasias (which can progress to cancer if not treated).
Types of HPV vaccines: Quadrivalent vaccine and bivalent vaccine.
Arthropod-Borne Viruses (Arboviruses)
Q. Write short essay/note on:
Classification of arboviruses
Major clinical syndromes caused by arboviruses.
Arthropod-borne viruses are called as arboviruses. Diseases caused by
arboviruses are listed in Table 4.28 and manifestations of a few diseases are
listed in Table 4.29.
Table 4.28: Examples of diseases caused by arthropod-borne.
Family Common diseases Family Common diseases
Arenaviridae Lymphocytic
choriomeningitis
Lassa fever
ArenavirusesFlaviviridae Mosquito-borne:
Janpanese
encephalitis
West Nile
encephalitis
St. Louis
encephalitis
Yellow fever
Dengue fever
Tick borne:
Kyasanur Forest
disease (KFD)
Direct contact:  Ebola
disease
Bunyaviridae California encephalitis
Rift Valley fever
Sandfly fever
Crimean-CongoTogaviridae Chikungunya disease
Sindbis disease
Eastern equine
encephalitis

hemorrhagic fever
Hanta virus—
hemorrhagic fever
with
renal/cardiopulmonary
syndromeWestern equine
encephalitis
Venezuelan
encephalitis
Table 4.29: A few diseases caused by arbovirus and their manifestation.
Flulike
syndromeEncephalitis Hepatitis Hemorrhage Shock
Dengue +  + + +
Yellow fever +  + + +
St. Louis encephalitis + +    
West Nile encephalitis + +    
Venezuelan
encephalitis+ +    
Western equine
encephalitis+ +    
Eastern equine
encephalitis+ +    
Japanese encephalitis + +    
+ = Present; – = Absent
DengueQ. Describe classic dengue (break bone fever), dengue hemorrhagic
fever (DHF) and dengue shock syndrome (DSS).
Q. Write short essay on the clinical features, diagnosis and management
of dengue hemorrhagic fever.
Dengue is the most rapidly spreading febrile illness caused by flavivirus and
transmitted by mosquitoes. It is the commonest arthropod-borne viral
infection in humans in the world.
Source of Infection
Humans suffering from dengue are main amplifying host of the virus and
infective during the first 3 days of the illness (the viremic stage). About 2
weeks after feeding (day time) on an infected individual, mosquitoes
become infective and remain so for life. Dengue is usually endemic.

Mode of Transmission
All are transmitted by the daytime Aedes mosquito biting. Aedes aegypti is
the most common mosquito involved in transmission which breeds in
stagnant water (e.g. collections of water in containers, water-based air
coolers and tire dumps).
Incubation period: 4–10 days following the mosquito bite.
Classification of Dengue
WHO (2008) Classification of Dengue
WHO (2008) classifies dengue into non-severe dengue (with and without
warning signs) and severe dengue, the criteria for the same is presented in
Figure 4.17. Even non-severe dengue patients without warning signs may
develop severe dengue. WHO (2016) has revised the classification and is
presented in Table 4.30.
Consequences of dengue virus infection is presented in Flowchart 4.1.Presently, expanded dengue has been defined and its features are presented
in Flowchart 4.2.
Pathogenesis of Severe Dengue
Severe dengue is characterized by plasma leakage, hemoconcentration,
bleeding and organ impairment.
Plasma leakage: The cause of plasma leakage probably due to functional
endothelial cell activation/dysfunction. The endothelial cell dysfunction in
turn may be mediated by activation of infected monocytes and T cells, the
complement system and mediators, monokines, cytokines and soluble
receptors.Bleeding: It may due to thrombocytopenia and associated platelet
dysfunction or disseminated intravascular coagulation. Thrombocytopenia
may be due to increased destruction or consumption (peripheral
sequestration and consumption).

Fig. 4.17:  WHO (2008) classification and levels of severity in dengue case.
Table 4.30: WHO classification of dengue infections and grading of
severity of DHF (2016).
DF/DHF Grade Signs and symptoms Laboratory
DF  Fever with two of the following:
Headache
Retro-orbital pain
Myalgia
Arthralgia/bone pain
Rash
Hemorrhagic manifestations
No evidence of plasma
leakageLeucopenia (WBC ≤ 5000
cells/mm3)
Thrombocytopenia (Platelet
count <150,000 cells/mm3)
Rising hematocrit (Hct) (5–
10%)
No evidence of plasma loss
DHF I Fever and hemorrhagic
manifestation (positive
tourniquet test) and evidence of
plasma leakageThrombocytopenia <100,000
cells/mm3;Hct rise ≥20%
DHF II As in Grade I plus spontaneous
bleedingThrombocytopenia <100,000
cells/mm3;Hct rise >20%
DHF* III As in Grade I or II plus
circulatory failure (weak pulse,
narrow pulse pressure (≤ 20 mmThrombocytopenia <100000
cells/mm3;Hct rise ≥20%

Hg), hypotension, restlessness)
DHF* IV As in Grade III plus profound
shock with undetectable BP and
pulseThrombocytopenia <100000
cells/mm3;Hct rise ≥20%
Source:  http://www.who.int/csr/resources/publications/dengue/Denguepublication/en/
(DHF: dengue hemorrhagic fever; Hct: hematocrit)
*: DHF III and IV are DSS = Dengue shock syndrome.
Flowchart 4.1: Manifestations of dengue infection.
(DHF: dengue hemorrhagic fever)
Flowchart 4.2:  Expanded dengue syndrome


Clinical Features
Dengue is a systemic and dynamic disease. It has a wide clinical spectrum
and includes both severe and non-severe clinical manifestations.
Asymptomatic infections are common (especially in children), but it is more
severe in infants and the elderly.
Phases of dengue
After the incubation period, dengue begins abruptly and is followed by the
three phases: (1) febrile, (2) critical and (3) recovery.
1. Febrile phase
Characterized by the abrupt onset of high-grade fever and this phase
last for 2–7 days. Fever may be continuous or saddle-back (see below).
It often accompanied by facial flushing, skin erythema, generalized
body ache (‘break-bone fever’), myalgia, arthralgia, malaise,
headache retrobulbar pain  (worsens on eye movements), severe
backache (which is a prominent symptom), anorexia, nausea and
vomiting. Some may have sore throat (pharyngitis), upper respiratory
tract symptoms, and conjunctival suffusion. In children, high fever
may produce febrile convulsions/seizures.Saddle-back fever: In few cases fever subsides and other symptoms
disappear after 3–4 days. This remission may last for 2 days and then
the fever returns together with others symptoms but milder. This
biphasic or ‘saddle-back’ pattern is considered characteristic of
dengue.Mild hemorrhagic manifestations such as petechiae and mucosal
membrane bleeding (e.g. nose and gums) may be found.
Liver is often enlarged and tender.
Laboratory findings
The earliest laboratory abnormality which has a high probability of
dengue is a progressive decrease in total white cell count.
Tourniquet test (Hess test)
–   Sphygmomanometer (blood pressure) cuff is tied to the upper arm above the elbow and
mark a circle of 5 cm diameter on the flexor aspect of forearm.
–   The cuff is inflated to 80 mm for 5 minutes.
–   Measure the number of petechiae present in the circle (already marked). A test is considered
positive when 20 or more petechiae appear in the circle.

2.  Critical phase
Around the time of falling (defervescence =
the period of abatement of fever) of fever (usually on days 3–7 of
illness), an increase in capillary permeability along with increase of
hematocrit levels may occur. This marks beginning of critical phase.
Consequences of plasma leakage are:
–   Pleural effusion  and ascites may develop.
–   Shock  occurs when there is a critical volume of plasma leakage and
is often preceded by warning signs.
–   Body temperature may be subnormal  when shock occurs.
–   Organ impairment: If shock is prolonged, it causes hypoperfusion
of organs and leads to progressive organ impairment, metabolic
acidosis and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). This in
turn leads to severe hemorrhage and decrease of hematocrit in
severe shock. Severe organ impairment (i.e. severe hepatitis,
encephalitis or myocarditis) and/or severe bleeding may also
develop without obvious plasma leakage or shock.Non-severe dengue : Patients who improve after defervescence are
said to have non-severe dengue.
Dengue with warning signs: Patients who deteriorate will manifest
with warning signs and are said to have dengue with warning signs.
Cases of dengue with warning signs usually recover with early
intravenous rehydration. However, some cases will progress to severe
dengue.
3.  Recovery phase If the patient survives the 24–48 hour critical phase, a gradual
reabsorption of extravascular compartment fluid  takes place during
the subsequent 48–72 hours.
It is characterized by improvement in the general well-being, return of
appetite, disappearance of gastrointestinal symptoms, stabilization of
hemodynamic status and diuresis.Other features: Some patients may develop a rash of ‘isles of white in
the sea of red’, and some may complain of generalized pruritus
(particularly on hands and feet).Findings

–  Bradycardia and electrocardiographic changes are common.
–   Hematocrit stabilizes or may be low due to the dilutional effect of
reabsorbed extracellular fluid (which leaked due to increased
vascular permeability).
–   White blood cell count: Usually begins to rise soon after
defervescence.
–   Platelet count recovery is later than that of white blood cell count.
Consequences of excessive intravenous fluids: If excessive
intravenous fluids are administered, massive pleural effusion and
ascites may develop leading to respiratory distress. During any phase
(critical and/or recovery phases), excessive fluid therapy may cause
pulmonary edema or congestive heart failure . The various clinical problems during the different phases of dengue are
presented in Table 4.31.
Table 4.31: Clinical problems during the different phases of dengue.
Phase Clinical problems
Febrile Dehydration; high fever may cause febrile seizures in young children
Critical Shock from plasma leakage; severe bleeding; organ impairment
Recovery Hypervolemia (only with excessive intravenous fluid therapy)
Severe Dengue
Q. Write short note/essay on dengue shock syndrome.
According to WHO severe dengue (Fig. 4.17) is defined by one or more of
the following:
1. Plasma leakage that may lead to shock (dengue shock) and/or fluid
accumulation, with or without respiratory distress.
2. Severe bleeding.
3. Severe organ impairment.
Mechanism of severe dengue
Dengue shock
Time of occurrence: Usually develops around defervescence on day 4 or
5 (range 3–7 days) of illness. It is preceded by the warning signs.

Mechanism of shock: In dengue, progression of increased vascular
permeability (due to endothelial dysfunction) leads to worsening of
hypovolemia and results in shock.
Consequences: Initially compensatory mechanisms try to correct the
process, but once they fail it goes into the decompensatory phase and
organ dysfunction sets in.
–  Severe dengue may be associated with coagulation abnormalities, but
they are not sufficient to cause major bleeding. When major bleeding
develops, it is always associated with profound shock, hypotension,
thrombocytopenia, hypoxia and acidosis. They can lead to multiple
organ failure and advanced disseminated intravascular coagulation.Most deaths occur in patients with profound shock complicated by fluid
overload. Complications of dengue are listed in Box 4.13.
Box 4.13: Complications of dengue.
Dengue hemorrhagic fever and disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis (HLH)
Dengue shock syndrome, polyserositis acalculous cholecystitis, acute pancreatitis
Cerebral hemorrhage or edema, cranial nerve palsies, rhabdomyolysis, hemolytic uremic syndrome
Hepatitis, encephalitis, myocarditis, aseptic meningitis, GB syndrome, cortical venous thrombosis,
pericarditis, atrial fibrillation, heart blocks, cardiomyopathy
Vertical transmission (if infection occurs within 5 weeks of delivery).
Diagnosis
Q. Write short note on diagnosis of dengue fever.
Blood: Increasing hemoglobin and hematocrit, leucopenia,
thrombocytopenia and raised live enzymes (AST or ALT).
Isolation of dengue virus from the blood (within first 5 days of onset of
symptoms) by tissue culture.
Detection of dengue virus RNA by molecular methods like RT-PCR or
nucleic acid sequence base amplification (NASBA) during the first few
days of illness is diagnostic.Detection of serum NS1 antigen by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA) is highly specific but less sensitive  than PCR. It is positive early
in the course of illness.
Detection of virus specific IgM antibodies or of rising IgG titers in

sequential serum samples (start after 5 days of onset).
In severe dengue: Chest radiograph to look for pleural effusion, and
ultrasound abdomen for ascites.
Q. Write short essay on management of dengue fever.

Stepwise Approach to the Management of Dengue
At the first levels of care a stepwise approach should be applied as mentioned
in Table 4.32.
Step I: Overall assessment (Table 4.33).
Table 4.32: A stepwise approach to the management of dengue (WHO).
Step I. Overall assessment
Step II. Diagnosis, assessment of disease phase and severity
Step III. Management
Management decisions: Depending on the clinical manifestations and other circumstances,
patients may:
–   be sent home (Group A);
–   be referred for in-hospital management (Group B);
–   require emergency treatment and urgent referral (Group C).
Table 4.33: Step I—overall assessment.
History Physical examination
Date of onset of fever/illness
Quantity of oral intake
Assessment for warning signs
Diarrhea
Change in mental state, seizure, dizziness
Urine output (frequency, volume and time of
last voiding)
Other important relevant histories including
coexisting conditionsMental state
Hydration status
Hemodynamic status
Tachypnea, acidotic breathing, pleural
effusion
Abdominal tenderness, hepatomegaly, ascites
Rash and bleeding manifestations
Tourniquet test (Hess test)
Investigations
Complete blood count.
Hematocrit in early febrile phase, establishes baseline, the patient’s own hematocrit.
Rapid decrease of white blood cell count makes dengue very likely.
Rapid decrease in platelet count along with a rising hematocrit compared to the baseline is
suggestive of progress to the plasma leakage/critical phase of disease.
Other tests include liver function tests (LFT), blood glucose, serum electrolytes, urea and
creatinine, bicarbonate or lactate, cardiac enzymes, ECG and urine specific gravity. A low serum
albumin, high ferritin and a raised CRP (C-reactive protein) are indicative of progress to severe
dengue.
Laboratory tests are performed to confirm the diagnosis. However, it is not necessary for the acute
management of dengue.

Step II: Diagnosis, assessment of disease phase and severity
On the basis of step I determine
Whether the disease is likely to be dengue
If dengue, which phase (febrile, critical or recovery)
Whether there are warning signs
Hydration and hemodynamic status of the patient
Whether the patient requires admission.
Step III: Management
Treatment of Group A patients (Can be managed at home)
Criteria for group APatients who are able to tolerate adequate volumes of oral fluids and pass urine at least once every
6 hours.
Do not have any of the warning signs, particularly when fever subsides.
Strategies to be followed:
Daily review of patients for disease progression (decreasing white blood cell count, defervescence
and warning signs).
Treatment plan:
–   Fluid intake:  Encourage intake oral rehydration solution (ORS), fruit juice and other fluids
containing electrolytes and sugar to replace losses from fever and vomiting.
–   Control of fever:  Paracetamol for high fever and if patient is uncomfortable. Tepid sponge if
fever is still high. Avoid use of NSAIDs (may aggravate gastritis or bleeding) and aspirin (may
develop Reye’s syndrome).
–   To be brought to hospital immediately  if no clinical improvement or bleeding manifestations
develop.
Treatment of group B patients
Patients may require hospital management for close observation, particularly as they approach the
critical phase.
Criteria for group B patients:  These include patients with:
Warning signs.
Coexisting conditions (e.g. pregnancy, infancy, old age, obesity, diabetes mellitus, renal failure,
chronic hemolytic diseases) that may make dengue or its management more complicated.
Certain social circumstances (such as living alone, or living far from a health facility without
reliable means of transport).
Treatment plan:
Obtain the reference hematocrit  before the start of fluid therapy.
Intravenous fluid:
–   Give only isotonic solutions such as normal (0.9%) saline or Ringer’s lactate.
–   Start with 5–7 mL/kg/hour for 1–2 hours, then reduce to 3–5 mL/kg/hour for 2–4 hours, and
then reduce to 2–3 mL/kg/hour or less according to the clinical response.
–   Reassess clinical status and repeat hematocrit .
–   If hematocrit remains the same or rises only minimally, continue with the same rate (2–3
mL/kg/hour) for another 2–4 hours.
–   If vital signs are worsening and hematocrit is rising rapidly, increase rate to 5–10 mL/kg/hour

for 1–2 hours.
–   Reassess clinical status, repeat hematocrit and review fluid infusion rates accordingly.
–   Monitor hematocrit, platelet count, creatinine, electrolytes, liver function tests.
Treatment of group C patients
Criteria for group C patients:  These patients require emergency treatment and urgent referral when
they are in the critical phase of disease or have severe dengue. The criteria include patients with
severe:
Plasma leakage leading to dengue shock and/or fluid accumulation with respiratory distress.
Hemorrhages.
Organ impairment (hepatic damage, renal impairment, cardiomyopathy, encephalopathy or
encephalitis).
Treatment plan:
All patients with severe dengue should be admitted to a hospital with intensive care facilities and
blood transfusion.
Intravenous fluid:  Judicious intravenous fluid resuscitation is the essential and usually sole
intervention required.
Replacement of plasma losses should be immediate and rapid with isotonic crystalloid solution
or, in the case of hypotensive shock by colloid solutions. If possible, obtain hematocrit levels
before and after fluid resuscitation.
Treatment of shock
Start intravenous fluid resuscitation with isotonic crystalloid solutions at 5–10 mL/kg/hour over 1
hour. Then reassess the patient’s condition (vital signs, capillary refill time, hematocrit, urine
output).If no improvement or shock worsens, fluid infusion rate can be increased. Vasopressors and
inotropes need to be added.
Treatment of hemorrhagic complications
Avoid intramuscular injections.
NSAIDs, antiplatelet agents, anticoagulants to be withheld temporarily.
Platelets transfusion if platelet count drops below 10,000/mm3 or patient develops bleeding
manifestations.
If coagulopathy present, transfuse plasma. Pack red cell transfusion if hemoglobin drops below 8
gm%. Steroids indicated if hemophagocytosis is diagnosed.
Management of complications appropriately
Prevention of dengue infections
Prevention or reduction of dengue virus transmission depends on control of the mosquito vectors or
interruption of human-vector contact.Control of the mosquito vectors
Interruption of human-vector contact
Currently, no vaccine or antiviral drug against dengue viral infections is available.
Chikungunya
Q. Write short essay/note on chikungunya.
Chikungunya is a viral fever caused by an alphavirus.

It is usually not fatal. However during 2005–2006 outbreak occurred in
India, where more than 200 deaths were reported mainly related to CNS
involvement and fulminant hepatitis.
Chikungunya (in Swahili of African dialect) means ‘that bends up’. It was
used in reference to the stooped posture developed due to the arthritic
symptoms of the disease.
Mode of spread: By bites from Aedes aegypti  mosquitoes.
Source of infection: Humans are the major reservoir of chikungunya virus.
Incubation period: 2–12 days.
Epidemiology: Observed in Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Kerala, Andhra
Pradesh, Rajasthan, Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh. Significant numbers of
cases have been reported from northern India including Delhi.
Clinical Features
SymptomsFever (often severe): The fever usually lasts for 2–5 days and may be
followed by an afebrile phase and then reappearance of fever (saddleback
pattern).
Maculopapular rash: Skin involvement is more common in children and
occurs about 40–50% of cases. It may appear at the beginning or several
days (day 2 or 3 of the disease) of the illness. It is usually a pruritic
maculopapular rash predominating on the trunk and limbs.Arthralgia or arthritis: Adults are more prone to migratory polyarthritis,
which produces early morning pain and swelling, most often in the small
joints of the ankles, feet, hands and wrists. However, larger joints may
also be affected. Arthritis may persist for months and may become chronic
(6 months to several years) in patients who are positive for human
leucocyte antigen (HLA)-B27.Other symptoms: Constitutional symptoms and signs, such as abdominal
pain, headache (last for a variable period), anorexia, nausea, conjunctival
injection and slight photophobia. Occasionally, bleeding from skin
(petechiae) and epistaxis may occur. Arthritis and skin pigmentation may
persist for months to years after convalescence.Diagnosis

Blood: Leucopenia and thrombocytopenia may occur but is uncommon.
Raised asparate amino transferases and C-reactive protein  may be
found.
Demonstrating antibodies using ELISA method for diagnosis.
Molecular methods include RT-PCR to detect structural genes of virus in
the blood sample.
Treatment
Symptomatic:  No specific treatment available. For arthralgias and arthritis NSAIDs  (e.g.
ibuprofen, diclofenac or naproxen) may be used. Rest is important to reduce morbidity.
Hydroxychloroquine (200 mg once or twice a day) may be given to patients with prolonged joint
pains.
Japanese Encephalitis
Q. Write short note on Japanese encephalitis.
Japanese encephalitis is a mosquito borne encephalitis caused by a
Flavivirus.
Mode of transmission: It is a viral infection transmitted by infected Culex
tritaeniorhynchus mosquitoes.
Source of infection: It is a zoonotic disease maintaining Japanese
encephalitis virus in nature by pig-mosquito-pig and bird-mosquito-bird
cycles. Culex tritaeniorhynchus feeds mainly on the infected pigs and
birds (e.g. herons and sparrows) and transmit the disease. Humans are
accidental hosts.Incubation period: 5–15 days after the mosquito bite.
Epidemiology: It is endemic in Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Assam, Andhra
Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal and Odisha states of India.
It is most frequent in the rice growing countries (where irrigated rice fields
are present).
Clinical Features
Age group: In endemic regions, the infection occurs in children between 3
and 15 years of age because of high background immunity in older
individuals.
Presenting features

Prodromal period: Following incubation period, the illness starts with
fever, severe rigors, headache, malaise nausea, diarrhea, vomiting, cough
and myalgia that last for 1–6 days. Weight loss is prominent.
Acute encephalitic stage: During this stage fever is high, there is neck
rigidity, and neurological signs such as irritability, altered
consciousness/behavior, hemiparesis and convulsions develop. Mental
deterioration occurs over a period of 3 to 4 days and may terminate in
coma.Residual neurological defects features such as cognitive and speech
impairment, emotional liability, cranial nerve palsies (e.g. ocular palsies-
deafness), hemiplegia, quadriplegia and Parkinsonian presentation
(extrapyramidal signs in the form of rigidity, dystonia, choreoathetosis and
coarse tremors) occur in about 70% of patients who have had CNS
involvement.
Mortality ranges from 7% to 40% and is higher in children.Diagnosis
Blood: Leukocytosis with neutrophilia.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination:
–   It shows raised pressure and cell count. During early stages
neutrophils may predominate but a lymphocytic pleocytosis is typical.
CSF protein is moderately raised  in about 50% of case.
–   Virus isolation  from CSF.
–   Detection of viral antigens in CSF by indirect immunofluorescence
assay (IFA).
Serological tests: Detect antibodies to viral antigens. The various tests
include virus neutralization test, hemagglutination inhibition and
complement fixation. Antibody detection  in serum and CSF by IgM
capture ELISA is a rapid diagnostic test.EEG: Persistent abnormalities are common (particularly in children).
Imaging studies by CT scan may show low-density areas in the temporal
lobes. MRI scan is more sensitive in detecting early abnormalities.
Treatment
Treatment is supportive/symptomatic and includes management of fever, raised intracranial
tension and convulsions.

Prevention
Control of the mosquito vectors
Interruption of human-vector contact
Vaccines: These include vaccines containing purified formalin-inactivated virus derived from
mouse brain (requires three doses on 0, 7 and 14 days) and cell-culture derived live attenuated.
Smallpox (Variola)
Q. Write short essay on the clinical features, treatment and prophylaxis
of smallpox.
It is a severe disease with high mortality caused by variola virus that
belongs to the Orthopoxvirus genus.
Smallpox was eradicated worldwide by a global vaccination program and
the last case was reported in 1977. In 1980, WHO declared world free of
smallpox.Interest in smallpox has re-emerged because of its potential as a
bioweapon. Deliberate introduction of the smallpox virus through
aerosolization can produce an epidemic in a few days.
Mode of transmission: Virus spread through the respiratory or
oropharyngeal mucosa. The virus is present in contaminated aerosols,
lesional tissue, body fluids or fomites. It may also spread through contact
with lesions (which contains numerous viable virions)
Incubation period: 12–17 days. During incubation period, the viral
proliferate within the lymph nodes and subsequently disseminated and seed
the other lymphoid tissues throughout the body.
Clinical Features
Prodromal period: It develops abruptly with high fever, headache, backache,
prostration and malaise.
Skin lesions (Described in Table 4.34)Contagious period: The disease is most contagious during the period
from the development of the rash up to the 10th day. However, the patient
remains contagious till scabs fall off.
–   Within 2–3 weeks, the skin lesions develop into scabs that detach.
Sometimes it may lead to scar formation or become hypopigmented.
–   Uncommon presentations are flat and hemorrhagic types of lesions.

♦   Smallpox: Characterized by soft, flat, confluent or semiconfluent
lesions.
♦   Hemorrhagic smallpox: Characterized by widespread hemorrhages
into skin and mucous membranes with a very high case-fatality rate.
Vaccination can modify course of disease with milder rash and lower
mortality.
Cause of death: May be due to DIC, hypotension and multiorgan failure.
Treatment
Symptomatic and there is no effective postexposure therapy.
Prophylaxis by Vaccine
It is a live attenuated vaccine that employs another virus of Orthopoxvirus genus called vaccinia.
Vaccination can prevent or reduce the severity of infection if given within 4 days of exposure.
However, most countries do not have adequate stock of vaccine.
Differences between smallpox and chickenpox are presented in Table 4.34.
Table 4.34: Differences between smallpox and chickenpox.
Features Smallpox Chickenpox
Stages of skin rash All rashes of the same stage Rash in different stages occur
simultaneously
Involvement of palms and soles Affected Not affected
Axilla Free Affected
Rash prominent on Extensor surfaces and bony
prominencesMostly on flexor surfaces
Location of rash Deep seated Superficial
Type of skin lesion Vesicles multilocular and
umbilicatedUnilocular-dew drop
appearance
Pleomorphic rashes
Distribution of rash Centrifugal Centripetal
Relation to fever Fever 2–4 days prior to rash Fever at the time of rash
Mortality 2–10% Very few
RABIES
Q. Describe etiology, clinical features, and treatment of rabies. Add a
note on postexposure prophylaxis.

Rabies is caused by a rhabdovirus (genotype 1, single stranded RNA virus of
the Lyssavirus genus). The virus has a marked affinity for central nervous
tissue and the salivary glands of a wide range of mammals. Established
infection is invariably fatal.
Mode of infection: By saliva usually through the bites or licks of an
infected animal on abrasions or on intact mucous membranes. Other forms of
transmission (aerosolized exposure in bat infested caves, post organ
transplant) are rare.
Source of infection: Humans are usually infected from dogs/fox (rarely cats)
and bats.
Incubation period in humans: Varies from few weeks to several months.
Unusually average is 1–3 months. In general, severe bites (especially on the
head or neck), are associated with shorter incubation periods than those
elsewhere.
Clinical FeaturesClinical varieties: There are two distinct clinical varieties of rabies in
humans: (1) Furious rabies (the classic variety) and (2) Dumb rabies (the
paralytic variety).
The only characteristic feature in the initial prodromal period is the pain
and tingling (paraesthesia) at the site of the bite. There may be fever,
malaise and headache.
After a prodromal period of 1–10 days, marked anxiety, agitation or
depressive features, hallucinations, and paralysis may develop. It may be
accompanied by spitting, biting and mania, with lucid intervals in which
the patient is markedly anxious.Hyperexcitability is the hallmark and is precipitated by auditory or visual
stimuli. The characteristic ‘hydrophobia’ (fear of water) develops in
50% of patients. In hydrophobia, though the patient is thirsty, attempts at
drinking (or to eat) provoke violent/severe contractions of the diaphragm
and other inspiratory (pharyngeal) muscles. Aerophobia (fear of air) is
pathognomonic of rabies.Cranial nerve lesions and autonomic instability is common.
Examination: It shows hyperreflexia, spasticity and features of
sympathetic overactivity (pupillary dilatation and diaphoresis).

Patient develops convulsions, respiratory paralysis and cardiac
arrhythmias. Death usually occurs within 10–14 days of the onset of
symptoms.
Dumb rabies presents with a symmetrical ascending paralysis similar to
Guillain–Barré syndrome. It commonly develops after bites from rabid bats.
Investigations/Diagnosis
Diagnosis is usually made on clinical grounds.
Skin punch biopsy: To detect antigen with an immunofluorescent
antibody test on frozen section.
Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RTPCR): Isolation
of viral RNA
Isolation of viruses: From saliva or the presence of antibodies in blood or
CSF.
Corneal smear test: It is unreliable.
Classic Negri bodies: They can be demonstrated at postmortem in 90% of
patients with rabies. These are eosinophilic, cytoplasmic, ovoid bodies, 2–
10 nm in diameter, found in large numbers in the neurons of the
hippocampus and the cerebellum.Diagnosis on the biting animal: By using RTPCR, immunofluorescence
assay (IFA) or tissue culture of the brain.
Q. Write a short essay/note on treatment of rabies.
Treatment/Management
Established disease
Once the CNS disease is established, treatment is symptomatic, as death is virtually inevitable.
Only a few patients with established rabies survive.
Intensive care:  The patient should be isolated in a quiet, darkened room. Patients who received
some postexposure prophylaxis should be given intensive care facilities to control cardiac and
respiratory failure and nutritional support. Only palliative treatment can be given once symptoms
have appeared.Heavy sedation:  The patient should be heavily sedated with diazepam/ morphine, supplemented
by chlorpromazine if needed. Sedation should be done liberally in patients who are excitable.
Nutrition and fluids should be given intravenously or through a gastrostomy.
Milwaukee Protocol using antivirals (Ribavirin and Amantidine) along with ketamine and
midazolam infusion has been tried.
Q. Write a short note on prevention of rabies.

Prevention
Preexposure prophylaxis
High-risk individuals: Preexposure prophylaxis is indicated to individuals with a high-risk of
contracting rabies. These include laboratory workers (who work with rabies virus), animal
handlers (who handle potentially infected animals professionally), veterinarians and those who
live at special risk in rabies-endemic areas.Method:
–   Three doses on days 0, 7 and 28 (1.0 mL) of human diploid (HDCV) or chick embryo cell
vaccine given by deep subcutaneous or intramuscular route.
–    A reinforcing dose after 12 months and additional reinforcing doses are given every 3–5
years (depending on the risk of exposure).
Q. Write a short note on postexposure prophylaxis of rabies.
Postexposure prophylaxis
Treatment of the wound:  The wounds should be thoroughly and carefully cleaned with a
quaternary ammonium detergent or soap and water. Excise the damaged tissues, the wound left
unsutured and open.
Rabies can be prevented if treatment is started within a day or two of bite. For maximum
protection hyperimmune serum and vaccine are needed.
Human rabies immunoglobulin  should be given immediately at dose is 20 IU/kg body weight;
half is injected /infiltrated around the bite wound and  other half is given intramuscularly at a
different site from the vaccine. Hyperimmune animal serum can be given but hypersensitivity
reactions (including anaphylaxis) are common.
Vaccine:
–   Human diploid cell strain vaccine (HDCV)  is the safest vaccine, free of complications. Six
1.0 mL doses of HDCV is should be given intramuscularly on days 0, 3, 7, 14, 30 and 90.
Ebola Virus Disease
Q. Write short note on the clinical features and management of Ebola
virus.
Ebola virus disease (EVD), earlier known as Ebola hemorrhagic fever, is a
severe, often fatal illness in humans. EVD outbreaks have a very high
fatality rate of around 90%. EVD outbreaks occurred primarily in remote
villages in Central and West Africa, near tropical rainforests.
Source of infection: Ebola virus is introduced into the human population
through close contact with the blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids
of infected animals. Humans recovered from the disease can transmit the
virus through semen for up to 7 weeks after recovery from illness.
Mode of Transmission
The natural host of the Ebola virus are the fruit bats of the Pteropodidae

family.
Spread of infection: The virus spreads in the human population
through human-to-human transmission , with infection resulting from
direct contact (through broken skin or mucous membranes) with the
blood, secretions, organs or other bodily fluids of infected people, and
indirect contact with environments contaminated with such fluids.
Clinical Features
Acute EVD is characterized by sudden onset of high grade fever, associated
with severe weakness, muscle pain, headache, vomiting, diarrhea and
skin rash.
Complications include acute renal failure, hemorrhagic manifestations, DIC,
hepatitis and MODS (multiple organ dysfunction syndrome).
Diagnosis is clinical and serological tests available.
Treatment: Symptomatic and supportive. Isolation is of paramount importance.
Handling of dead bodies, animal carcases needs to be emphasized.
No vaccine available.
Swine Flu
Q. Write short note on Swine Flu.
Swine influenza virus (SIV) refers to influenza cases that are caused by
Orthomyxovirus endemic to pig populations. SIV strains have been
classified either as influenza virus C or one of the various subtypes of the
genus influenza virus A.In late March and early April 2009, cases of human infection with swine
influenza A (H1N1) viruses were first reported in Southern California and
near San Antonio, Texas.Swine influenza is a respiratory disease of pigs  caused by type A
influenza virus that regularly causes outbreaks of influenza in pigs that
cause high levels of illness but low death rates in pigs. Swine influenza
viruses may circulate among swine throughout the year, but most
outbreaks occur during the late fall and winter months similar to outbreaks
in humans. The classical swine flu virus (an influenza type A H1N1 virus)
was first isolated from a pig in 1930.

The disease originally was nicknamed swine flu because the virus that
causes the disease originally jumped to humans from the live pigs in
which it evolved. The virus is a ‘reassortant’—a mix of genes from swine,
bird, and human flu viruses.
Source of InfectionDroplets from cough or sneeze of an infected individual.
Object contaminated by the cough or touch of an infected person. 
Infected individual shed the virus from the day prior to illness onset until
resolution of fever. Hence infected individuals should be considered to be
contagious up to 7 days from the onset of illness.
Signs and Symptoms (Table 4.35)
Patients aged above 65, children below 5 years, pregnant women (especially
during the third trimester) and those with underlying medical conditions (e.g.
asthma, diabetes, obesity, heart disease), or those with weakened immune
system (e.g. on immunosuppressive medications or infected with HIV) are at
high risk of serious complications.
Table 4.35: Signs and symptoms of swine flu.High grade fever
Unusual tiredness
Headache
Running nose
Sore throatShortness of breath or cough
Loss of appetite
Aching muscles
Diarrhea or vomiting
The CDC criteria for suspected H1N1 influenza are listed in Table 4.36.
Table 4.36: The CDC criteria for suspected H1N1 influenza.
Onset of acute febrile respiratory illness within 7 days of close contact with a person who has a
confirmed case of H1N1 influenza A virus infection
Onset of acute febrile respiratory illness within 7 days of travel to a community (within the United
States or internationally) where one or more H1N1 influenza A cases have been confirmed
Acute febrile respiratory illness in a person who resides in a community where at least one H1N1
influenza case has been confirmed.
(CDC: centers for disease control and prevention)

Complications: ARDS (adult respiratory distress syndrome)and MODS
(multiple organ dysfunction syndrome).
Diagnosis
A confirmed case  of novel influenza A (H١ N١ )virus infection is defined as
a person with an influenza-like illness with laboratory confirmed novel
influenza A (H١ N١ )virus infection by one or more of the following tests:
1. Real-time RT-PCR
2. Viral culture from swabs (nasal, oral, secretions of respiratory tract) can
be used for virus isolation.
Treatment
Mainly supportive and consists of bed rest, increased fluid consumption, cough suppressants, and
antipyretics and analgesics (e.g., acetaminophen, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) for fever
and myalgias.
Severe cases may need intravenous hydration and other supportive measures .
Antiviral Agents
They may also be considered for treatment or prophylaxis.
Neuraminidase inhibitors:  They inhibit neuraminidase which is a glycoprotein on the surface
of influenza virus that destroys an infected cell’s receptor for viral hemagglutinin. By inhibiting
viral neuraminidase, neuraminidase inhibitor agents decrease the release of viruses from
infected cells and, thus, decrease the spread of virus. Drugs include Oseltamivir and Zanamivir.
Both are effective against both influenza A or B.
1. Oseltamivir (Tamiflu)
Must be administered within 48 hours of symptom onset to provide optimal treatment.
Adult dose
–   Treatment for acute illness:  75 mg PO BID for 5 days
–   Prophylaxis:  75 mg PO qd (Please refer to duration of prophylaxis specific for
postexposure).
2. Zanamivir (Relenza)
It is in powder form for inhalation via the Diskhaler oral inhalation device.
adult dose
–   Treatment for acute illness:  10 mg inhaled orally BID for 5 days
–   Prophylaxis of household contact:  10 mg inhaled orally qd for 10 days (initiate within
36 hours)
–   Prophylaxis for community outbreak:  10 mg inhaled orally qd for 28 days (initiate
within 5 days of outbreak)
Other antiviral agents (e.g. amantadine, rimantadine) are not recommended because of recent
resistance to other influenza strains.
Vaccination:  Yearly vaccination with season specific strain vaccine before the annual flu season
is recommended. Two types of vaccination are available namely intranasal and intramuscular.
Monovalent/trivalent vaccines are available.

Zika Virus
Q. Write short note on Zika Virus.
Zika virus (ZIKV) is an arbovirus, belongs to the flavivirus family.
It is enveloped and icosahedral with a nonsegmented, single-stranded,
positive-sense RNA genome. It was first identified in Zika forest of
Uganda in 1947.
Mode of Spread
Zika virus is transmitted by Aedes mosquito species such as A. aegypti ,
the extrinsic incubation period in mosquitoes is about 10 days. Rarely,
mother to child transmission and one case of sexual transmission has been
reported.The vertebrate hosts of the disease are monkeys and humans. The virus
infects dendritic cells near the site of inoculation, and later spreads
to lymph nodes and produces viremia.
Incubation period: 10 days.
Clinical FeaturesIt produces symptoms similar to a mild form of dengue fever with mild
headaches, maculopapular rash, fever, malaise, conjunctivitis,
and arthralgia. Within two to four days, the rash started fading, and fever
resolved within three days.Neurological complications: Guillain–Barré syndrome and other
neurologic complications.
Congenital infection leads to microcephaly, chorioretinal atrophy,
hydranencephaly, IUGR, hydrops fetalis. In January 2016 the US Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) issued travel guidance on
affected countries, including the use of enhanced precautions, and
guidelines for pregnant women including considering postponing travel to
affected areas. Most dangerous time is during first trimester of pregnancy
and damage to the brain of fetus.Diagnosis
Sample to be tested: Blood saliva and urine.
PCR: Useful in the first 3–5 days after the onset of symptoms. It directly

detects the virus or specific viral antigens in the clinical specimen.
Serology test: Detects the presence of antibodies and useful only after 5
days.
Treatment
Only symptomatic. No specific antiviral drugs or vaccines are available.
Prevention and control
Avoid travel to areas with an active infection.
Control of mosquito.
Molluscum Contagiosum
Q. Write short note on molluscum contagiosum.
It is caused by a DNA poxvirus called the molluscum contagiosum virus
(MCV). MCV has no nonhuman-animal reservoir (infecting only humans).
Types: Four types of MCV named MCV-1 to 4; MCV-1 is the most
prevalent and MCV-2 is seen usually in adults.
Mode of transmission: The virus spread from person to person by touching
of the affected skin. The virus also spreads by touching a surface with the
virus on it, such as a towel, clothing, or toys.
Age group: Children and young adults are infected and also commonly seen
in HIV patients.
Appearance of lesions: Lesions begin as small (3–6 mm) papules that are
smooth, flesh-colored domes with a central dimple (umbilication). Inside the
papule is a white, curd-like core that can be easily expressed. Occasionally,
they may be complicated by secondary bacterial infections.Site of lesions:
–   It can occur anywhere on the skin and mucous membranes, but are
usually grouped in one or two areas. Occasionally, they may be widely
disseminated.
–   Common sites: Head, eyelids, trunk, and genitalia (predominant site in
adults).
Treatment:  Imiquimod and Retinoids have been used. Cryosurgery, curettage have also been used in
the treatment.

FUNGAL INFECTIONS
Candidiasis (Moniliasis)
Q. Write short note on candidiasis (moniliasis).
Infection of skin or mucous membranes (e.g. oral cavity and vagina) by
Candida is known moniliasis.
Most Candida infections occur when the normal commensal flora
breach the skin or mucosal barriers. Candida resides normally in the
skin, mouth, gastrointestinal tract, and vagina. Candida species usually
live as benign commensals and does not cause disease in healthy
individuals. Candida species (usually C. albicans), are the most common
cause of human fungal infections. Candidas are small asexual fungi.Candida species are the most common nosocomial pathogens. Candida
albicans is the most common cause of candidiasis. Candidiasis may be
superficial (non-invasive) or invasive (disseminate). Invasive candidiasis
can also be due to non-albicans candida species (e.g. C. glabrata) and
some of these are resistant to fluconazole.
Lesions/Conditions Caused Due to Candida
1. Oral thrush (refer Fig. 5.7B): It is characterized by white adherent,
painless, discrete or confluent patches in the mouth. Conditions that
predispose to oral candida infection include use of broad-spectrum
antibiotics, xerostomia, immune dysfunction (e.g. diabetes,
immunosuppressive therapy, HIV infection, etc.) or the presence of
removable prostheses and lichen planus.2. Vulvovaginal candidiasis: More common in diabetics. It presents with
pruritus, pain, and vaginal discharge which is usually thin but may appear
as whitish ‘curds’ in severe cases.3. Cutaneous candidiasis: It may present as intertriginous infection (in the
skin folds), paronychia (painful swelling at the nail-skin interface)
balanitis (infection of the glans penis), Pruritus ani (infection surrounding
the anus), vulval candidiasis (in diabetic females) and scrotal candidiasis.4. Chronic mucocutaneous candidiasis: It is a heterogeneous infection of
the hair, nails, skin, and mucous membranes which persists in spite of
intermittent therapy. The onset is usually in infancy or within the first two

decades of life. It may be mild and limited to a specific area of the skin or
nails or may be severe form (Candida granuloma). It occurs in
immunocompromised patients with leukemias, lymphomas and AIDS.
5. Deeply invasive candida infections: It may or may not be due to
hematogenous spread.
Esophageal candidiasis (refer Fig. 5.7A): Deep esophageal infection
may result from penetration by organisms from superficial esophageal
erosions. It present as a dysphagia and retrosternal painCandidiasis of the urinary tract: It presents with hematogenous renal
abscess and bladder thrush. Kidney infection may develop from
catheter.Hematogenous dissemination of candida (invasive candidiasis or
candidemia): Candida may enter into the intravascular compartment
either from the gastrointestinal tract or, less often, from the skin
through the site of an indwelling intravascular catheter. Then it may
spread hematogenously to deep organs such as brain, chorioretina,
heart, and kidneys. It presents with retinal abscesses (extending into
vitreous), pulmonary candidiasis, endocarditis, chronic meningitis and
arthritis.
Table 4.37: Treatment of candidiasis.
Disease Treatment
Cutaneous Topical azole or topical nystatin
Vulvovaginal Oral fluconazole (150 mg) or azole
cream/suppository or nystatin suppository
Thrush Clotrimazole troches or Nystatin or fluconazole
Esophageal Fluconazole tablets (100–200 mg/day) or
itraconazole solution (200 mg/day) or
caspofungin, micafungin, or amphotericin B
Therapy should be extended for 3 weeks or 2
weeks after the symptoms subside, whichever is
longer
Disseminated candidiasis Ketoconaole 200–400 mg/day, fluconazole 200
mg/day or itraconazole 100 mg per day for 2
weeks
Severe disseminated candidiasis Intravenous fluconazole (6 mg/kg/day) or
amphotericin B
Echinocandins (include caspofungin, micafungin
and anidulafungin)

Diagnosis
Visualization of hyphae or pseudohyphae on wet mount (saline and
10% KOH) preparation or in scrapings from infected lesions under
microscope.
Tissue secretions stained with Gram’s stain, periodic acid-Schiff stain, or
methenamine silver stain may show candida in association with
inflammation.In invasive disease from blood cultures.
Treatment (Table 4.37):  Depends on the site and severity of infection.
Superficial Mycoses
Q. Write short note on superficial mycoses and dermatophytes.
Superficial mycoses are fungal infections of the outermost keratinized
(cornfield) layers of the skin or hair shaft resulting in essentially no
pathological changes.
Superficial mycoses along with their etiologic agent are as follows:Pityriasis versicolor:  Malassezia furfur
Black piedra:  Piedraia hortae
White piedra:  Trichosporon beigelii
Tinea nigra: Exophiala werneckii
Pityriasis Versicolor
Etiology: Malassezia furfur (Pityrosporum orbiculare)  which is a lipophilic
yeast.
Normal flora of the superficial epidermis and clusters around the openings
of hair follicles.
Saprophytic on normal skin of trunk, head, neck and appears in highest
numbers in areas with increased sebaceous activity. Causes superficial
chronic infection of stratum corneum.
Predisposing factors: Malnutrition, burns, corticosteroid therapy,
immunosuppression, depressed cellular immunity, excess heat and humidity.
It is associated with increased sweating.
Clinical presentation

Most common in adolescent and young adult males.
Multiple small, asymptomatic, red to fawn-colored, circular, macules,
patches, or follicular papules. It is hypopigmented. There may be tan to
dark brown macules and patches.
Most common site: Back, underarm, upper arm, chest, neck  and
occasionally on face.
Microscopy of skin scrapings, shows ‘spaghetti and meatballs’ hyphae.
Lesions fluoresce greenish yellow in Wood’s light.
Treatment:  Topical selenium sulphide or 2% ketoconazole shampoo (apply and remove after 30–60
minutes and repeat daily for 7 days) or a topical imidazole cream (twice daily for 10 days). Oral
ketoconazole or oral itraconazole (100 mg twice daily for 1 week) in resistant cases. Altered
pigmentation persist for months even after successful treatment.
Dermatophytes
Cutaneous fungi are called dermatophytes which are keratinophilic fungi
—they possess keratinase allowing them to utilize keratin as a nutrient
and energy source.
They infect the keratinized (horny) outer layer of the scalp, glabrous
skin, and nails causing tinea or ringworm by secreting keratinase—which
degrades keratin with varied clinical manifestations and are caused by
species of the fungal genera Trichophyton, Epidermophyton, and
Microsporum (in order of commonality).Lesions on skin and sometimes nails have a characteristic circular
pattern  that was mistaken by ancient physicians as being a worm down in
the tissue.
These lesions are still today called ringworm infections even though the
etiology is known to be a fungus rather than a worm.
Clinical manifestations of ringworm infections are called different names on
basis of location of infection sites (Table 4.38).
Table 4.38: Terminology for ringworm infections and location of infection.
Terminology Location of ringworm infection
Tinea capitis Head, scalp, eyebrows, eyelashes
Tinea favosa Scalp (crusty hair)
Tinea corporis Body (smooth skin) (Fig. 4.18A)

Tinea cruris Groin (jock itch) (Fig. 4.18B)
Tinea unguium Nails
Tinea barbae Beard
Tinea manuum Hand (Fig. 4.18C)
Tinea pedis Foot (athlete’s foot)
Kerion
Inflammatory reaction of tinea capitis caused by Microsporum canis or
Trichophyton mentagrophyte.
Presents as boggy indurated swellings with crusting and loose hairs.
Hair follicles may discharge pus.
In extensive lesions, fever, pain and regional lymphadenopathy is present.
Kerion may be followed by scarring and alopecia in areas of inflammation
and suppuration.
Favus
Caused by Trichophyton schoenleinii .
Characterized by the presence of yellowish, cup-shaped crusts known as
scutula. Each scutulum develops round a hair, which pierces it centrally.
The scutula have a distinctive mousy odor.Cicatricial alopecia is usually found in long-standing cases.
Figs. 4.18A to C: (A) Tinea corporis; (B)Tinea cruris; (C) Tinea manuum.
Treatment of mycoses
Topical:  Miconazole, clotrimazole, econazole, terbinafine.
Oral:  Griseofulvin, ketaconazole, itraconazole, terbinafine.

OPPORTUNISTIC MYCOSES
Q. Write short essay/note on opportunistic mycoses.
Occurs in humans with a compromised immune system.
Causative agents are normal resident flora that becomes pathogenic only
when the host’s immune defences are altered, as in immunosuppressive
therapy, in a chronic disease (e.g. diabetes mellitus), or during steroid or
antibacterial therapy that upsets the balance of bacterial flora in the body.
Etiology (Table 4.39)
Aspergillosis (refer pages 373-6)Aspergillus species are ubiquitous saprophytes in nature
In nature >300 species of Aspergillus exist, few are important as human
pathogens. These include (1) A. fumigatus, (2) A. niger, (3) A. flavus, (4)
A. terreus and (5) A. nidulans.
Table 4.39: Common causative agents responsible for opportunistic
mycoses.
Candida species
Cryptococcus neoformans
Aspergillus species
Zygomycosis (Rhizopus, mucor, absidia)Penicillium species
Fusarium species
Alternaria species
Clinical Syndromes
The Aspergillus species can cause a variety of clinical syndromes:
Pulmonary aspergillosis: These include allergic asthma,
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, and aspergilloma.
Invasive aspergillosis
Superficial infections: Sinusitis, mycotic keratitis, otomycosis.
Treatment:  Invasive aspergillosis is treated with intravenous amphotericin B, voriconazoles.
Mucormycosis
It represents a group of life-threatening infections caused by fungi of the
order Mucorales.
Rhizopus oryzae (in the family Mucoraceae) is by far the most

common cause of infection.
Risk Factors
Impaired immune system: Mucormycosis typically cause infection
primarily in patients with diabetes or defects in phagocytic function
(e.g. associated with prolonged neutropenia or glucocorticoid treatment),
solid organ or hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT), or
malignancy.Elevated levels of free iron: Supports fungal growth in serum and tissues.
Hence patients with raised levels of free iron also have increased risk. In
iron-overloaded patients with end-stage renal failure, treatment with
deferoxamine (iron chelator for the human host) predisposes to the
development of rapidly fatal disseminated mucormycosis. Deferoxamine
serves as a fungal siderophore, directly delivering iron to the mucorales.
Clinical Categories
Mucormycosis can be divided into at least six clinical categories based on
clinical presentation and the involvement of a particular anatomic site. These
are (1) rhinocerebral (most common in diabetics), (2) pulmonary (in patients
undergoing hematopoietic stem cell transplant), (3) cutaneous, (4)
gastrointestinal, (5) disseminated and (6) miscellaneous.Rhinocerebral mucormycosis
The initial symptoms of rhinocerebral mucormycosis are nonspecific  and
include eye or facial pain and facial numbness followed by the onset of
conjunctival suffusion, blurring of vision, and soft tissue swelling.
Fever may be absent in up to half of cases, while white blood cell counts
are typically elevated as long as the patient has functioning bone marrow.
If untreated, infection usually spreads from the ethmoid sinus to the orbit,
resulting in compromise of extraocular muscle function and proptosis,
typically with chemosis. Onset of signs and symptoms in the contralateral
eye, with resulting bilateral proptosis, chemosis, vision loss, and
ophthalmoplegia, is ominous and suggests the development of cavernous
sinus thrombosis.Upon visual inspection, infected tissue may appear to be normal during the
earliest stages of fungal spread and then progresses through an
erythematous phase, with or without edema, before the onset of a

violaceous appearance and finally the development of a black necrotic
eschar.
Definitive Diagnosis
Diagnosis requires a positive culture from a sterile site (e.g. a needle
aspirate, a tissue biopsy specimen, or pleural fluid). A probable diagnosis
of mucormycosis can be done by culture from a nonsterile site (e.g.
sputum or bronchoalveolar lavage).Biopsy with histopathologic evidence of invasive mucormycosis is the
most sensitive and specific modality for definitive diagnosis. Biopsy
reveals characteristic wide (6- to 30-m), thick-walled, ribbon-like, aseptate
hyphal elements that branch at right angles
Treatment: Surgical debridement plusAmphoterecin B deoxycholate: 1 mg/kg per day.
Liposomal AmB (LAmB): 5–10 mg/kg per day. However, dose escalation of LAmB to 10 mg/kg
per day for CNS mucormycosis may be considered in light of the limited penetration of polyenes
into the brain.
Amphotericin B lipid complex (ABLC): 5–7.5 mg/kg.
Echinocandin-lipid polyene combinations in primarily diabetic patients with rhino-orbital-cerebral
mucormycosis.
Mycetoma
Q. Write short note on mycetoma. Write short note actinomycosis.
Mycetoma is a chronic suppurative infection  of the deep soft tissues
and bones.
Most common site is the limbs but can also occur in the abdominal or
chest wall or head.
Etiology
Caused by either (1) aerobic or anaerobic branching gram-positive bacilli,
Actinomycetales (actinomycetoma—60%), or (2) by true fungi, Eumycetes
(eumycetoma—40%).
1. Actinomycetomas are caused by bacteria such as Actinomadura,
Nocardia and Streptomyces spp.
2. Eumycetes: Many fungi  cause eumycetomas. Most common are
Madurella mycetomatis, M. grisea, Leptosphaeria senegalensis and

Scedosporium apiospermum.
Colored grains: Both the above groups characteristically produce colored
grains; the color depends on the causative organism. Examples include black
grains by eumycetoma, red and yellow grains by actinomycetoma, and white
grains by either of them. The disease develops mostly in the tropics and
subtropics.
Mode of infection: It is acquired by inoculation  (e.g. from a thorn) and most
commonly affects the foot (Madura foot).
Clinical FeaturesIt begins as a painless swelling at the implantation site . It becomes
chronic and progressively, grows and spreads within the soft tissues, and
extends into the underlying bone. There is usually little pain without fever
or lymphadenopathy.
Discharging sinuses (Fig. 4.19): Nodules develop under the epidermis
and rupture, producing sinuses through which grains (fungal colonies)
may be discharged. Sinuses heal with scarring, while fresh sinuses appear
at other places. It can cause progressive disability.Deeper soft tissue and bone involvement are less rapid and extensive in
eumycetoma than actinomycetoma.
Fig. 4.19: Mycetoma.
Diagnoses/Investigations
Demonstration  of fungal grains in pus, and/or causative agent by
histopathological examination of tissue.
Culture and sensitivity is needed for identification species and
susceptibility testing.
Serological tests: Not available.

Management
Actinomycetoma:  Treated with prolonged antibiotic combinations. Usual combination is
streptomycin and dapsone, with dapsone replaced by co-trimoxazole in cases with intolerance or
refractory cases. Other combination includes co-trimoxazole plus amikacin, with rifampicin added
in refractory cases and to prevent recurrence.
Eumycetoma:  Usually treated with a combination of surgery and antifungal therapy. Most
commonly used antifungal drugs are itraconazole and ketoconazole (both 200–400 mg/day). Other
drugs include terbinafine monotherapy, voriconazole and posaconazole. Amphotericin B is usually
not effective. Therapy is continued for 6–12 months or longer. In extensive and severe cases,
amputation may be needed.
Nocardiosis
Nocardiosis is a gram-positive bacterial infection caused by aerobic
actinomycetes of the genus Nocardia found in the soil.
Mode of infection: It is an uncommon infection which occurs most
frequently by direct traumatic inoculation  or occasionally via inhalation
or ingestion.
Clinical features
Localized cutaneous infection: It causes localized cutaneous ulcers or
nodules, most frequently in the lower limbs. In tropical countries, chronic
destructive infection can produce actinomycetoma (refer above on page
172), involving soft tissues and bone.Systemic Nocardia infection: Occurs mostly in immunocompromised
individuals and results in suppurative disease with lung and brain
abscesses.
Microscopic appearance: Nocardia spp. appears as long, filamentous,
branching gram-positive rods. They are weakly acid-fast. They can be
cultured but need prolonged incubation.
Treatment
It depends on the result of culture and sensitivity.Systemic infection:  Needs combinations of ceftriaxone, meropenem, amikacin and co-
trimoxazole. They are to be given for 6–12 months or longer. Abscesses are drained surgically
wherever possible.
Localized cutaneous infection:  Usually treated with a single drug for 1–3 months.
Treatment of actinomycetoma (refer above on page 172)
Actinomyces israelii
Actinomyces israelii  can produce deep infection in the head and neck, and

suppurating disease in the pelvis associated with intrauterine contraceptive
devices (IUCDs).
Treatment: Penicillin or doxycycline.
PROTOZOAL INFECTIONS
Malaria
Q. Draw a neat labeled diagram of life cycle of the malarial parasite.
Discuss the etiology, epidemiology, clinical features, complications,
investigations and management of malaria.
Q. Discuss the clinical features, diagnosis and management of P .
falciparum  malaria (both uncomplicated and complicated P.
falciform  malaria).
Malaria is a protozoan disease caused by Plasmodium . Human malaria is
usually caused by one of four species of the genus Plasmodium  namely
(1) P. falciparum , (2) P. vivax, (3) P. ovale and (4) P. malariae.
Occasionally a species of malaria usually found in primates namely P.
knowlesi  (simian parasite) can affect man.
P. falciparum causes the most severe form of malaria than the other
Plasmodium species. P.vivax  is the most common cause of malaria in
India.
Mode of transmission: By the bite of female anopheline mosquitoes.
Malaria can also be transmitted through contaminated blood transfusions.
A comparison of the developmental characteristics of various species of
Plasmodium is presented in Table 4.40.
Table 4.40: Developmental characteristics of various species of
Plasmodium.
Features P. falciparum P. vivax P. ovale P. malariae
Duration of
erythrocytic cycle48 hours 48 hours 48 hours 72 hours
Type of red cells
parasitizedAll Reticulocytes Reticulocytes Mature
erythrocytes
Relapse No Yes Yes No

Drug resistance Yes +/– No No
Life Cycle of the Malarial Parasite (Fig. 4.20) and Pathogenesis
Q. Write short essay on life cycle of malarial parasite.
The life cycle of Plasmodium species is simple because it involves only
humans and mosquitoes. However, the development of the parasite is
complex, because it passes through several morphologically distinct forms.
Malarial parasites pass its life cycle in two different hosts namely: (1) human
(intermediate host) and (2) female anopheles mosquito (definitive host).
Fig. 4.20: Life cycle of malarial parasites (refer text for description).
Human cycle (Fig. 4.20)
Human cycle (infection) starts with the introduction of infectious sporozoite
by the bite of infected female anopheles mosquito. The sporozoite is found in
the salivary glands of mosquitoes. During mosquito bite, the mosquito takes a
blood meal and sporozoites are released into the human’s blood. The
different stages of human cycle are:

Pre-erythrocytic (Primary exoerythrocytic) stage
Sporozites cannot directly enter erythrocyte to start its erythrocyte stage, but
undergoes development inside liver cells. The infection of the liver and
development of sporozites into merozoites is referred to as the pre-
erythrocytic (exoerythrocytic) stage. Within minutes of entry of sporozites
into the human blood, (those which are not destroyed by the immune
response) they are carried via the bloodstream and are rapidly (within 30
minute) taken up by the liver. They enter liver cells and these malaria
parasites multiply by asexual reproduction (intrahepatic schizogony),
releasing about 30,000 merozoites (asexual, haploid forms) when each
infected liver cells ruptures. This stage is asymptomatic and during this
phase, the parasites are not found in the peripheral blood. The infected
hepatocytes rupture and release merozoites into the bloodstream.During P. falciparum infection, rupture of swollen liver cells usually
occurs within 8 to 12 weeks. P. falciparum and P. malariae have no
persistent exoerythrocytic phase but a new outbreak of fever may result
from multiplication of parasites in red cells which have not been
eliminated by treatment and immune processes.In contrast, P. vivax  and P. ovale releases merozoites into the bloodstream
weeks to months after initial infection.
Hypnozoite (latent) stage
The pre-erythrocytic phase disappears completely in P. falciparum, whereas a
few parasites persist in the liver cells as dormant forms in P. vivax and P.
ovale. The resting phase of parasite (latent phase) is called as hypnozoite.
These hypnozoites are capable of developing into merozoites months or years
later, causing relapsing malarial infection. Thus, the first attack of clinical
malaria may develop long after the individual has left the endemic area.Erythrocytic stage
Once merozoites are released from the liver into the blood stream, they
rapidly invade erythrocyte by penetration of the membrane. Within the red
cells (erythrocytic stage) asexual division occurs.Asexual forms: In the red cells parasite develop through the stages of
asexual forms changing from merozoite to trophozoite, to schizont  and
finally appearing as 8–24 new merozoites. These asexual forms of parasite
can be demonstrated in the thick blood smears.

–   Ring form: It is the first stage of the parasite in the red cell and is
characterized by the presence of a single chromatin mass (ring form).
–   Trophozoite: During this, the parasite assumes an irregular or ameboid
shape.
–   Schizont: It is the next stage the parasite has consumed two-thirds of
the RBC’s hemoglobin and has grown to occupy most of the cell. It
shows multiple chromatin masses, each of which develops into a
merozoite. Rupture of the schizont releases merozoites into the blood.
This causes fever and the periodicity of fever depends on the species of
parasite.
–   Merozoites: Rupture of the red cell containing merozoites releases the
merozoites into the bloodstream. These merozoites are capable of
invading additional new erythrocyte and repeating the cycle. The
characteristic clinical features of malaria such as paroxysmal fever,
chills, and rigors develop during the release of these merozoites into
the blood.
Each cycle of the above process is called erythrocytic schizogony. The
periodicity of such cycle takes about 48 h in P. falciparum, P. vivax and P.
ovale and about 72 h in P. malariae. P. vivax and P. ovale mainly attack
reticulocytes and young erythrocytes, whereas P. malariae tends to attack old
erythrocytes; P. falciparum will parasitize any stage of erythrocyte.Sexual forms: Most malaria parasites within the red cells develop into
daughter merozoites. A few merozoites within erythrocytes develop not
into trophozoites but undergo a different pathway of development into
sexual forms called gametocytes (male and female gametocytes). These
gametocytes are not released from the red cells until taken up by a feeding
mosquito to complete the life cycle. These gametocytes are ingested by the
mosquito during a blood meal when mosquito bites the infected human.Mosquito cycle
A female anopheles mosquito during its blood meal from an infected patient
ingests both sexual and asexual forms of parasite, but it is only the mature
sexual forms (gametocytes) capable of development.The male and female gametocytes of malarial parasite fuse inside the mid-
gut (stomach) of the mosquito to form a zygote .
The zygote matures to form an ookinete, which penetrates the gut wall and

form an oocyst.
The oocyst matures and forms numerous sporozoites. These sporozoites
have special predilection towards the salivary glands and reach maximum
concentration in the salivary ducts of mosquito. The mosquito at this stage
is capable of transmitting malarial infection.
During the blood meal these sporozoites are inoculated into the new
human host, thus completing the life cycle of Plasmodium.
Protection Against Malaria
Red blood cells containing hemoglobin F, C or S impair growth of P.
falciparum parasite. Patients with hemoglobin S especially heterozygotes
(AS) are protected against the lethal complications of malaria.
Attachment of merozoites to red blood cells is mediated via a specific
erythrocyte surface receptor. In P. vivax, this receptor is related to the
Duffy blood group antigen (Fya or Fyb). Thus, an individual who is Duffy-
negative (as most of the West African population) will be resistant to
infection by P. vivax .
Clinical Features
Malaria is a very common cause of fever in tropical countries. The first
symptoms of malaria are nonspecific.
P. vivax and P. ovale malaria
Incubation period  for P. vivax is 12–17 days, and for P. ovale is 15–18
days.
Prodromal symptoms include headache, fatigue, abdominal discomfort,
and muscle aches. These are more severe with P. malariae infections.
Fever: The most common symptom of these ‘benign’ malarias is
paroxysms of fever. Fever starts with a rigor. The febrile paroxysm
synchronizes with erythrocytic stage of the parasite.
–   Tertian fever: In P. vivax  and P. ovale malaria infections, the fever
recurs every third day (tertian) interval (with 48 hours cycle between
spikes).P. vivax: Patients suffering from P. vivax  malaria may develop anemia,
thrombocytopenia and mild jaundice with tender hepatosplenomegaly.
Splenic rupture is more common . Occasionally, P. vivax malaria

presently develops complications similar to those of P. falciparum
malaria.
P. ovale: The acute symptoms of P. ovale may be as severe as those of P.
vivax infection, but anemia is less severe and the risk of splenic rupture
is less common .
P. vivax and P. ovale: They have a persistent hepatic cycle and a few
parasites persist in the liver cells as dormant forms. This may give rise to
relapses.
P. malariae malaria
Incubation period: 18–40 days
Prodromal symptoms include headache, fatigue, abdominal discomfort,
and muscle aches and may be more severe than P. vivax.
Fever: The febrile paroxysm synchronizes with erythrocytic stage of the
parasite.
–   Quartan fever: In P. malariae infections, the fever recurs every fourth
day (quartan) interval (72 hours interval between spikes).
It is associated with gross splenomegaly, but splenic rupture is less
common and anemia is less severe. Chronic P. malariae infections cause
glomerulonephritis and nephrotic syndrome. P. malariae does not
relapse, but a persisting undetectable parasitemia may produce repeated
exacerbations and the risk of splenic rupture is less common.
P. falciparum malaria (malignant tertian or subtertian malaria)
Q. Write short essay on falciparum malaria.
It is the most dangerous type of malarias and patients may be either
‘killed or cured’.
Incubation period: 7–14 days (mean 12 days).
Prodromal symptoms: Onset is often insidious, with malaise, headache,
myalgia, anorexia and vomiting.
Fever: Patients develop mild fever having no particular pattern and may
last for several days before the onset of the classical ‘malarial paroxysms’.
–   A high irregularly spiking unremitting fever or daily (quotidian)
paroxysm is more commonly seen in falciparum malaria but usually
due to mixed infection (falciparum plus vivax).

Physical findings: Patient is often anemic and jaundiced with moderate
tender hepatosplenomegaly.
Neurological complications can manifest as acute headache, irritability,
agitation, seizures, psychosis and impaired consciousness.
Box 4.14 lists the jaundice in malaria.
Box 4.14: Jaundice in malaria.
Causes: Jaundice may be due to severe hemolysis and hepatic involvement (malarial hepatopathy) by
malaria.
Hemolysis:  The malarial parasite, especially P. falciparum infects a large number of RBCs. These
are destroyed in the spleen and result in hemolytic anemia. It produces elevation of serum bilirubin
(dominant unconjugated fraction) level without any significant elevation of the liver enzymes.
Malarial hepatitis (malarial hepatopathy):  This term is used to describe dysfunction of liver
cells in severe and complicated malaria. However, inflammation of the liver parenchyma is never
observed
Severe manifestations and complications of falciparum malaria
Q. Write short essay on:
Complications of malaria
Complications of falciparum malaria.
WHO defines complicated falciparum malaria as one of the features
shown in the Table 4.41 along with presence of asexual forms of P.
falciparum in the peripheral smear. Acute renal failure, acute respiratory
distress syndrome and jaundice are uncommon in children.
At highest risk of complications from malaria are nonimmune people, and
children and pregnant females who live in endemic regions.
Cerebral malaria
Q. Write short essay on clinical features and treatment of cerebral
malaria.
Q. Write long essay on cerebral malaria-etiopathogenesis, clinical
features and management.
Definition: Cerebral malaria is defined as diffuse encephalopathy in a patient
with falciparum malaria which is not attributable to any other cause.
Features: Cerebral malaria manifests as diffuse symmetric encephalopathy.

Neurological
Convulsions: Usually generalized and often repeated. They occur in both
children (50%) and adults (10%) but are more common in children.
Most common neurological signs in adults are those of a symmetrical
upper motor neuron lesion. The abdominal reflexes and cremasteric
reflexes are absent.Mild neck stiffness may be seen, however, neck rigidity and photophobia
and signs of raised intracranial tension are absent. Retinal hemorrhages
occur in about 15% of cases, exudates are rare.Motor abnormalities like decerebrate rigidity, decorticate rigidity and
opisthotonus occur.
Fixed jaw closure and tooth grinding (bruxism) are common.
Neuropsychiatric manifestations, cerebellar signs, extrapyramidal
syndromes and multiple cranial nerve involvement are common in Indian
patients.Residual neurological sequelae: They develop in about 5% of adults and
10% of children. These include hemiplegia, cerebral palsy, cortical
blindness, deafness aphasia and ataxia. They are more frequent in patients
with prolonged deep coma, repeated convulsions, those with
hypoglycemia and severe anemia.
Table 4.41: Criteria for severe and complicated malaria.
Manifestation Features
World Health Organization criteria from 1990
1.  Cerebral Cmalaria Unarousable coma not attributable to any other
cause, with a Glasgow Coma Scale score ≤9;
Coma should persist for at least 30 min after a
generalized convulsion
2.  Severe anemia Hematocrit <15% or hemoglobin ≤5 g/dL the
presence of parasite count >10000/µL
3.  Renal failure Urine output <400 mL/24 hours in adults (<12
mL/kg/24 hours in children) and a serum
creatinine >265 µmol/L (>3.0 mg/dL) despite
adequate volume repletion
4.  Metabolic (lactic) acidosis Metabolic acidosis is defined by an arterial blood
pH of <7.35 with a plasma bicarbonate
concentration of <22 mmol/L; hyperlactatemia is

defined as a plasma lactate concentration of 2–5
mmol/L and lactic acidosis is characterized by a
pH <7.25 and a plasma lactate >5 mmol/L.
5.  Pulmonary edema or acute respiratory
distress syndrome (ARDS)Breathlessness, bilateral crackles, and other
features of pulmonary edema. The acute lung
injury score is calculated on the basis of
radiographic densities, severity of hypoxemia,
and positive end-expiratory pressure
6.  Hypoglycemia Whole blood glucose concentration of less than
2.2 mmol/L (less than 40 mg/dL)
7.  Hypotension and shock (algid malaria) Systolic blood pressure <50 mm Hg in children
1–5 years or <70 mm Hg in patients ≥5 years;
cold and clammy skin or a core-skin temperature
difference >10 °C
8.  Abnormal bleeding and/or disseminated
intravascular coagulationSpontaneous bleeding from the gums, nose,
gastrointestinal tract, retinal hemorrhages and/or
laboratory evidence of disseminated intravascular
coagulation
9.  Repeated generalized convulsions ≥3 generalized seizures within 24 hours
10.  Hemoglobinuria Macroscopic black, brown or red urine; not
associated with effects of oxidant drugs or
enzyme defects (like G6PD deficiency)
Added World Health Organization criteria from 2000
11.  Impaired consciousness Various levels of impairment may indicate severe
infection although not falling into the definition
of cerebral malaria. These patients are generally
arousable.
12.  Prostration Extreme weakness, needs support
13.  Hyperparasitemia 5% parasitized erythrocytes or >250,000
parasites/µL (in nonimmune individuals)
14.  Hyperpyrexia Core body temperature above 40 °C
15.  Jaundice (Hyperbilirubinemia) Plasma or serum bilirubin >50 mcmol/L (3
mg/dL)
Other (Not included in WHO)
16.  Severe thrombocytopenia Platelet counts less than 10,000/cumm
17.  Fluid and electrolyte disturbances Dehydration, postural hypotension, clinical
evidence of hypovolemia
18.  Vomiting of oral drugs Patients with persistent vomiting may have to be
admitted for parenteral therapy.
19.  Complicating or associated infections Aspiration bronchopneumonia, septicemia,
urinary tract infection, etc.
20.  Malarial retinopathy In children dying with cerebral malaria, malarial

retinopathy was found to be a better indicator of
malarial coma. Similar retinopathy in an adult
has also been reported
Ophthalmological
Eyes may be divergent and a pout reflex may be elicited by stroking the
sides of the mouth. The corneal reflexes are preserved (except in deep
coma). Transient abnormalities of eye movement (especially dysconjugate
gaze) may be found.Ophthalmoscopy: Retinal hemorrhages may occur and indicate a poor
prognosis. Papilledema is rare.
Bad prognostic signs
Include prolonged impaired consciousness, respiratory failure, renal
failure, jaundice and hypoglycemia.
The CSF pressure is usually normal. The fluid is clear with less than 10
cells/µL, CSF lactic acid and protein levels are elevated.
Cerebral malaria carries a mortality of around 20% in adults and 15% in
children. Residual deficits are unusual in adults (<3%). Box 4.15 lists the
causes of neurological manifestations in malaria other than
hyperparasitemia.Box 4.15: Causes of neurological manifestations in malaria other than
hyperparasitemia.
High-grade fever 
Antimalarial drugs like chloroquine, quinine, mefloquine and halofantrine.
Hypoglycemia, either due to severe malaria or due to drugs like quinine.
Hyponatremia, most often in the elderly.
Severe anemia and hypoxemia can also cause cerebral dysfunction, particularly in children.
Anemia (Box 4.16)
Renal failure
Acute kidney injury is common in severe falciparum malaria and usually
occurs in adults. It causes progressive oliguria eventually resulting in
anuria. It is accompanied by progressive increase serum creatinine and
urea levels. It is usually reversible.Caused by renal cortical vasoconstriction and resultant hypoperfusion,
sequestration and resultant acute tubular necrosis due to microvascular

obstruction and due to massive intravascular hemolysis in black water
fever.
Dehydration and hypovolemia can lead to renal hypoperfusion, but this is
reversible with adequate rehydration.
Box 4.16: Causes of anemia in malaria.
Hemolysis of 
–   infected red cells
–   noninfected red cells (black water fever)
Dyserythropoiesis
Splenomegaly causing
–   Erythrocyte sequestration
–   Hemodilution
Depletion of folate stores
Hemorrhage secondary to thrombocytopenia/DIC
Iron deficiency secondary to RBC breakdown
Hypoglycemia
Hypoglycemia is an important and common complication of severe
falciparum malaria. It is particularly problematic occurs in three groups of
patients:
1. Children with severe disease
2. Patients treated with quinine or quinidine
3. Pregnant women (either on admission or following quinine treatment)Mechanism: In malaria, hypoglycemia develops due to various
mechanisms (Box 4.17).
Box 4.17: Causes of hypoglycemia in malaria.
Failure to hepatic gluconeogenesis
Increased consumption of glucose by host and malaria parasite.
Treatment with quinine or quinidine. Both these drugs strongly stimulate pancreas to secrete
insulin. This produces hyperinsulinemia resulting in hypoglycemia.
Fluid, electrolyte and acid-base disturbances
Hypovolemia: Characterized by low jugular venous pressure, postural
hypotension, oliguria and high urine specific gravity. This may be
associated with signs of dehydration.
Acidotic breathing: It may develop in severely ill patients in shock,

hypoglycemia, hyperparasitemia and renal failure.
Lactic acidosis: It is a common complication and associated with raised
lactic acid levels both in blood and CSF.
Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema
It is a serious complication of severe falciparum malaria in adults. It
carries a high mortality rate (>80%). It can also develop in otherwise
uncomplicated vivax malaria, where recovery is usual.It may develop several days after antimalarial therapy and at a time when
the patient’s general condition is improving.
Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema is associated with hyperparasitemia,
renal failure, pregnancy, hypoglycemia and lactic acidosis. It is aggravated
by vigorous administration of IV fluid.
Circulatory collapse (‘Algid malaria’)Algid malaria or hypotension due to peripheral circulatory failure may
develop suddenly in severe malaria or it may be the presenting feature in
some cases of malaria, with a systolic blood pressure less than 80 mm Hg
in the supine position [less than 50 mm Hg in children], a cold, clammy,
cyanotic skin, constricted peripheral veins and rapid feeble pulse.This clinical picture is often associated with a complicating gram-negative
septicemia and possible sites of associated infection should be sought in
such patients, e.g. lung, urinary tract (especially if there is an indwelling
catheter), meninges (meningitis), intravenous injection sites, intravenous
lines, etc.Circulatory collapse is also observed in patients with pulmonary edema,
metabolic acidosis, massive gastrointestinal hemorrhage, dehydration and
hypovolemia.Blood and urine culture should be done. Soon after collection of the
specimen for culture, broad-spectrum antibiotics should be started. 
Malarial hemoglobinuria (Black water fever)
Malaria hemoglobinuria is uncommon, and is usually associated with
hyperparasitemia and/or severe disease. It may or may not be
accompanied by renal failure.Patients with glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency and
other erythrocyte enzyme deficiencies may develop vascular hemolysis

and hemoglobinuria when treated with oxidant drugs such as primaquine.
Black water fever  typically occurs in nonimmune patients with chronic
falciparum malaria, taking antimalarials (especially quinine and
primaquine) irregularly. It occurs more commonly in patients with G6PD
deficiency.
The hemolysis can occur so rapidly that the hemoglobin may drop
significantly within a few hours and it may recur periodically at intervals
of hours or days. Patient presents with head ache, nausea, vomiting and
severe pain in the loins and prostration. Fever up to 39.4°C with a rigor is
also seen. Urine is dark red to almost black. Box 4.18 lists the chronic
complications of malaria.Box 4.18: Chronic complications of malaria.
Tropical splenomegaly syndrome
Quatran malarial nephropathy
Burkitt’s lymphoma
Investigations and Diagnosis
Q. Write short essay on laboratory tests in the diagnosis of malaria.
Malaria should be considered in the differential diagnosis of febrile illness.
Microscopic demonstration of parasite
Peripheral smear examination: The diagnosis of malaria depends on the
demonstration of asexual forms of the parasite in stained peripheral-blood
smears. Both thin and thick smears should be examined whenever malaria
is suspected. Smears are stained by one of the Romanowsky stains (e.g.
Wright’s, Field’s, Leishman’s or Giemsa).Bone marrow aspirate: Sometimes parasites cannot be detected in
peripheral blood smears, even in patient with severe malarial infections.
This may be due to partial antimalarials treatment or by sequestration of
parasitized cells in deep vascular beds. In these circumstances examination
of smears of bone marrow aspirate reveals parasites or malaria pigment.Alternative microscopic methods have been tried, including faster
methods of preparation, dark-field microscopy, and stains like
benzothiocarboxypurine, acridine orange and Rhodamine-123.Quantitative buffy coat analysis (QBC): It is an alternative and probably

more sensitive test than the peripheral smear for detecting the malarial
parasite. In this test, the centrifuged buffy coat is stained with a
flurochrome (e.g. acridine orange) that ‘lights up’ (microtube
concentration methods with acridine orange staining) malarial parasites.
The buffy coat smear is viewed under fluorescence microscopy.
Immunodiagnosis
Serological techniques: They can detect malarial antibodies, but these tests
are not specific and are not done routinely. The tests include
immunofluorescent assay (IFA) and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA).
Table 4.42 shows comparison of rapid diagnostic tests for malaria antigens.
PCR testing
Molecular diagnosis by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification of
parasite nucleic acid (for parasite messenger RNA or DNA) is more
sensitive than microscopy or rapid diagnostic tests.
Table 4.42: Comparison of rapid diagnostic tests for malaria antigens.
PfHRP2 tests PfHRP2 and PMA test pLDH test
Target antigen Histidine rich protein 2
of P. falciparum, water
soluble protein
expressed on RBC
membranePan-
specific Plasmodium
aldolase, parasite
glycolytic enzyme
produced by all species
and PfHRP2Parasite lactate
dehydrogenase,
parasite glycolytic
enzyme produced by
all species
Capability Detects P. falciparum
onlyCan detect all 4 species Can detect all 4 species
Detection limit >40–100 parasites/µL Higher for P. vivax and
other non-falciparum
species>100–200 parasites/µL
for P. falciparum and
P. vivax; may be higher
for P. malariae and
P. ovale
Cross-reactivity with
autoantibodiesReported, high (up to
83% with rheumatoid
factor)Not known Reported low (3.3%
with rheumatoid factor)
Indication of viability
of parasitesNo No Positive test indicates
presence of viable
parasitemia

Other laboratory findings
Blood:
–   Normochromic normocytic anemia, thrombocytopenia.
–   Total leukocyte count is low to normal, but neutrophil leukocytosis
may be observed in severe infections.
Acute-phase protein: ESR (erythrocyte sedimentation rate), plasma
viscosity, and levels of C-reactive protein are high.
Coagulation study: In severe infections, prothrombin time and partial
thromboplastin time may be prolonged and antithrombin III levels are
decreased.Other findings in sever malaria: In complicated malaria there may be
metabolic acidosis and:
–   Low plasma concentrations of glucose, sodium, bicarbonate, calcium,
magnesium and albumin.
–   Elevated levels of lactate, BUN, creatinine, muscle and liver enzymes,
bilirubin, and gamma globulin.
Neuroimaging in cerebral malaria may show brain swelling, cortical
infarcts and hyperintense areas in white matter.
Q. Write short essay on:
Treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria
Drugs used in resistant malaria/drug resistant malaria. Drugs for
resistant falciparum malaria.
Radical treatment of malaria
Name antimalarial drugs
Management/Treatment
Aims of treatment are presented in Table 4.43.
To counter the threat of resistance of P. falciparum  to monotherapies, and to improve treatment
outcome, combinations of antimalarials are now recommended by WHO for the treatment of
falciparum malaria. Two or more blood schizontocidal drugs with independent modes of action and
thus unrelated biochemical targets in the parasite are used and at present Artemisinin-based
Combination Therapy (ACT) is the recommended treatments for uncomplicated falciparum malaria.Artemisinin-based Combination Therapy (ACT)
Artemisinin and its derivatives (artesunate, artemether, artemotil, and dihydroartemisinin)
produce rapid clearance of parasitemia and rapid resolution of symptoms. They reduce parasite
numbers by a factor of approximately 10,000 in each asexual cycle, which is more than other
current antimalarials (which reduce parasite numbers 100- to 1000-fold per cycle). Artemisinin

and its derivatives are eliminated rapidly.
When given in combination with rapidly eliminated compounds (tetracyclines, clindamycin), a 7-
day course of treatment with an artemisinin compound is required; but when given in combination
with slowly eliminated antimalarials, shorter courses of treatment (3 days) are effective.
Non-artemisinin based combinations (non-aCTs)  include sulfadoxine –pyrimethamine with
chloroquine (SP+CQ) or amodiaquine (SP+AQ). However, the prevailing high levels of resistance
have compromised the efficacy of these combinations. There is no convincing evidence that SP+CQ
provides any additional benefit over SP, so this combination is not recommended.The ACT used in the national program in India is artesunate + sulfadoxine + pyrimethamine. It is
given as:
–   200 mg artesunate along with sulfadoxine 1500 mg and pyrimethamine 75 mg on day 1.
–   200 mg artesunate on days 2 and 3.
Another option is to use quinine 600 mg salt three times daily for 5 days orally, followed by a
single dose of sulfadoxine 1.5 g combined with pyrimethamine 75 mg.
ACTs can be given in second and third trimester of pregnancy. Recommended treatment in first
trimester of pregnancy is quinine.
If sulfonamide sensitivity is suspected, quinine may be followed by tetracycline 250 m 6 hourly
for 7 days.
Box 4.19:  Chemoprophylaxis of malaria.
For short-term chemoprophylaxis (less than 6 weeks), doxycycline in a dose of 100 mg daily. It
should be started 2 days before travel and continued for 4 weeks after leaving the malarious area.
For long-term chemoprophylaxis (more than 6 weeks), mefloquine in a dose of 5 mg/kg (up to
250 mg) weekly. It should be administered 2 weeks before, during and 4 weeks after leaving the
area.
Chemoprophylaxis of malaria is presented in Box 4.19.
Table 4.43: Aims of treatment.
Aims Causation Therapy Drugs
To alleviate symptoms Symptoms are caused
by blood forms of the
parasiteBlood schizonticidal
drugsChloroquine, quinine,
artemisinin
combinations
To prevent relapses Relapses are due to
hypnozoites of P.
vivax/P. ovaleTissue schizonticidal
drugsPrimaquine
To prevent spread Spread is through the
gametocytesGametocytocidal drugs Primaquine for P.
falciparum,
Chloroquine for all
otherOther drugs for treating chloroquine resistant P. falciparum are mefloquine (15 mg/kg followed by
10 mg/kg after 8 hours; generally given as ACT) and halofantrine. Recently, dihydroartemisinin (4
mg/kg/day) + Piperaquine (18 mg/kg/day) combination for three days has been available.

Summary of treatment of malaria is presented in Table 4.44.
Radical cure of malaria due to P. vivax and P. ovale.
Primaquine is given at a dose of 15 mg daily for 14 days. It destroys the hypnozoite phase in the
liver.
Table 4.45 outlines the treatment of severe malaria.
Management of severe manifestations and complications of falciparum malaria is presented in Table
4.46. Recommendations for treatment of uncomplicated P. falciparum malaria in pregnancy is
mentioned in Table 4.47.
Table 4.44: Summary of treatment of malaria.
Type of infection Suppressive treatment Radical treatment
P. vivax and P. ovale Chloroquine 25 mg of
salt/kg over 36–48 hoursPrimaquine 0.25 mg/kg for 14 days
P. malariae and P. knowlesi Chloroquine 25 mg of
salt/kg over 36–48 hoursNone
P. falciparum Treatment depends on
severity and sensitivity
Artesunate +
pyrimethamine-
sulphadoxine or other
ACTs, OR quinine plus
tetracyclinePrimaquine 0.75 mg/kg in single dose
as gametocytocidal
Mixed (P. vivax + P.
falciparum)ACT as for P. falciparum Primaquine as for P. vivax
Table 4.45: Treatment of severe malaria.
First drug Follow-on treatment (Full course of any ACT)
Artesunate 2.4 mg/kg body weight (bw) IV or IM
on admission; then at 12 h and 24 h, then once a
day for at least 24 hours, followed by full course
of ACT ORArtesunate plus sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine
Artesunate plus amodiaquine
Artesunate plus clindamycin or doxycycline
Artemether 3.2 mg/kg bw IM given on admission
then 1.6 mg/kg bw per day for at least 24 hours,
followed by full course of ACTArtemether plus lumefantrine
Dihydroartemisinin+Piperaquine
Quinine, 20 mg salt/kg bw on admission (iv
infusion or divided IM injection), then 10 mg/kg
bw every 8 h; infusion rate should not exceed 5
mg salt/kg bw per hour; course for 3 daysDoxycycline 100 mg BID (2.2 mg/kg BID for
<45 kg) for 7 days OR clindamycin 20 mg
base/kg/day divided in three doses for 7 days in
pregnancy
Table 4.46: Management of severe manifestations and complications of
falciparum malaria.

Manifestation/complication Immediate management (in addition to
antimalarial treatment)
Coma (cerebral malaria) Maintain airway, place patient on his or her side,
exclude other treatable causes of coma (e.g.
hypoglycemia, bacterial meningitis); avoid
harmful ancillary treatment such as
corticosteroids, heparin and adrenaline; intubate
if necessary
Hyperpyrexia Administer tepid sponging, fanning, cooling
blanket and antipyretic drugs
Convulsions Maintain airways; treat promptly with
intravenous or rectal diazepam or intramuscular
paraldehyde
Hypoglycemia Check blood glucose, correct hypoglycemia and
maintain with glucose-containing infusion
Severe anemia Transfuse with screened fresh whole blood
Acute pulmonary edema Over-enthusiastic rehydration should be avoided
so as to prevent pulmonary edema. Prop patient
up at an angle of 45°, give oxygen, give a
diuretic, stop intravenous fluids, intubate and add
positive end-expiratory pressure/continuous
positive airway pressure in life-threatening
hypoxemia
Acute renal failure Exclude prerenal causes, check fluid balance and
urinary sodium; if in established renal failure add
hemofiltration or hemodialysis, or if unavailable,
peritoneal dialysis. The benefits of
diuretics/dopamine in acute renal failure are not
proven
Spontaneous bleeding and coagulopathy Transfuse with screened fresh whole blood
(cryoprecipitate, fresh frozen plasma and
platelets if available); give vitamin K injection
Metabolic acidosis Exclude or treat hypoglycemia, hypovolemia and
septicemia. If severe add hemofiltration or
hemodialysis
Shock Suspect septicemia, take blood for cultures; give
parenteral antimicrobials, correct hemodynamic
disturbances
Hyperparasitemia Treat with artemisinins, intravenously or orally
Table 4.47: Recommendations for treatment of uncomplicated P.
falciparum malaria in pregnancy.
First trimester Quinine + clindamycin for 7 days. ACT should be used if it is the only
effective treatment available

Second and third
trimestersACT known to be effective in the country/region or artesunate +
clindamycin to be given for 7 days or quinine + clindamycin to be given for
7 days
Q. Write short note on uses of chloroquine (conditions in which
chloroquine is used).
Uses of chloroquine are listed in Box 4.20.
Box 4.20: Uses of chloroquine.
Drug of choice for clinical cure and suppressive prophylaxis of all types of malaria, except that
caused by resistant P. falciparum
Extraintestinal Amebiasis
Rheumatoid arthritis, SLE, chikungunya
Discoid lupus erythematosus
Lepra reactions
Photogenic reactions
Infectious mononucleosis (symptomatic relief)
Tropical Splenomegaly Syndrome (TSS)
Q. Write short essay/note on tropical splenomegaly syndrome (TSS).
Tropical splenomegaly syndrome or big spleen disease, also known as
hyper-reactive malarial splenomegaly is massive enlargement of the spleen
resulting from abnormal immune response to repeated attacks of malaria. It is
seen among residents of endemic areas of malaria.
It is one of the chronic complications of malaria.
Etiopathogenesis
Chronic or repeated malarial infections produce
hypergammaglobulinemia; normocytic normochromic anemia; and
massive splenomegaly.
TSS syndrome is characterized by the production of cytotoxic IgM
antibodies to CD8+ T lymphocytes, antibodies to CD5+ T lymphocytes,
and an increase in the ratio of CD4+ to CD8+ T cells. These result in
continuous IgM production by B cell and the formation of cryoglobulins
(IgM aggregates and immune complexes). This stimulates
reticuloendothelial hyperplasia and leads to splenomegaly.
Clinical features

Anemia and some degree of pancytopenia are usually found.
There is increased vulnerability to respiratory and skin infections and
many may die due to overwhelming sepsis.
Physical examination shows massive splenomegaly, hepatomegaly and
occasionally low-grade fever.
The disease generally runs a benign course. Portal hypertension does not
develop and the condition is reversible with antimalarial treatment. Some
may evolve into malignant lymphoproliferative disorder (e.g. CLL).
Diagnosis of TSS
Antimalarial antibodies: High levels of antimalarial antibodies are found
in blood. IgM levels are markedly elevated (up to 20 times).
There is increase in the serum levels of polyclonal IgM with
cryoglobulinemia, reduced C3 and the rheumatoid factor may be positive.
Liver biopsy:
–   Light microscopy of liver shows sinusoidal lymphocytosis and Kupffer
cell hyperplasia.
–   Immunofluorescence microscopy shows IgM aggregates
phagocytosed by RE cells.
Peripheral blood: The peripheral smear shows normocytic normochromic
anemia with increased reticulocyte count. Leukopenia and
thrombocytopenia may also be seen due to hypersplenism. Malarial
parasites are not found  in the peripheral blood.
Treatment of tropical splenomegaly syndromeChloroquine weekly or proguanil daily have been found to be useful. These drugs may have to be
continued for long periods, possibly for life.
Severe anemia may require blood transfusion.
Splenectomy may do more harm than good and it may be beneficial in only patients with splenic
lymphoma.
Splenic irradiation or antimitotic therapy are not beneficial and may be even dangerous.
Malaria vaccines
Q. Write short note on malarial vaccines.
Vaccine types
The candidate malaria vaccines target the different phases of the parasite’s life cycle.
The pre-erythrocytic vaccines  target sporozoites or schizont infected liver cells and is aimed at
preventing infection by stopping the progression of hepatic stage. Even a single sporozoite

escaping vaccine-induced immunity may cause a fully pathogenic blood stage infection, as was
found during the clinical trials of the latest antisporozoite RTS, S vaccine.
The erythrocytic stage vaccines are aimed at reducing parasite multiplication and growth in order
to protect against clinical disease, particularly severe disease. These vaccines are designed to
induce antibody responses against the targets on the asexual blood stage of the parasite such as
merozoite surface proteins (such as MSP-1) or those contained in specialized organelles associated
with invasion (such as AMA-1). But, the very short duration during which merozoites stay outside
the red cells (about 2 minutes), the high degree of polymorphic variability, and the use of
alternative invasion pathways by P. falciparum .Transmission-blocking vaccines  are aimed at reducing malaria transmission by interrupting the
parasite life-cycle in the mosquito by inducing antibodies that prevent either fertilization of the
gametes in the mosquito gut or the further development of the zygote into sporozoites. These
vaccines do not protect the immunized individual but rather provide herd benefit. antidisease
vaccination, by preventing the parasite surface protein parasite-derived Plasmodium falciparum
erythrocyte membrane protein 1 (PfEMP1) from interacting with various vascular endothelial cell-
surface receptors, may block the sequestration of parasite-infected erythrocytes and prevent the
serious complications such as cerebral malaria or placental malaria.
All these vaccines are in clinical trial stages. RTS, S is the most recently developed recombinant
vaccine. It consists of the P. falciparum circumsporozoite protein from the pre-erythrocytic stage has
been approved to vaccinate children aged 6 weeks to 17 months outside the European Union.
Leishmaniasis
Q. Write short note on Leishmaniasis.
Leishmaniasis is a group of diseases caused by unicellular, flagellate,
intracellular protozoa of the genus Leishmania, which are transmitted by the
bite of the female phlebotomine sandfly.
Clinical Syndromes
Visceral Leishmaniasis (Kala-azar)
Q. Write short note on kala-azar or visceral leishmaniasis.
Visceral leishmaniasis (kala-azar) is a generalized visceral infection caused
by the protozoon Leishmania donovani  complex (comprising L. donovani , L.
infantum and L.chagasi).
Epidemiology
Mode of transmission: Sandfly of the Genera Phlebotomus.
Endemic:
–   Kala-azar is endemic in several countries. More than 90% of visceral
leishmaniasis are found in India, Bangladesh, Southern Sudan, Nepal
and Brazil.

–   In India, it is endemic in the states of Bihar, West Bengal, Eastern parts
of Uttar Pradesh and parts of Odisha.
Sporadic  cases have been reported from several other parts of India.
Life cycle of leishmania (Fig. 4.21)
Leishmania occur in two forms: (1) extracellular, flagellate promastigote
form in the sandfly vector and (2) intracellular, nonflagellate amastigote form
in humans.
Incubation period: Usually 1–6 months, but may be several years.
Clinical features of kala-azar
Age group: In India, adults and children are equally affected whereas
elsewhere it is mainly seen small children and infants (except in adults
with HIV coinfection).
Organs involved: It primarily affects the host’s reticuloendothelial
system. In visceral leishmaniasis, monocytes and macrophages of the
spleen, liver, bone marrow and lymph nodes are primarily affected.Onset: Great majority of individuals infected remain asymptomatic and
onset in others may be abrupt.
Fever: It is the first sign of infection. Few patients present with a low-
grade fever, whereas others present with a high-grade, usually
accompanied by rigor and chills. The fever is intermittent showing a
double rise of temperature in 24 hours (‘camel hump fever’). The intensity
of fever decreases over time, and patients may be afebrile for intervening
periods ranging from weeks to months. This is followed by a relapse of
fever which is often less intense.

Fig. 4.21:  Life cycle of leishmaniasis.
Physical findings
Massive splenomegaly and hepatomegaly: Splenomegaly develops in
the first few weeks and becomes massive as the disease progresses.
Moderate hepatomegaly develops later.
Lymphadenopathy: It is common in patients in Africa, the Mediterranean
and South America. In India it is more common in patients from West
Bengal.Blackish discoloration of the skin: Disease derived its name; kala-azar is
derived from the Hindi word for ‘black fever’. Generalized blackish
pigmentation with rough skin is prominent over face is an observed in
advanced stage of disease and now it is rare.Anemia: Moderate to severe anemia develops rapidly, and can produce
congestive cardiac failure and associated clinical features.
Bleeding manifestations: Thrombocytopenia, often associated with

hepatic dysfunction, may cause bleeding from the retina, gastrointestinal
tract and nose.
Cause of death: Death usually occurs within a year and is either due to
bacterial infection or uncontrolled bleeding.
Complications
Hypoalbuminemia: May develop in advanced stage and may manifest as
pedal edema, ascites and anasarca (gross generalized edema and swelling).
Immunosuppression: As the disease advances, severe
immunosuppression may lead to secondary infections. These include
tuberculosis, pneumonia, malaria, severe amebic or bacillary dysentery,
gastroenteritis, herpes zoster and chickenpox. Skin infections (e.g. boils,
cellulitis, scabies and cancrum oris) are common.Investigations
Direct evidences
Demonstration of amastigotes (Leishman–Donovan bodies): It can be
demonstrated in stained smears of aspirates of bone marrow (50–70%
cases), spleen (70–90% cases), liver, lymph nodes or buffy coat of
peripheral blood. Demonstration of LD bodies in splenic smears is the
most useful for the diagnosis (98% sensitivity); however, there is a risk of
serious hemorrhage in inexperienced hands. It is the gold standard for the
diagnosis of visceral leishmaniasis (VL).Culture: The aspirated material can be cultured in the Novy-MacNeal-
Nicolle (NNN) medium for the organism.
Indirect evidences
Blood: Pancytopenia is a common feature (i.e. anemia, granulocytopenia
and thrombocytopenia).
Biochemical findings:
–   Low serum albumin (hypoalbuminemia) and polyclonal
hypergammaglobulinemia (high serum globulin), chiefly IgG
followed by IgM in advanced cases.
–   Liver function test: Mildly elevated bilirubin, AST/ALT and alkaline
phosphatase may be seen.
Serological/immunodiagnostic tests:
–   These are less invasive and are useful in community surveillance

studies.
–   Leishmanin (Montenegro) skin test: Intradermal injection of killed
culture of promastigotes produces a delayed-type hypersensitivity and
is positive only in patients with cured kala-azar.
–   Napier’s aldehyde (formal gel) test and Chopra’s antimony test:
These are nonspecific test and should not be employed for the
diagnosis of VL. They are used for demonstration of increased
immunoglobulins.
–   Detection of specific antibody:
    Various test such as complement fixation test, indirect
hemagglutination test, indirect fluorescent antibody test and
countercurrent immunoglobulins have poor sensitivity and specificity.Antigen detection by reverse western blotting, dot-enzyme immunoassay
(EIA) and latex agglutination test.
PCR: To detect DNA and identify species.
Post-Kala-azar Dermal Leishmaniasis (PKDL)
Time of occurrence: In India, Sudan and other East African countries, 2–
50% of patients develop skin lesions due to local parasitic infection
concurrent with or after apparent recovery or cure of visceral leishmaniasis.
Clinical features
Skin lesions may be of three types namely: hypopigmented macules, papules
or nodules and can occur in varying combinations:
Hypopigmented macules: Earliest lesions and usually found on the trunk
and extremities.
Erythematous patches: These have butterfly distribution on the face.
Yellowish pink nodules: They are generally found on the skin and rarely
on mucus membrane of tongue and eye.
Diagnosis: Demonstration of parasite in the slit smear or by culture of the
dermal tissue.
Treatment
Q. Drugs used to treat kala-azar
General considerations:  Blood transfusions to correct severe anemia and treatment of intercurrent
bacterial infections with antibiotics.

Pentavalent antimonial compounds
Pentavalent antimonial compounds (sodium stibogluconate, meglumine antimoniate) were the first
drugs to be used for the treatment of leishmaniasis and still remain the mainstay of treatment.
The dose are 20 mg/kg either intravenously or intramuscularly for 40 days. However, many
patients may fail to respond due to parasitic resistance.
Side effects:  Include arthralgias, myalgias, abdominal pain, raised liver enzymes, pancreatitis (in
immunosuppressed patients), ECG changes (T wave inversion and reduced amplitude) and rarely
death due to cardiotoxicity.
For PKDL treatment for 3–4 months is necessary.
Amphotericin B
Q. Write short note on amphotericin B and its side effects.
Amphotericin B deoxycholate is currently used as a primary drug of choice in Bihar, India. In other
parts of the world, it is used as a second line drug when patient is unresponsive to initial antimonial
treatment.Dose: 0.75–1.00 mg/kg given once daily or on alternate days for a total of 15–20 infusion. It has a
cure rate of almost 100%.
Side effects: Infusion-related side effects  include high fever with chills, thrombophlebitis,
diarrhea and vomiting are common. Other side effects include hypokalemia and renal or hepatic
toxicity and thrombocytopenia.
Lipid formulations of amphotericin b: Some of above side effects of amphotericin B
deoxycholate can be reduced by using lipid- preparations B lipid complex and amphotericin B
colloidal dispersion. In India, liposomal amphotericin B is administered at a total dose of 10 or 15
mg/kg, administered in a single dose or as multiple doses over several days. It may be combined
with 7–14 days of oral miltefosine.
MiltefosineMiltefosine is an alkyl phospholipid administered orally has shown excellent results. It is the first
highly effective, oral drug for treating visceral leishmaniasis.
Dose: 50 mg once a day if weight is <25 kg, and 50 mg twice a day if weight is >25 kg. Duration
of treatment is 28 days.
Side effects include vomiting and diarrhea, and occasionally, reversible hepatotoxicity and
nephrotoxicity.
Pentamidine
Pentamidine isethionate was used. Dose of 3–4 mg/kg on alternate days for 5–25 weeks was
recommended as a second-line drug to treat antimony resistant cases. However, it is abandoned
because of its reduced effectiveness and serious side effects (e.g. hypoglycemia hypotension and
induction of diabetes mellitus).
Other drugsParomomycin (aminosidine): It is antibiotic with antileishmanial action and is highly effective and
safe drug. It is given intramuscularly at dose of 11 mg of base/kg daily for 21 days;
Azoles: ketoconazole, fluconazole, itraconazole
–   These oral antifungal agents have variable efficacy in leishmaniasis treatment.
Toxoplasmosis

Q. Discuss the etiology, clinical manifestations, diagnosis and
management of toxoplasmosis.
Toxoplasmosis is caused by the intracellular protozoan parasite Toxoplasma
gondii .
Life Cycle of Toxoplasma gondii
Man is the intermediate host and cat is the definitive host.
Mode of Transmission
Humans infection occurs via ingestion of:
–   Oocyst discharged in the feces of infected reservoir animal (cat),
contaminated salads, vegetables and water.
–   Raw or undercooked meats containing tissue cysts (bradyzoites).
Sheep, pigs and rabbits are the most common meat sources.
Transplacental infection from mother to fetus may also occur.
Clinical Manifestations
Q. Write short note on clinical features of toxoplasmosis.
Infection in immunocompetent host
Asymptomatic: Most acute toxoplasmosis is subclinical and goes
unnoticed.
Painless lymphadenopathy: In symptomatic patients, it is the most
common presenting feature. It may local or generalized and cervical
lymphadenopathy is most common.Other features:
–   Systemic symptoms are not observed in most patients. If present, these
include fever, malaise, fatigue, myalgias, sore throat and headache.
–   Uncommon features are skin rash and confusion.
–   Rarely: Myocarditis, encephalitis, pneumonia, hepatitis, and
polymyositis.
Completely resolution occurs within a few weeks to months.
Ocular infection:
–   Most often ocular involvement (chorioretinitis) observed in congenital

infection
–   Examination shows gray white foci of retinal necrosis with adjacent
choroiditis, vasculitis, hemorrhage and vitreitis. Anterior uveitis may
also be seen.
Infection in immunocompromised host
In immunocompromised patients, toxoplasmosis is usually due to
reactivation of latent infection.
Central nervous system:
–   It is the most common system affected.
–   Manifestations include encephalopathy, meningoencephalitis, seizures,
headache and focal neurological deficits.
Pneumonia and ocular involvement may also occur.
Congenital toxoplasmosis
Q. Write short note on congenital toxoplasmosis.
Transmission
Acute toxoplasmosis is mostly subclinical and develops in 0.3–1% of
pregnant women.
Clinical manifestations
Congenital toxoplasmosis may be asymptomatic, but can produce serious
disease.
CNS: Manifestations include hydrocephalus, microcephaly, encephalitis,
convulsions, tremors, paralysis and mental retardation. Cerebrospinal fluid
may be xanthochromic with raised protein and mononuclear cells. Skull
radiograph may show patches of calcification in the brain.Ophthalmic manifestations: Microphthalmus, nystagmus, chorioretinitis
(common) and blindness.
Other features: Hepatomegaly, jaundice, thrombocytopenia and purpura
may be seen.
Investigations
Blood: Mild lymphocytosis, raised ESR and mild increase in liver
enzymes.

Serodiagnosis: Presence of significant levels of Toxoplasma specific IgM
antibody indicates acute infection and absence of IgM antibodies virtually
rules out acute infection. However, in immunocompromised patients most
of the time toxoplasmosis is due to reactivation and there is no rise in IgM
antibody. Hence, IgG antibodies are used for presumptive diagnosis.
–   Sabin–Feldman methylene blue dye test: A dye test positive with a
titer of 1:128 is diagnostic of active toxoplasmosis.
–   Indirect fluorescent antibody test
–   Fluorescent stain for toxoplasma (Goldman’s test): It is useful for
detection of parasites in smears and biopsy specimens.
–   ELISA test.PCR for toxoplasma DNA in ocular secretions and amniotic fluid.
Microscopic examination  of smear or biopsy material (from a lymph
node or muscle) shows the parasite.
Inoculation  of suspected material into laboratory-bred mice, guinea pigs
may show characteristic histological changes. These include any of the
three infectious stages: tachyzoites in groups, bradyzoites (tissue cysts) or
sporozoites within oocyst.
Investigations in toxoplasma encephalitis:
–   CSF  may be normal or show mild increase in cells and protein
–   Serum: IgG antibodies to toxoplasma
–   Radiological: CT scan of head may show multiple contrast-enhancing
lesions. However, MRI is more sensitive than CT scan in identifying
the lesions. Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT)
helps in differentiating CNS lymphoma from toxoplasmic encephalitis.
Management
Acquired uncomplicated toxoplasmosis in an immunocompetent individual is self-limiting and
does not require treatment.
Treatment for severe (especially eye involvement) or progressive disease and for infection in
immunocompromised patients:
–   Combination of sulfadiazine 2–4 g daily (1 g 6 hourly) and pyrimethamine in a single
loading dose 25 mg daily both for 4–6 weeks, along with folinic acid/leucovorin. Steroids are
added to the above regime for ocular toxoplasmosis.
–   If the patient is sensitive to sulfonamides, clindamycin or azithromycin can be used.Toxoplasmosis in pregnant women:
–   If a seronegative women acquires toxoplasmosis during pregnancy (especially during first
trimester), or seroconverts during pregnancy, there is a greater risk of transmitting the infection

to fetus giving rise to an infant with congenital toxoplasmosis. Such pregnancies should be
terminated.
–   The aim of management of pregnant women with toxoplasmosis is to reduce the risk of fetal
complications.
–   The recommended treatment for a pregnant woman with an established recent infection is
spiramycin  (3 g daily in divided doses) until term. However, whether it has any significant
effect on the frequency or severity of fetal damage is not well established. Infected infants
should be treated from birth.
INFECTIONS CAUSED BY HELMINTHS
CESTODES (TAPEWORMS)
Cestodes (tapeworms) are ribbon-shaped worms which vary from a few
millimeters to several meters in length.
Life Cycle (Fig. 4.22)
The tapeworm passes its life cycle in two hosts:
Definitive host: Human is the definitive host and harbors the adult worm.
Intermediate host: It may be pig or cattle depending on type of tapeworm
and they harbor larval forms.

Fig. 4.22: Life cycle of Taenia solium.
Taenia solium
Q. Write a short note on taeniasis solium and cysticercosis.
Taenia solium, the pork tapeworm, inhabits the intestinal lumen of humans
(only definitive host). Adult worms are found only in human. Pigs are the
usual intermediate hosts.
Disease in Humans
Taenia solium causes
Intestinal infection: If a cysticerci present in the undercooked pork is
ingested
Cysticercosis (systemic infection from larval migration): If ova present in
contaminated food and water are ingested. Feco-oral autoinfection can
occur but is rare.
Patients with tapeworms usually do not develop cysticercosis and patients

with cysticercosis do not usually harbor tapeworms.
Cysticercosis
It is the condition in which human tissue is invaded by the larval form of
Taenia solium.
Mode of infection
Human cysticercosis results from ingestion of ova/eggs of Taenia solium
which have contaminated water or vegetable .
Feco-oral autoinfection: Human harboring adult worm may autoinfect
himself either due to unhygienic personal habits.
Reversal of peristaltic movements of the intestine whereby gravid
segments are thrown back to the stomach which is releases thousands of
eggs into the stomach.The common sites of cysticerci are subcutaneous tissue, skeletal muscle,
brain and eyes.
Clinical features
Q. Write short note on neurocysticercosis.
Intestinal infection: Presence of adult tapeworm in the intestine is usually do
not produce symptoms. It is usually discovered when proglottids are found in
feces or on underclothing.
Cysticercosis: They are usually range from 10 to 1000.Superficially placed cysts: Those in subcutaneous tissues and muscles
cause few or no symptoms. They produce palpable or visible nodule (pea-
like ovoid bodies) under the skin or mucosa. Eventually they die and
undergo dystrophic calcification. The dead larvae may cause marked
tissue response resulting in muscular pain, weakness, fever and
eosinophilia.Neurocysticercosis results from cysts in the brain. Heavy brain infections
may present with meningoencephalitis, epilepsy, personality changes,
staggering gait, space-occupying lesion, stroke (due to inflammatory
changes in the wall of intracranial arteries located in the vicinity of
cysticerci) or hydrocephalus. The cerebral signs usually occur after 5–20
years when the larvae die.Diagnosis

Stool examination: Eggs and proglottides in stool.
Radiological investigations:
–   Radiographs of involved soft tissue (buttocks and thigh) may show
calcified cysts (cigar-shaped/rice grain calcification) in muscles (Fig.
4.23).
Fig. 4.23:  X-ray thigh and shows cigar-shaped/rice grain calcification due to calcified cysts of
tapeworm in muscles.
–   CT scan  of the brain may show calcified cysticerci, small hypodense
lesions (ring or disc-like enhancing lesion) or small hypodense lesions
with central bright spot. CT scan is more sensitive than MRI for
identifying calcified cysts.
–   MRI scan: It is better for identifying cystic lesions, enhancement and
cysticercosis in the ventricles.Serological test: Specific enzyme linked immunoelectrodiffusion transfer
blot (EITB) using lentil-lectin purified glycoproteins is highly sensitive
and specific. IFA and ELISA test are also useful.Histological examination of the excised subcutaneous nodule or the

lesion will show cysticerci.
Q. Write short note on:
Drug treatment of tapeworm.
Treatment of neurocysticercosis.
Treatment
Intestinal infection
For the adult worm in the intestine: Niclosamide (2 g as a single dose), praziquantel (5 mg/kg) or
albendazole.
Neurocysticercosis
Albendazole:  15 mg/kg/day for 2–4 weeks is the drug of choice for parenchymal
neurocysticercosis.
An alternative drug is praziquantel  (PZQ) in the dose of 50 mg/kg in three divided doses daily for
10 days. Single day course is effective in patients with a single cyst or low cyst burdens, but is less
efficacious in those with heavier cyst burdens.
Corticosteroids:  Successful treatment is accompanied by increased local inflammation. Hence,
prednisolone  is given in the dose of 10 mg 8 hourly for 14 days, starting 1 day before, during and
after the course of anthelminthic (albendazole or PZQ).
Antiepileptic drugs should be administered for epilepsy until the reaction in the brain has
subsided.
Operative intervention  may be necessary for internal hydrocephalus.
Echinococcus granulosus (Taenia echinococcus) and Hydatid
Disease
Q. Write short note on hydatid disease.

Life Cycle of Echinococcus granulosus (Fig. 4.24)
Definitive host: Dog, wolf, fox and jackal are the definitive host.
Intermediate host: Human, sheep, pig, cattle, goat, etc. are intermediate
host.
Hydatid Disease
Hydatid cyst is the larval stage of E. granulosus producing tissue infection o f
humans or other intermediate hosts (sheep, cattle, camels and other animals
from contaminated water).
Mode of infection: Human is infected accidentally by ingestion of eggs
while handling a dog or drinking contaminated water. Canines (especially
dogs) are the definitive hosts for E. granulosus.
Clinical featuresHumans may ingest the eggs while handling a dog or contaminated water.
Usually, hydatid cyst is acquired in childhood and diagnosed after a latent
period of 5–20 years. It may cause pressure symptoms and vary,
depending on the site of the cyst (organ or tissue involved).

Fig. 4.24:  Life cycle of Echinococcus granulosus.
Liver: In about 75% of the patients, hydatid disease involves the right
lobe of the liver and it contains a single cyst. The lesions in liver often
present as palpable masses or abdominal pain.
–   Obstruction of bile duct may produce obstructive jaundice.
–   Intrabiliary extrusion of calcified hepatic cysts can cause recurrent
cholecystitis.
Rupture of a hydatid cysts: May occur into the bile duct, peritoneal
cavity, lung, pleura or bronchus. It may cause fever, pruritus, urticarial
rash or an anaphylactoid reaction which may be fatal.

Pulmonary hydatid cyst may rupture producing cough, chest pain or
hemoptysis.
Hydatid cyst in central nervous system may produce epilepsy or
blindness.
Other organs involved: Rarely bone, heart, kidneys, spleen, ovary and
thyroid.
Gross appearance of hydatid cyst is shown in Figure 4.25A.
Diagnosis
Radiological:
–   X-ray: Routine chest radiographs is helpful in the diagnosis of hydatid
cysts of lung. Lung lesions appear as round, irregular masses of
uniform density. The ‘meniscus sign’ or ‘crescent sign’ is due to the
presence of air between the pericyst and the laminated membrane. The
‘water lily sign’ is due to an endocyst floating in a partially fluid-filled
cyst. Occasionally, a chest X-ray may show smooth rim of calcified
hepatic cyst.
–   CT scan (Fig. 4.25B), ultrasonography and MRI can identify the
hydatid cysts by showing scolices and daughter cysts.Casoni’s skin test is performed by intradermal injection of 0.2 mL of
fresh sterile hydatid fluid. Positive test produces immediate
hypersensitivity reaction (not routinely available).Serological test:
–   Precipitin reaction, complement fixation, immunofluorescent tests and
ELISA are positive in 70–90% of patients.
–   IHAT, ELISA using specific echinococcal antigens.
Q. Write short note on medical management of hydatid disease.
Management/treatment
Surgical excision of the cysts wherever possible is the treatment of choice. Great care is needed to
avoid spillage of fluid and cavities are sterilized with 0.5% silver nitrate or 2.7% sodium chloride.
In inoperable cases, ‘high-dose’ albendazole (7.5 mg/kg/twice daily or 400 mg twice daily) is
given for 1–3 months. In selected cases, the drug can combined with PAIR (percutaneous
puncture, aspiration, injection of scolicidal agent and reaspiration).Praziquantel (20 mg/kg twice daily for 14 days) kills protoscolices and useful perioperatively.

Figs. 4.25A and B:  (A) Gross appearance of hydatid cyst; (B) Hydatid cyst on CT abdomen.
Enterobius vermicularis (Threadworm/Pinworm)
Q. Write a short note on enterobiasis, pinworm infection and
threadworm infection.
Enterobiasis is an intestinal infection of humans caused by Enterobius
vermicularis (threadworm).
Mode of Infection
Humans are usually infected by the ingestion of eggs by direct transfer of
eggs from the anus to the mouth by way of contaminated fingers or through
contaminated food or water. Retroinfection occurs when the eggs hatch in the
perianal region and the larvae migrate back into the bowel lumen.
Clinical Features
Q. Write a short note on clinical features of Enterobius vermicularis.
Perianal itching (Pruritus ani): It is the most common symptom,
especially at night. This is due to the gravid female worm which migrates
to anal region at night and lays ova around perianal region causing intense
itching at night. The ova are carried to the mouth on the fingers and so
reinfection or human-to-human infection is common (autoinfection). The
adult worms may be seen moving on the buttocks or in the stool.In females: Migration of adult worm into the female genitalia. It may

result in vaginal discharge, salpingitis and endometritis.
Other symptoms include irritability, insomnia and enuresis.
Investigations and Diagnoses
Q. Write a short note on laboratory features of pinworm infestations.
Direct visualizing the worms in the perineal and perianal region.
Stool examination  for eggs may be positive in only 5–10% cases.
–   Cellophane tape test: This test is performed by touching the adhesive
surface of cellophane tape to the perianal area of skin several times in
the morning and removing. It is then examined for eggs on a glass slide
under the microscope. Sensitivity of test is about 90%.
Treatment/Management
Pyrantel pamoate given in a single oral dose of 11 mg/kg is the treatment of choice.
Other drugs:  A single oral dose of mebendazole (100 mg), albendazole (400 mg) or piperazine
(4 g).
Recurring infections:  If infection constantly recurs in a family, each family member should be
given mebendazole 100 mg twice daily for 3 days. This should be repeated after 2 weeks (for also
to control autoreinfection). During this period all night clothes and bed linens are laundered.
Finger nails must be trimmed and hands are washed before meals.
Ascaris lumbricoides (Roundworm)
Q. Write short note on ascariasis or roundworm infection.
Ascariasis is an infection of humans caused by nematode Ascaris
lumbricoides.
Clinical Features
Q. Write short note on complications of roundworm infestations.
Infection is usually asymptomatic.
Heavy infections are associated with nausea, vomiting, abdominal
discomfort, anorexia and malnutrition (fat, protein, carbohydrate and
vitamins) especially in children. However, serious morbidity and mortality
are rare in ascariasis.The adult worm may be vomited or passed in the stool.
Mechanical effects: The large size of the adult worm and its tendency to

aggregate can form bolus of adult worms. It may produce volvulus,
intussusception or obstruction of the small intestine (most common in the
terminal ileum), hemorrhagic infarction and perforation.
Ectopic Ascariasis:
–   They may occasionally migrate and invade the appendix (causing acute
appendicitis), or the bile duct (causing biliary obstruction, suppurative
cholangitis and liver abscess) and pancreatic ducts (pancreatitis).
–   Pulmonary: Larval migration through the lungs may produce
pulmonary eosinophilia, ascaris bronchopneumonia (characterized by
fever, cough, dyspnea, wheeze, eosinophilic leukocytosis and
migratory pulmonary infiltrates), eosinophilic granulomas, bronchial
asthma and urticaria.Investigations and Diagnoses
Stool examination: Microscopically shows typical ova in the feces and
occasionally adult worms are expelled from the mouth or the anus.
Radiographic study: barium examination may demonstrate the worms.
Blood shows eosinophilia.
Management/Treatment
Intestinal ascariasis:  A single dose of albendazole (400 mg), pyrantel pamoate (11 mg/kg;
maximum 1 g), ivermectin (150–200 μg/ kg) or mebendazole (100 mg twice daily for 3 days). The
older drug, piperazine citrate is highly effective and less expensive, but slightly more toxic.
Obstruction  due to ascariasis adult worms should be treated with nasogastric suction, piperazine
citrate and intravenous fluids. Very rarely, surgical or endoscopic intervention may be needed for
intestinal or biliary obstruction.
Ascaris bronchopneumonia is treated symptomatically.
Trichuris trichiura (Whipworm)
Q. Write a short note on trichuriasis/whipworm infection.
Trichuriasis is an intestinal infection of humans caused by Trichuris trichiura
(whipworm).
Clinical Features
Infection is usually asymptomatic, but mucosal damage at the attachment
of worm in the intestine can produce petechiae. This may cause loss of
0.005 mL blood/worm/day by the patient and cause anemia.

Occasionally intense infections in children may cause severe mucosal
damage leading to colonic ulceration, persistent diarrhea/dysentery,
growth retardation or rectal prolapse.
Treatment:  Mebendazole in the dose of 100 mg twice daily for 3 days or albendazole 400 mg once
daily for 3 days in the treatment of choice. Heavy infections may need repetitions of dose.
Ancylostomiasis (Hookworm)
Q. Discuss the etiopathogenesis, clinical features, and management and
prevention of hookworm disease.
Ancylostomiasis is a symptomatic infection caused by parasitization with
human hookworms Ancylostoma duodenale or Necator americanus.
Hookworm infection is one of the major causes of anemia in the tropics
and subtropics.
Ancylostoma duodenale or old-world hookworm is found in East Asia,
Africa, China, Japan, India and the Pacific Islands. Necator americanus or
new-world hookworm is found in South and Central America and the
Caribbean.
Mode of Infection
It occurs through skin by filariform larvae when human walks bare-foot on
the focally contaminated soil.
Clinical Features
Lesion in skin: Allergic dermatitis/ itching dermatitis (‘ground itch
dermatitis’) develops at the site of entry of the infective filariform larvae.
The lesions are usually on the feet, particularly between the toes.
Pulmonary manifestations: The passage of larvae through the lungs in a
heavy infection produces cough with blood-stained sputum, fever. There
may be bronchitis, patchy pulmonary consolidation/bronchopneumonia
and eosinophilia.Gastrointestinal manifestations: Light infections (especially in well-
nourished individuals) are often asymptomatic. When the worms have
reached the small intestine, heavier worm loads may be produce epigastric
pain, nausea, and vomiting resembling peptic ulcer disease. Other
symptoms include abdominal distension, pica, and small frequent loose

stools.
Pathological effects: Chronic heavy infection, particularly on a
background of malnourishment, may cause:
–   Iron deficiency anemia due to chronic intestinal blood loss.
–   Hypoproteinemia/hypoalbuminemia
–   Retarded physical, mental and sexual development may occur in
older children with heavy infection in children.
Investigations and Diagnoses
Stool examination:
–   Microscopic examination  of stool shows the characteristic
eggs/ovum. The eggs of both Ancylostoma duodenale and Necator
americanus are 60–70 µm in length and bounded by an ovoid
transparent hyaline membrane.
–   Occult blood: The stools rarely show gross blood, but tests for occult
blood are usually positive.
Blood:
–   Peripheral blood smear: Characteristically shows microcytic
hypochromic anemia. There may be eosinophilia (as high as 70 –
80%) in some cases.
–   Hemoglobin  level is usually low.
Hypoalbuminemia is a common in severe disease.
Q. Write short essay/note on:
Treatment of ancylostomiasis
Mention the drugs used in ancylostoma infestation.
Treatment/Management
Drugs:  A single dose of albendazole in the dose of 400 mg is the treatment of choice. Other drugs
include mebendazole (100 mg twice daily for 3 days), and pyrantel pamoate (single oral dose of
11 mg/kg). Eradication of infestation should be confirmed by follow-up stool examination 2 weeks
after discontinuation of treatment.
Improvement of nutrition with a high-protein diet.
Anemia:  Mild anemia usually responds to oral iron therapy. Severe anemia is often associated
with anasarca, and heart failure. This should be treated carefully if required with blood
transfusions.

Cutaneous Larva Migrans (Creeping Eruption)
Q. Write short note on cutaneous larva migrans (creeping eruption).
Definition: Cutaneous larva migrans (CLM) is a creeping eruptions in the
skin caused by the filariform larvae which aimlessly wander through the
skin for weeks or months producing a reddish itch papule along the path of
travel of the larvae (termed ‘larva migrans’).Cause: Cutaneous larva migrans is particularly observed with non-human
hookworms namely Ancylostoma braziliense and A. caninum.
–   Strongyloides stercoralis may produce creeping eruptions and its
filariform larvae moves rapidly in short line; hence it is termed larva
currens (reflecting fast movement of strongyloides larva) (Fig. 4.26).
Sites affected: The main sites affected in cutaneous larva migrans are the
dorsum and sole of the feet, buttocks, pelvic waist, legs and shoulders.
Infestation is usually self-limited. It can persist for a few days to months,
but rarely for years.Loeffler’s syndrome (transient migratory pulmonary infiltrates,
peripheral blood eosinophilia and sputum eosinophilia) is found in many
cases of cutaneous larva migrans.
Fig. 4.26:  Cutaneous larva migrans.
Clinical Features
There are usually no systemic symptoms and diagnosis is purely made on
clinical grounds. Skin shows multiple, clearly defined, intensely pruritic,
linear and serpiginous tracts.

Treatment
Ivermectin:  It is the drug of choice and given as a single dose in the dose of 150–200 μg/kg.
Alternative drug is albendazole (200 mg twice a day for 5–7 days).
Antihistamines may be given for intense itching.
Strongyloidiasis
Q. Discuss clinical features, diagnosis and treatment of strongyloidiasis.
Strongyloidiasis is an intestinal infection of humans caused by
Strongyloides stercoralis.
The adult worm of Strongyloides stercoralis is small and measures 2 mm
in length. It is found in many parts of the tropics and subtropics. It lives in
the small intestine namely upper part of jejunum.
Clinical Features
Skin lesions: Larval migration through skin may produce itchy rashes at
the site of entry. Autoinfection may produce migratory linear weal around
the buttocks and lower abdomen (cutaneous larva currens). The classic
triad of symptoms is (i) abdominal pain, (ii) diarrhea and (iii) urticaria.Pulmonary lesions: Larval migration through lungs may produce cough,
dyspnea, hemoptysis and bronchospasm.
Intestinal lesions: Adult worms in the intestine may cause abdominal
pain, bloating diarrhea, steatorrhea (malabsorption) and weight loss. In
heavy infections damage to the small intestinal mucosa can cause even
perforation.Systemic infection: Systemic strongyloidiasis (the Strongyloides
hyperinfection syndrome), with dissemination of larvae throughout the
body. It may occur in immunocompromised states (e.g. HIV infection and
corticosteroid therapy). This may produce diarrhea, severe, generalized
abdominal pain, abdominal distension, pneumonia, meningoencephalitis
shock and death. Gram-negative sepsis may develop.Diagnosis
Stool examination: Motile larvae (at least three samples) may be observed
on microscopic examination of stool, especially after a period of
incubation. Larvae may also be cultured from stool.

Blood: Eosinophilia may be found in some patients.
Duodenal/jejunal aspirate may show larvae.
Serological tests: ELISA for antibody to S. stercoralis.
In patients with disseminated infection: Stool examination, ELISA, and
sputum and blood examination for larvae.
Q. Write short note on management of strongyloidiasis.
Treatment
Ivermectin  (200 μg/kg/day) for 2 days is the drug of choice.
albendazole:  It is an alternative drug but is less effective drug. It is given orally at a dose of 400
mg twice daily for 7 days.
Disseminated systemic infections:  Both ivermectin and albendazole should be given and may be
continued for 7 days or till the parasites are cleared.
Filariasis
Q. Discuss the clinical features, diagnosis and treatment of filariasis.
Conditions included under filariasis are listed in Box 4.21.
Box 4.21: Conditions included under filariasis.
Lymphatic filariasis: Caused by Wuchereria bancrofti  and Brugia malayi.
Onchocerciasis (river blindness): Caused by Onchocerca volvulus
Loiasis: Caused by Loa loa
Lymphatic Filariasis
Q. Write short essay on lymphatic filariasis and bancroftian filariasis
and their clinical manifestations and management.
Clinical outcome of lymphatic filariasis may range from subclinical infection
to hydrocele and elephantiasis. Life cycle of filariasis is presented in Figure
4.27.

Fig. 4.27:  Life cycle of filariasis.
Clinical Features
Q. Write short essay on clinical features of filariasis.
Acute filarial lymphangitis: It presents with fever, with chills and
sweats, headache and muscle pain. On examination there will be pain,
tenderness and erythema along the course of inflamed lymphatic
vessels. The whole episode may last for few days, but it may recur several
times in a year. Temporary edema becomes more persistent and regional
lymph nodes (e.g. inguinal) enlarged painful and tender. Inflammation of
the spermatic cord (funiculitis), epididymis (epididymitis) and testis
(orchitis) is common.Chronic stage of the disease: It is characterized by development of
permanent lymphedema (‘elephantiasis’) of legs (Fig. 4.28), scrotal
edema, chylous ascites, chylos pleural effusion and chyluria .
Progressive enlargement of lymphedema may produce coarsening,

corrugation, fissuring and bacterial infection of the skin and subcutaneous
tissue. This results in irreversible ‘elephantiasis’. The scrotum may
become very large in size because of hydrocele. Chyluria and chylous
effusions appear as milky and opalescent which on standing shows fat
globules on the top of chylous fluid.Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia (refer pages 380-2).
Fig. 4.28:  Lymphatic filariasis.
Investigations (Laboratory Findings) and Diagnoses
Q. Write short essay on laboratory findings in filariasis.
In the early stages of lymphangitis diagnosis can be made on clinical
grounds, and peripheral blood eosinophilia. Microfilariae are not seen in
the peripheral blood during early infestation.Peripheral blood:
–   Eosinophilia: Host immune response to the parasite produces massive
eosinophilia.
–   Demonstration of microfilariae: In the peripheral blood at night.
Demonstration of microfilariae in other fluids:  Microfilariae can be
demonstrated in the hydrocele fluid and may occasionally show an adult

worm.
Diethylcarbamazine (DEC) provocation test: In this test, administration
of 100 mg DEC usually produces positive blood specimens within 30–60
minutes.
Radiology: Calcified filariae may be demonstrable by radiography.
Serological tests:
–   Antigen detection and antibody detection in the blood: By ELISA
or immunochromatic method.
PCR for DNA detection.
Radionuclide lymphoscintigraphy: It is used to detect widespread
lymphatic abnormalities.
Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia: Serology is strongly positive and IgE
levels are markedly raised but circulating microfilariae are not found. The
chest X-ray shows miliary changes or mottled opacities. Lung function
tests show a restrictive picture.
TreatmentAim of treatment:  Reversing and halting the disease progression.
Diethylcarbamazine (DEC)  in the dose of 6 mg/kg in three divided doses for 12–21 days kills
both microfilariae and adult worms.
–   Adverse effects:  Due to the host response to dying microfilariae. The intensity of reaction
directly proportional to the microfilarial load. The main symptoms include fever, headache,
nausea, vomiting, arthralgia and prostration. They usually develop within 24–36 hours of the
first dose of DEC. Antihistamines or corticosteroids may be needed to control these allergic
reactions.Ivermectin  kills only microfilariae, but not the adult worms.
Combined albendazole (400 mg) and ivermectin (200 μg/kg) in a single dose, with or without
DEC (300 mg), is also highly effective.
Doxycycline 200 mg per day for 4 weeks plus ivermectin as a single dose (200 μg/kg provides
additional benefit by eliminating the bacteria. This interrupts the parasite embryogenesis.
Surgery may be of useful in the treatment established elephantiasis.
Chronic lymphatic pathology
Prevention of secondary infection:  Advised to take meticulous care of skin in lymphedematous
limbs to prevent secondary bacterial and fungal infections.
Control of lymphedema:  Tight bandaging, massage and bed rest with elevation of the affected
limb to control the lymphedema.
Prevention of further damage:  Prompt diagnosis and antibiotic therapy of bacterial cellulitis to
prevent further lymphatic damage and worsening of existing elephantiasis.
Surgery:  Plastic surgery may be required in established elephantiasis. Hydroceles and chyluria
can be repaired by surgery.

ECTOPARASITES
Ectoparasites are parasites that live on the surface of its host.
Scabies
Q. Write short essay on scabies.
Scabies is an intensely itchy rash caused by the ectoparasitic, mite, Sarcoptes
scabiei  var hominis.
Age: It is most common in children and young adults but can occur at any
age group.
Mode of Transmission
Person to person contact: Scabies is a highly contagious. Newly
fertilized female mites are transmitted from person to person by prolonged
close/intimate personal contact (e.g. within households or institutions)
with the skin, and by sexual contact. This transmission is facilitated by
social crowding, poor hygiene, and multiple sexual partners. In the
absence of host contact, the mites usually die within a day or so. About
15–20 minutes of close contact with an infected individual is necessary for
transfer of the mites from one individual to another.Through contaminated clothes: Transfer through clothes and bedding
contaminated by infested patient immediately beforehand.
Clinical Features
Q. Write short essay on clinical features of scabies.
Scabies clinically present with itchy red papules (or occasionally vesicles
and pustules). Itching/pruritus are worse at night.
Distribution of lesions: Often suggests the diagnosis. Skin lesions can
occur anywhere but rare on the face and scalp, except in infants. Sites of
predilection are (i) between the web spaces of the fingers (Fig. 4.29A) and
toes, (ii) on the palms and soles (more commonly in small children), (iii)
around the wrists and axillae, on the male genitalia (Fig. 4.29B), and
around the nipples and umbilicus. Circle of Hebra is an imaginary circle
intersecting sites of predilection and include areolae, axillae, elbow
flexures, wrists, finger webs, umbilicus, lower abdomen, genitalia.

Pruritus/itching is a prominent feature and usually intense and worse
(most severe) at night and after a hot shower. The itching develops a few
days after infestation. It may develop within a few hours if the mite is
infested for second time. It develops in the trunk and limbs and usually not
affect the scalp.Generalized rash  of scabies appears as tiny red intensely itchy bumps on
the limbs and trunk. It is due to an allergic reaction to the mites and their
products. It may develop several weeks to develop after initial infestation.
Figs. 4.29A and B:  (A) Scabies involving the web spaces of the fingers; (B) Genital region of
male.
Nodules: Presence of itchy lumps or nodules in the armpits and groins or
along the shaft of the penis is highly suggestive of scabies. Nodules may
persist for several weeks or longer even after the successful eradication of
living mite.Acropustulosis: Blisters and pustules on the palms and soles of infants
with scabies.
Pathognomonic sign: It is the presence of linear or curved skin burrows in
which the mites live. However, these are not always seen. Burrows are seen
as dark wavy lines in the epidermis and measure up to 15 mm. Typical
burrows may be only few in number. Hence, they are often missed if the skin
has been scratched or become secondarily infected or if there is eczema.
Microscopic examination of the contents of a burrow may show many mites,
eggs or mite feces (scybala).Q. Write short note on systemic complications of scabies.
Complication: Excoriations and secondary bacterial infection may develop

in the skin rash. Secondary infection of lesions of scabies due to
nephritogenic streptococci may complicate the rash leading to
poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis.
Diagnosis
Q. Write short essay on Norwegian or crusted scabies.
Clinical grounds: Scabies should be considered on the basis of clinical
presentation and history. Diagnosis can be made in patients with itching
and symmetrical skin lesions in characteristic distribution/locations. It
may be obvious if there is a history of household/close contact with an
affected patient.Confirmation of scabies: It is by identifying the scabietic burrow and
visualizing the mite. Burrows should be unroofed with a sterile needle or
scalpel blade. The skin scrapings of a lesion should be examined
microscopically (by a potassium hydroxide preparation) for the mite
and/or its eggs and its fecal pellets. Microscopic examination of clear
adhesive tape lifted from lesions and skin biopsy also may be useful for
diagnosis.
Disorders predisposing to crusted scabies are shown in Table 4.48.
Crusted or Norwegian ScabiesQ. Write short note on diagnosis of scabies.
Crusted scabies or Norwegian scabies is clinical variant of scabies
characterized by hyperinfestation (huge numbers) of Sarcoptes scabiei
mites in the skin.
It is named Norwegian scabies because of its initial description in
Norwegian patients with leprosy.
Predisposing conditions: Patients are highly infectious. The number of
mites rapidly increases (hyperinfestation) due to impaired immune
response, lack of pruritus or patient’s with neurological disorders with
physical inability to scratch. Disorders predisposing to crusted scabies are
listed in Table 4.48. It may be associated with HLA-A11. Transmission
through fomites can occur because mites survive on the sloughed skin in
environment.

Clinical features: Patient presents with marked thickening and crusting of
the skin (hyperkeratotic crusted lesions) particulars on the hands.
However, entire body including the face and scalp is often involved. Nails
often show hyperkeratosis.
Table 4.48: Disorders predisposing to crusted scabies.
Disorders with defective T-cell response:
AIDS, lymphoma, organ transplantation, T-cell
leukemiaNeurological disorders: Parkinson’ s disease,
tabes dorsalis, syringomyelia
Physical debilities:  Critical illness, kwashiorkor Mental debilitation:  Down’s syndrome, mental
retardation
Reduced sensation:  Leprosy Metabolic disorder:  Diabetes mellitusQ. Write short essay on management of scabies/drugs used to treat
scabies.
Treatment
Principles of scabies treatment
Topical treatment of the patient and all asymptomatic close contacts (family members/physical
contacts) should be done simultaneously to ensure eradication.
Include a scabicidal and a keratolytic in the treatment.
To avoid reinfection, washing or cleaning of recently worn clothes (including underclothing) and
bed linen (preferably at 60°C) is recommended.
Topical treatment
Areas of application:  Scabicides are applied thinly and thoroughly to all over the skin below the
neck (including the genitalia, palms and soles, and under the nails). Reapply topical scabicide to
the hands if patient washed it during the treatment period.
Duration of treatment:  Usually effectively treated scabies infestations become noninfectious
within a day. However, even after successful treatment, pruritus/itching and rash may remain even
up to 4 weeks. Unnecessary retreatment may cause contact dermatitis.
Repetition of application:  Topical application should be repeated after one week.
Topical scabicide
These include (i) precipitated sulfur 2–10% in petrolatum, (ii) benzyl benzoate 10–25%, (iii)
crotamiton 10%, (iv) Lindane (gamma benzene hexachloride) 1%, (v) permethrin 5%, and (vi)
malathion 0.5%.
Oral therapy
IvermectinDose:
–   Single oral dose 200 μg/kg in otherwise healthy individuals and side effects are rare.
–   Two doses of oral ivermectin (200 μg/kg, as 2 doses 2 weeks apart) is easy to use and as
effective as topical therapy. Two doses are indicated in Crusted scabies or Norwegian scabies.
The toxic effects with two doses are insignificant.
Oral antihistamines can alleviate the hypersensitivity response.

Lice Infection
Q. Write a short essay/note on pediculosis.
Lice are blood-sucking ectoparasites and can infest human in three ways:
1. Head lice (Pediculosis capitis)
Infestation with the head louse, Pediculus humanus capitis, is common
worldwide.
Age and gender: Predominantly affects children and more common in
females.
Spread:
–   It is highly contagious and spread by direct head-to-head contact
and associated with overcrowding.
–   It may be indirectly spread through hats, clothes or pillow covers.
Clinical presentation: Head lice usually presents with scalp itch that
leads to scratching, scalp excoriations, secondary infection (important
cause of impetigo) and cervical lymphadenopathy. Itching may
produce sleep disturbances and difficulties in concentration and the
affected children may perform poorly in school.Diagnosis:
–   Confirmed by identifying the living louse or nymph or empty egg
cases (‘nits’ look like whitish shells stuck to the hair shaft on the
scalp and are difficult to dislodge).
Treatment
Apply malathion or permethrin or carbaryl or phenothrin in lotion or aqueous formulations,
twice at an interval of 7–10 days (with a contact time of 12 hours). If treatment with one fails, a
different insecticide is used for the next course. Rotational treatments within a community can
avoid resistance. Treatment is usually repeated after 7 days.Regular ‘wet-combing’ (physical removal of live lice by regular combing of conditioned wet hair,
metal nit combs may help remove the eggs) is less effective than pharmacological applications.
Apply vaseline to eyelashes/brows twice daily for at least a fortnight.
Resistant cases:  Use oral ivermectin (400 μg/kg as 2 doses 1 week apart).
Treatment of secondary bacterial infection if present.
2.  Body lice (Pediculosis corporis)
Body lice are ectoparasites similar to head lice but they live on
clothing (e.g. seams), and feed on the skin.

Predisposing factors include poor hygiene, poverty, neglect and
overcrowded conditions. It is rare in developed countries (except in
homeless and vagrants).
Spread: By direct contact or sharing infested clothing. The lice and
eggs are commonly found on the clothing but are rarely observed on
the skin of the patient.Clinical presentation: It presents with itch, excoriations and
secondary infection. Sometimes, there may be post-inflammatory
hyperpigmentation of the skin.
Treatment:  By malathion or permethrin. Dry cleaning and high-temperature washing or insecticide
treatment for the clothes is helpful.
3.  Pubic lice (Crab lice, Phthiriasis pubis)Pubic louse (Phthirus pubis) is a bloodsucking insect that attaches
tightly to the pubic hair.
Mode of transmission: Usually, it is sexually acquired (direct contact)
and transferred only by close bodily contact. The lice lay its eggs (nits)
at hair bases and usually hatch within a week.Clinical presentation: It may be asymptomatic or presents with severe
itching, especially at night. Usually infests public hair and occasionally
other hairy areas (eyebrows, eyelashes and the beard). Lice can be seen
near the base of the hair with eggs.
Treatment:  Similar to head lice and the treatment of choice is malathion or carbaryl in an aqueous
base. They are applied on two occasions to the whole body, because it can also infest body hair. All
sexual contacts (patient’s partner) should also be treated. Patient should be screened for other
sexually transmitted diseases. Infestation of the eyelashes and eyebrows is treated with application of
white soft paraffin 3 times daily for 1–2 weeks.
SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED INFECTIONS
STD (Sexually Transmitted Disease) are a group of communicable diseases
that are transmitted predominantly by sexual contact and caused by a wide
range of bacterial, viral, protozoal and fungal agents and ectoparasites (Table
4.49).
Gonorrhea

Q. Write short note on gonorrhea/acute gonococcal urethritis.
Definition: Gonorrhea is a sexually transmitted infection (STI) due to the
gram-negative diplococcus, Neisseria gonorrhea. It commonly infects
columnar epithelium in the lower genital tract (cervicitis, urethritis), rectum
(proctitis), and eye (conjunctivitis).
Mode of transmission: Genital-genital, genital-anorectal, or oro-genital or
oro-anal contact or from mother-to-child transmission during delivery.
Incubation period: Usually 2–10 days following exposure.
Clinical Features
Gonococcal infections in men: Acute urethritis is the most common
clinical manifestation and presents with urethral discharge and dysuria
usually without urinary frequency or urgency. On examination, urethra
shows mucopurulent discharge that may be accompanied by erythema of
the urethral meatus.Gonococcal infections in women: Gonococcal cervicitis and vaginitis
present with symptoms related to endocervical and urethral infection and
include scant vaginal discharge and dysuria. Gonococci may infect the
urethra, paraurethral glands/ducts, and Bartholin’s glands/ducts. It may be
asymptomatic in up to 80% of women.
Table 4.49: Sexually transmitted infections.
Bacterial agentsNeisseria gonorrhea
Chlamydia trachomatis
Haemophilus ducreyi
Mycoplasma hominis
Ureaplasma urealyticum
Calymmatobacterium granulomatis
Shigella spp.
Group B Streptococcus
Bacterial vaginitis associated organismsViral agents
Human (alpha) herpesvirus
Human (beta) herpesvirus
Hepatitis B virus
Human papillomavirus
Molluscum contagiosum virus.
Human immunodeficiency virus
Protozoal agents
Entamoeba histolytica
Giardia lamblia
Trichomonas vaginalisFungal agents
Candida albicans
Ectoparasites
Phthirus pubis

Sarcoptes scabiei
Anorectal and pharyngeal gonorrhea are usually asymptomatic.
Ocular gonorrhea: Gonococcal conjunctivitis is an uncommon. It may
present with purulent discharge from the eye(s), inflammation of the
conjunctivae and edema of the eyelids, pain and photophobia. Gonococcal
ophthalmia neonatorum also presents with purulent conjunctivitis and
edema of the eyelids. Conjunctivitis must be treated early to prevent
corneal damage.Disseminated gonococcal infection (DGI): Dissemination can result in
gonococcal bacteremia and is rare and develops in women with
asymptomatic genital infection. Symptoms include arthritis of one or more
joints (asymmetric and migratory), pustular skin lesions, fever and
tenosynovitis. Gonococcal endocarditis or meningitis may rarely occur.Acute perihepatitis (Fitz-Hugh-Curits syndrome) is a rare complication
of PID, and is thought to occur through direct extension of N. gonorrheae
from fallopian tube to liver capsule and peritoneum along the paracolic
gutters. Patients present with sharp, pleuritic right upper quadrant pain.
Diagnosis
Q. Write short note on gonorrhea diagnosis and treatment.
Gram’s staining and culture of urethral exudates, genital, rectal,
pharyngeal or ocular secretions show gram-negative intracellular
monococci and diplococci.Sterile pyuria: Urine may show polymorphonuclear leukocytes with a
negative urine culture report.
Nucleic acid probe tests: Nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs) is
more sensitive than culture. They can be performed on urine samples,
swabs from endocervix, urethra, rectum and pharynx.Direct antigen detection by fluorescein-conjugated monoclonal antibodies
and direct fluorescence microscopy.
Enzyme-linked immunoassays for the detection of gonococcal antigen.
Blood cultures in disseminated disease.
Complications: If untreated infections can develop following complications:
In females: Causes pelvic inflammatory disease PID (pelvic inflammatory

disease). Local complications such as endometritis, salpingitis, tubo-
ovarian abscess, bartholinitis, peritonitis, and perihepatitis.
In male patients: Periurethritis, epididymitis epididymo-orchitis and
prostatitis.
Newborns: Ophthalmia neonatorum in newborns.
Box 4.22: Treatment of gonorrhea.
One of the following regimens is recommended at present:
–   Cefixime 400 mg orally (single dose)
–   Ceftriaxone 250 mg intramuscularly (single dose)
–   Spectinomycin 2 g intramuscularly (single dose)
If quinolone and azithromycin resistance is not a problem:
–   Ciprofloxacin 500 mg orally (single dose)
–   Ofloxacin 400 mg orally (single dose)
–   Levofloxacin 250 mg orally (single dose)
–   Azithromycin 2 g orally (single dose)For epididymo-orchitis doxycycline 100 mg twice daily for 14 days along with one dose of
ceftriaxone or ciprofloxacin.
Q. Write short note on:
Management of urethral discharge in males
Treatment of gonorrhea in adults.
Treatment  of gonorrhea (Box 4.22).
Nongonococcal Urethritis
Etiology (Table 4.50)
Signs and symptoms
Symptoms and signs of gonococcal urethritis and non-gonococcal urethritis
are similar but differ significantly in severity.
Table 4.50: Causes of nongonococcal urethritis.
Chlamydia trachomatis (15–40%) Mycoplasma genitalium (15–25%)
Others (20–50%)
Trichomonas vaginalis
Ureaplasma urealiticum
Herpes simplex virus (in absence of skinMiscellaneous
In association with urinary tract infection,
bacterial prostatitis, urethral stricture, phimosis,
secondary to instrumentation of the urethra,
congenital abnormalities, chemical irritation,

lesions)
Adenovirus
Hemophilustumors
Diagnosis
Gram staining of discharge or sediment of first voided urine:
(symptomatic/asymptomatic)
Direct fluorescence assay
Enzyme immunoassay
Hybridization assay
Nucleic acid amplification tests.
Q. Write short note on drugs used in nongonococcal urethritis.
Treatment
STD treatment guidelines from the CDC 2010 and the WHO recommends
–   Doxycycline 100 mg twice daily for 7 days. OR
–   azithromycin 1 g orally
Alternatives
Erythromycin base 500 mg four times for 7 days, OR
Ofloxacin 300 mg twice daily for 7 days, OR
Levofloxacin 500 mg once daily for 7 days
General Features
All sex partners in last 60 days should be evaluated and treated.
Sexual abstinence till completion of treatment.
Patients should be reviewed 2–3 weeks after treatment to confirm resolution of symptoms and
treatment of sexual contacts.
Should be checked for other STIs including syphilis and HIV. Results of tests checked during
review.
Chancroid
Q. Write short essay/note on clinical features and treatment of
chancroid.
Chancroid or soft chancre is an acute sexually transmitted infection caused
by Haemophilus ducreyi . It is characterized by painful genital ulcerations
and inguinal adenitis.
The genital ulceration in chancroid increases the efficiency of
transmission and the degree of susceptibility to HIV in infection.

Coinfection with Treponema pallidum and herpes simplex is observed in
10% of cases.
Clinical Features
Q. Write short note on bubo.
Incubation period: Usually 3–10 days.
Infection is acquired due to a break in the epithelium during sexual contact
with an infected individual.
Lesion in the external genitalia:
–   Sites of lesions: Prepuce and frenulum in men and vaginal entrance
and the perineum. At the site of inoculation (the external genitalia), an
initial erythematous papule appears which then breaks down within 2–
3 days into a classic chancroidal ulcer.
–   Characteristics of ulcer: This chancroid ulcer is superficial,
circumscribed and painful. Ulcers have ragged and undermined edges,
and necrotic base, bleeds easily and generally not indurated. Ulcer may
be single. If multiple, they may merge to form giant serpiginous ulcer.Lymphadenopathy: About 50% of patients develop enlarged, painful,
tender inguinal lymph nodes (usually unilateral). The involved nodes
become matted and progress to form large unilocular buboes which
suppurate.
Diagnosis
Q. Write short note on chancroid diagnosis and treatment.
Treatment of chancroid  (Box 4.23)
Sex partners of chancroid patients should be examined and treated, if they had sexual contact with the
patient during the 10 days preceding the patient’s onset of symptoms. This is regardless of whether
they have symptoms of the disease or not.
Box 4.23: Treatment options for chancroid.
Azithromycin, 1 g orally, as a single dose, OR
Ceftriaxone, 250 mg by intramuscular injection as a single dose, OR
Ciprofloxacin, 500 mg orally, twice daily for 3 days, OR
Erythromycin base, 500 mg orally 4 times daily for 7 days

It is based on the microscopic identification and culture isolation of
Hemophilus ducreyi  in scrapings from ulcer or pus from bubo.
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) technique not commercially available.
Detection of antibody to H. ducreyi  using EIA may be useful.
CHLAMYDIAL INFECTIONS
Q. Write a short note on chlamydial infections.
Chlamydial infections may be asymptomatic or cause:
In male: Urethritis, epididymitis, prostatitis. Untreated infection can cause
infertility and reactive arthritis.
In female: Cervicitis and salpingitis. Most of the infected females are
asymptomatic and are likely to develop complications such as PID,
infertility or ectopic pregnancy.
Lymphogranuloma Venereum (LGV)
Q. Write a short note on lymphogranuloma venereum (LGV).
It is a sexually transmitted disease caused Chalmydia trachomatis (types
LGV 1, 2 and 3).
Clinical Features
Incubation period: 3–30 days.
Stages: Three characteristic stages:
1. Primary genital lesion: LGV starts as an asymptomatic small painless
papule at the site of inoculation (external genitalia) and tends to
ulcerate.
2. Regional lymphadenopathy: A few days to weeks, the ulcers heal and
regional lymphadenopathy (usually unilateral develops). The lymph
nodes are initially discrete painful and fixed and the overlying skin
appears dusky and erythematous.
3. Buboes: Later in the course, the lymph nodes may become matted,
fluctuant (buboes) and rupture. The overlying skin becomes thinned,
inflamed, and fixed. Finally, multiple draining fistulae may occur.
Extensive enlargement of inguinal lymph nodes above and below the
inguinal ligament (‘groove sign’) can develop.

Other feature:
–   Acute LGV can also cause proctitis with perirectal abscesses, which
may resemble anorectal Crohn’s disease.
–   Chronic phase: Chronic infection may produce extensive scarring and
abscess and sinus formation. The destruction of local lymph nodes can
produce lymphedema of the genitalia.
–   Constitutional symptoms: These include fever, chills, headache,
anorexia, meningismus, myalgias and arthralgias.
Diagnosis
Detection of nucleic acid (DNA): Direct immunofluorescent antibody,
and nucleic acid amplification tests are positive which should be
confirmed by real time PCR for LGV specific DNA.Isolation of the LGV (L1–3 serotypes) strain of Chlamydia: Tissue
culture from swab obtained from ulcer aspirated bubo pus, rectum,
urethra, endocervix or from other infected tissue is the most specific test;
however, sensitivity is only 75–85%.Serological tests: Microimmunofluorescence (micro IF) test, complement
fixation test (CF) to detect antibodies.
Frei skin test is not useful.
Treatment (Box 4.24)
Early treatment is necessary to prevent the chronic phase.
Fluctuant buboes should be aspirated with a syringe and needle.
Surgical drainage or reconstructive surgery may be sometimes needed.
Box 4.24: Treatment options for lymphogranuloma venereum.
Doxycycline, 100 mg orally, twice daily for 14 days, OR
Erythromycin, 500 mg orally, 4 times daily for 14 days, OR
Tetracycline, 500 mg orally, 4 times daily for 14 days
GRANULOMA INGUINALE (DONOVANOSIS)
Q. Write short note on granuloma inguinale (donovanosis).
Granuloma inguinale is a genital ulcerative disease caused due to intracellular
gram-negative bacterium Klebsiella granulomatis formerly known as

calymmatobacterium granulomatis (Donovan bodies).
Incubation period: 3–40 days.
Clinical Features (Genital Lesions)
Treatment (box 4.25)
Treatment will prevent the progression of lesions. Treatment should be continued until all lesions
have completely epithelialized.
Treatment with antibiotics is needed for at least 3 weeks. Effective regimens are presented in Box
4.25.
Box 4.25: Treatment options for granuloma inguinale.
Azithromycin, 1 g orally on the first day, then 500 mg orally, once a day, OR
Doxycycline, 100 mg orally, twice daily, OR
Erythromycin, 500 mg orally, 4 times daily, OR
Tetracycline, 500 mg orally, 4 times daily, OR
Trimethoprim 80 mg/sulfamethoxazole 400 mg, 2 tablets orally, twice daily
Painless, progressive ulcerative lesions without regional
lymphadenopathy.
Genital lesions are highly vascular produces ‘beefy red appearance’ and
bleeds easily on touch. However, it can also produce hypertrophic
granulomatous, necrotic or sclerotic lesions.
Diagnosis: Microscopy examination of material from the lesion (tissue crush
preparation or biopsy) shows dark staining intracellular bipolar-staining
Donovan bodies. The causative organism is difficult to culture.
SYPHILIS
Syphilis (lues) is a chronic, systemic infection caused by spirochete
Treponema pallidum is usually sexually transmitted. Spirochetes are gram-
negative, slender corkscrew-shaped.
Source of Infection
Contact with an open infectious lesion of primary or secondary syphilis.
Lesions in the mucous membranes or skin of the genital organs, rectum,
mouth, fingers, or nipples. These lesions include chancre, mucous patch, skin
rash or condylomata lata.
Mode of Transmission

Sexual contact: It is the usual mode of spread.
Transplacental transmission: From mother with active disease to the
fetus (during pregnancy) → congenital syphilis.
Blood transfusion
Direct contact with the open lesion is rare mode of transmission.
Transmission from a mother to her fetus, and rarely by blood transfusion is
possible for several years following infection.
Treponema pallidum can penetrate intact mucous membranes or abraded
skin rapidly and gain entry into the lymphatics and bloodstream and
produce systemic infection.
Classification (Table 4.51 and Fig. 4.30)Acquired Syphilis
Primary syphilis
Primary chancre: It is the classical lesion of primary syphilis.
Location: The primary chancre develop at the site of inoculation
–   In males: Penis or scrotum in males (in heterosexual) and in
homosexual males, it may occur in the anal canal, rectum fingers, or
within the mouth
–   In females: Cervix, vulva and vaginal wall.
Primary chancre (Fig. 4.31) is single, firm, non-tender (painless), slightly
raised, red papule (chancre) up to several centimeters in diameter. It
rapidly becomes eroded to create a clean-based shallow ulcer. Because of
the induration surrounding the ulcer, it is designated as hard chancre.
Table 4.51: Classification of syphilis.
Acquired syphilis Congenital syphilis
A. Primary syphilis
B. Secondary syphilis
C. Latent syphilis
D. Late syphilis (tertiary)
Late latent
Benign tertiary
Quaternary syphilis (cardiovascular and
neurosyphilis)Intrauterine death and perinatal death.
Early (infantile)
Late (tardive)

Regional lymphadenitis: Usually accompanies the primary chancre within 1
week of the onset of the lesion.
The lymph nodes are firm, rubbery, mobile, nonsuppurative, painless and
non-tender.
Chancres on external genital and anus produce bilateral inguinal
lymphadenopathy, where as those on cervix and vagina cause iliac or
perirectal lymphadenopathy.
Fate: Even without therapy, the primary chancre heals within 4–6 weeks, but
the lymphadenopathy may persist for months.Primary syphilis in HIV positive patients is often asymptomatic and they
frequently present with secondary or latent syphilis.
Fig. 4.30: Course of syphilis (if untreated).

Fig. 4.31: Primary chancre in primary acquired syphilis.
Secondary syphilis
Q. Write short essay/note on:
Secondary syphilis
Condylomata lata, mucous patches and snail track ulcers.
Secondary syphilis develops 4 to 10 weeks after the primary chancre in
approximately 75% of untreated patients. Its manifestations are due to
systemic spread and proliferation of the spirochetes within the skin and
mucocutaneous tissues. It starts with symptoms of generalized infection such
as malaise, sore throat, headache, low-grade fever and arthralgia.Lesions
Mucocutaneous lesions: These are painless, superficial lesions and contain
spirochetes and are infectious.
Skin rashes (75%): They begin as discrete red-brown macules less than
5 mm in diameter. They are generalized symmetrical and non-irritable but
more frequent on the trunk and proximal limbs. These macular lesions
may progress to a scaly/pustular/annular or necrotic ulcers which

frequently involve the palms (Fig. 4.32A), and soles. The lesions which
are initial red, changing to a ‘gun-metal’ gray as they resolve.
Condylomata lata (10%) (Fig. 4.32B):  These are broad-based, moist,
pink or gray-white, elevated plaques (papules coalescing to plaques),
highly infectious containing numerous spirochetes. They are seen in moist,
warm, intertriginous areas of the skin, such as the anogenital region
(perineum, vulva, and scrotum), inner thighs, and axillae.
Mucosal lesions (30%): Usually occurs in the mucous membranes of oral
cavity (lip, oral  mucosa, tongue, palate, and pharynx) or vulva, vagina or
glans penis as silvery-gray superficial  mucosal erosions. They are
surrounded by a red serpiginous periphery and are usually painless.
Rarely, they may coalesce to produce characteristic ‘snail track’ ulcers in
the mouth.These lesions contain numerous T. pallidum and are the highly infectious.
Microscopy: Similar to primary chancre, i.e. infiltration by plasma cells
and endarteritis obliterans.

Figs. 4.32A and B:  (A) Symmetrical skin rashes of secondary syphilis on palm; (B) Condyloma lata.
Generalized painless lymphadenopathy: Generalized, firm non-tender
lymphadenopathy (shotty) occurs in about 50% of patients. They involve
especially epitrochlear nodes and show plenty of spirochetes. Mild fever,
malaise, and weight loss are common in secondary syphilis, which may last
for several weeks. The lesions subside even without treatment.
Less common manifestations include meningitis, cranial nerve palsies,
anterior or posterior uveitis, hepatitis, gastritis, glomerulonephritis
(proteinuria, nephrotic syndrome or hemorrhagic glomerulonephritis) or
arthritis and periostitis.Latent syphilis
Without treatment, the clinical manifestations of secondary syphilis will

resolve over 3–12 weeks. In an untreated (about 30%) patient during this
phase, there is no evidence of clinical disease but shows the presence of
positive syphilis serology or the diagnostic cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
abnormalities of neurosyphilis. This is known as latent syphilis and is divided
into:Early latency (within 1 year of infection): During this period syphilis may
be transmitted sexually.
Late latency (begins at 1 year of infection): During this, the patient is no
longer sexually infectious. Pregnant women with latent syphilis may infect
the fetus in utero.
Late (tertiary) syphilis
1. Late latent syphilis
–   This phase may persist for many years or for life.
–   No symptoms or signs of syphilis.
–   More than 60% of patients suffer little or no ill health even without
treatment.
2. Benign tertiary (gummatous) syphilis
–   It is called benign because of its response to therapy rather than its
clinical manifestations.
–   It may develop after 3 to 10 years after initial infection.
Structures involved: Skin (frequently at sites of trauma as nodules or
ulcers), mucous membranes (mouth, pharynx, larynx or nasal septum
appear as punched-out ulcers), bone (e.g. skull, tibia, fibula and
clavicle) muscle or viscera (e.g. liver-hepar lobatum, spleen).Characteristic feature: It is a chronic granulomatous (sometimes
ulcerating) lesion called a gumma, which may be single or multiple.
Consequences: Healing with scar formation may damage the function
of the structure involved.
3. Quaternary syphilis: Neurosyphilis and cardiovascular syphilis may
coexist and sometimes called as quaternary syphilis.
Q. Write short note on cardiovascular syphilis.
Cardiovascular syphilis
–   May present many years after initial infection.

–   Most frequently involves the aorta (the ascending aorta aortic
valve and/or the coronary ostia, the aortic arch) and known as
syphilitic aortitis.
–   Clinical features include angina, features of aortic incompetence and
aortic aneurysm.
Neurosyphilis (discussed on pages 976-7).
Congenital Syphilis (Box 4.26)
Box 4.26: Stigmata of congenital syphilis.
Hutchinson’s incisors (anterior-posterior thickening with notch on narrowed cutting edge)
Mulberry molars (imperfectly formed cusps/deficient dental enamel)
High arched palate
Maxillary hypoplasia
Saddle nose
Rhagades (radiating scars around mouth, nose and anus following rash)
Salt and pepper scars on retina (from choroiditis)
Corneal scars (from interstitial keratitis)
Sabre tibia (from periostitis)
Bossing of frontal and parietal bones (healed periosteal nodes)
Q. Write short note on congenial syphilis.
Transplacental transmission: T. pallidum can cross placenta and spread it
infected mother to the fetus (during pregnancy).
Transmission occurs, when mother is suffering from primary or
secondary syphilis (when the spirochetes are abundant. Because of
routine serologic testing for syphilis is done in all pregnancies) congenital
syphilis is rare.
Manifestations: Can be divided into:
1. Intrauterine death and perinatal death.
2. Early (infantile) congenital syphilis: It manifests within the first 2
years of life and often manifested by nasal discharge (rhinitis) and
congestion (snuffles). They resemble features of secondary syphilis.
–   A desquamating or bullous eruption/rash  can lead to epidermal
sloughing of the skin, mainly in the hands, feet, around the mouth and
anus. Also may show condyloma lata.

–   Skeletal abnormalities: Syphilitic osteochondritis  (inflammation of
bone and cartilage is more distinctive in the nose → produces
characteristic saddle nose deformity); syphilitic periostitis (involves
the tibia and leads to anterior bowing, or saber shin).
–   Others organs involved liver  (diffuse fibrosis) and lungs (airless-
pneumonia alba).
3. Late (tardive) congenital syphilis:
–   Manifests 2 years after birth , and about 50% of untreated children
with neonatal syphilis will develop late manifestations and take the
form of ‘stigmata’ relating to early damage to developing structures,
particularly teeth and long bones.
–   Distinctive manifestation in Hutchinson’s triad  is: (1) interstitial
keratitis, Hutchinson’s teeth  and (2) eighth-nerve deafness. Other
features include Clutton’s joints, neurosyphilis, gummatous periostitis,
destruction of palate and nasal septum. Cardiovascular involvement is
rare. Stigmata of congenital syphilis are listed in Box 4.26.
Laboratory DiagnosisQ. Write short note/essay on:
Tests for diagnosis of syphilis
Serological tests for syphilis
VDRL test.
Demonstration of Treponema pallidum
Dark-field microcopy: Most sensitive and specific method is
identification in serum collected from primary chancres, or from moist or
eroded mucous lesions in secondary syphilis by dark-field microscopy. It
shows drifting rotary motion (corkscrew) of Treponema pallidum. Patients
with either primary or secondary disease are highly infectious.Direct fluorescent antibody T. pallidum (DFA-TP) test: In fixed smears
from the chancre is important for diagnosis in primary syphilis.
Microscopic demonstration of Treponema pallidum  in tissues stained by
appropriate stains and PCR are also useful.
Serological Tests

Non-treponemal antibody (nonspecific) tests: These tests measure
antibody to cardiolipin, a phospholipid present in both host tissues and T.
pallidum.
These test include:
–   Venereal Diseases Research Laboratory (VDRL) test
–   Rapid plasma reagin (RPR) test
Treponemal (specific) antibody tests:  They measure antibodies, which
react with T. pallidum.
Significance
–   Used for confirmation. They are highly specific for treponemal disease.
However, do not differentiate between syphilis and other treponemal
infection (e.g. as yaws).
–   Most of the patients, these tests usually remain positive for life,
regardless of treatment or disease activity. However, 15–25% of
patients treated in primary stage become nonreactive after 2–3 years.
–   Various tests include:
♦   Treponemal antigen-based enzyme immunoassay (EIA) for IgG and
IgM
♦   T. pallidum hemagglutination assay (TPHA)
♦   T. pallidum particle agglutination assay (TPPA)
♦   Fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption (FTA-ABS) test.
Examination of CSF: In benign tertiary and cardiovascular syphilis, CSF
should be examined because of coexistence of asymptomatic neurological
disease. CSF should be examined in neurosyphilis and in both early and late
congenital syphilis.
Other tests: Chest X-ray, electrocardiogram (ECG) and echocardiogram are
necessary in cardiovascular syphilis. Biopsy may be necessary to diagnose
gumma.
Management (Table 4.52)Patients allergic to penicillin: In primary, secondary and early latent syphilis, these patients should
be given tetracycline or doxycyline for 2 weeks and in late latent syphilis it should be given for 4
weeks.
Ceftriaxone:  It may be given in the dose of 1 g once a day for 10–14 days.
Azithromycin:  Single dose of 2 g is also effective except in homosexual men and during
pregnancy.

Response to treatment  is considered as satisfactory, if there is a four-fold decrease in non-
treponemal titers at 3 to 6 months in all stages of syphilis.
Neurosyphilis:  It should be followed up with lumbar puncture and evaluation of CSF every 6
months until the cell count is normal. If after 6 months the cell count is not decreased, retreatment
should be given.
Treatment reactions
Anaphylaxis:  Penicillin is a common cause.
Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction:
–   Treatment of syphilitic patients having a high bacterial load, by antibiotics can cause a massive
release of endotoxins, and cytokine causing Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction.
–   Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction is an acute febrile reaction that follows after (about 8 hours after
the first injection) any therapy for syphilis. It is characterized by headache, myalgia, malaise,
mild fever, rigors, and other symptoms that usually resolve within the first 24 hours.
–   It is common in early syphilis and rare in late syphilis.
Table 4.52: Management of syphilis.
Stage of syphilis Drug Regimen
Primary Procaine penicillin 6,00,000 units IM/day for 12 days
Oxytetracycline 500 mg orally four times/day for 15
days
Doxycycline 100 mg orally two times/day for 15
days
Benzathine penicillin 2.4 mega (million) units IM single
dose (1.2 million units in each buttock)
Secondary Procaine penicillin 6,00,000 units IM once daily for 15
days
Benzathine penicillin 2.4 million units IM single dose
Early latent Benzathine penicillin 2.4 million units IM single dose
Late latent/tertiary
and cardiovascular
syphilisBenzathine penicillin 2.4 million units IM weekly for 3
weeks
Neurosyphilis Crystalline penicillin 18–24 million units/day for 10–14
days
Procaine penicillin PLUS
probenecid2.4 million units/day IM for 10–14 day
+ 500 mg QID for 10–14 day
–   It may induce fetal distress or premature labor in pregnancy. This concern should not prevent
or delay therapy. It may be severe and worsen the clinical manifestations in cardiovascular or
neurosyphilis.
–   Penicillin should not be withheld because of the Jarisch–Herxheimer reaction. Because it is not
a dose-dependent and there is no point in giving a smaller dose.
–   Prednisolone 10–20 mg orally three times daily for 3 days given for 24 hours prior to therapy

may prevent the reaction.
Approach to a Case of Genital Ulcer (Genital Ulcer
Disease/GUD)
Definition: Genital ulcer is defined as ulcerative, erosive, pustular or
vesicular lesions on the genitalia with or without lymphadenopathy.
Etiology (Table 4.53)
Table 4.53: Causes of genital ulcer disease.
STD-related etiologies and organisms
Genital herpes Herpes simplex virus type 1 and type 2
Primary syphilis Treponema pallidum var. pallidum
Chancroid Hemophilus ducreyi
Lymphogranuloma venereum (LGV) Chlamydia trachomatis serovars L1-L3
Granuloma inguinale (Donovanosis) Calymmatobacterium granulomatis now called
Klebsiella granulomatis
Non-STD-related etiologies
Non-STD infectious Candida, CMV, EBV, Mycobacteria,
Staphylococcus
Noninfectious Bechets, Reiters, cancer, trauma, aphthous, fixed
drug eruptions
No etiological agent is found in 20 to 50% of Genital Ulcer Disease (GUD)
Features and differential diagnosis of genital ulcer disease is presented in and
Table 4.54.
Table 4.54: Differential diagnosis of a few genital ulcer diseases.
Characteristic Syphilis Herpes (Fig.
4.33)Chancroid LGV Donovanosis
Primary lesion Papule Vesicle Pustule Papule,
vesicle,
pustulePapule
Number of
lesionsUsually 1 Multiple Multiple Single Variable
Diameter 5–15 mm 1–2 mm Variable 2–10 mm Variable
Edges Sharply
demarcated
elevatedErythematous,
polycyclicUndermined,
raggedElevated,
round or ovalElevated,
irregular

Depth Superficial or
deepSuperficial Excavated Superficial or
deepElevated
Base Smooth, non-
purulent
covered with
serous exudateErythematous Purulent, dirty
gray baseVariable Red velvety,
bleeds easily
Induration Button hole None Not indurated Not indurated Not indurated
Pain Absent Present Present Absent Absent
Lymph nodes Bilateral non-
tender, firm,
lead shot,
nonsuppurativeBilateral
tender, firm,
nonsuppurativeUnilateral,
tender,
suppurative,
unilocularUnilateral,
tender,
suppurative,
multilocularNone.
Pseudobubo
seen
NOSOCOMIAL INFECTIONS (HOSPITAL
INFECTIONS)
IntroductionQ. Write short essay/answer on nosocomial infections.
Nosocomial infection  is the term derived from two Greek words ‘nosos’
(disease) and ‘komeion’ (to take care of).
Definition: In its broad meaning, nosocomial infection is defined as any
infection or disease that any individual suffers from the invasion of
pathogens in hospital.
Requisites for using the term nosocomial infections are:
Manifestation of the symptoms, first appear 48 hours or more after
hospital admission or within 30 days after discharge from hospital.
Any infection or disease which does not exist or is not in incubation
period when the clients are hospitalized. They are the result of treatment in
a hospital or a healthcare service unit, but secondary to the patient‘s
original conditionInfection is caused by the invasion of disease-producing microorganisms
acquired in hospital.

Fig. 4.33: Herpetic penile ulcer.
Health Care-Associated Infection (HAI)
An infection that develops in a patient who is cared for in any setting where
health care is delivered (e.g. acute care hospital, chronic care facility,
ambulatory clinic, dialysis center, surgicenter, home).
Classification of Nosocomial Infection
According to the site of infections, nosocomial infection has the possibility
to occur in every system and every site.
According to the source of the pathogens, nosocomial infections can be
classified into:
Reactivation of latent infection: TB, herpes viruses.
Endogenous infections (autogenous infections): From normal
commensals of the skin, respiratory, GI, GU tract are common. It can
occur when part of the individual’s flora becomes altered and results in an
overgrowth of microorganism. When sufficient numbers of
microorganisms normally found in one body cavity or lining are

transferred to another body site, an endogenous infection develops. For
example, transmission of enterococci, normally found in fecal material,
from hands to the skin is a cause of wound infections.
Exogenous infections (cross infections): They are due to the invasion of
causative microorganisms from the source other than the individual’s
themselves, such as from hospital personnel, the other individuals, various
objects and hospital environment.
–   Inanimate environment: Aspergillus  from hospital construction,
Legionella from contaminated water.
–   Animate environment: Hospital staff, visitors, other patients and
cross transmission is common.
Factors Predisposing to Hospital Infection1. Pre-existing condition
2. Need for invasive devices
3. Effect of surgery (skin wound, tissue trauma, opening colonized viscus,
immobilization, implants of foreign material (joint prostheses, arterial
graft)
4. Effect of antibiotic treatment (colonization by resistant bacteria and fungi)
5. Effect of immunosuppressive treatment (corticosteroids, cancer
chemotherapy, radiotherapy, transplant immunosuppression)
6. Exposure to health care workers and other patients, who may transmit
pathogens
7. Exposure to pathogens in the hospital environment.
Epidemiology: It develops in ~10% of patients admitted to hospital
Etiology: Staphylococcus aureus, enterobacteria, Pseudomonas
aeruginosa, Acinetobacter spp., coagulase-negative Staphylococci ,
Enterococci  and Candida are the most frequent pathogens.
Mechanisms of Transmission
Contact: Direct (person-person), indirect (transmission through an
intermediate object-contaminated instruments)
Airborne: Organisms that have a true airborne phase as pattern of
dissemination (TB, Varicella)
Common-vehicle: Common animate vehicle as agent of transmission
(ingested food or water, blood products, IV fluids)

Droplet: Brief passage through the air when the source and patient are in
close proximity
Arthropod borne.
Main Groups of Nosocomial Infection (Box 4.27)
Q. Write short essay/answer on common types of nosocomial infections.
Intravascular Catheter-Related Infections
Localized: Peripheral thrombophlebitis, absces
Systemic: Bacteremia, sepsis, endocarditis, metastatic infection.
Microbiology: Coagulase-negative staphylococci (S. epidermidis), S. aureus,
Candida spp., Enterococcus spp., gram-negative rods.
Clinical features:
Local signs of inflammation at the site of entry: Redness, tenderness,
swelling, slight purulent exudate—prominent in peripheral lines, less in
central lines.
Systemic signs: Fever, rigors and no other source of fever.
Clinical improvement after catheter removal.
Elevated inflammatory markers, typical pathogens in blood culture.
Box 4.27: Main groups of nosocomial infections.
Catheter-related infections
Pneumonia
Respiratory tract infections other than pneumonia
Surgical site infections
Urinary tract infections
Gastrointestinal infections
Central nervous system infections
Management of catheter/line-related sepsis
Two blood cultures, one from catheter, one from peripheral to differentiate colonization vs
catheter related bacteremia.
Catheter removal, culture of the tip – semiquantitative > 15 CFU = infection (insertion of a new
catheter not immediately).
Antibiotics, if symptoms did not resolve after removal, guided by culture results.
Long-time catheters (Broviac, Hickman) – catheter treatment, antibiotic locks.
Prevention and control

Choice of catheter and insertion site.
Aseptic and atraumatic insertion (skin disinfection, barrier precautions), fixation to the skin.
TPN-total parenteral nutrition (all-in-one bags) prepared in the pharmacy under sterile precautions.
Minimimize opening of the IV set for additive drugs, every opening strictly aseptic.
Maintaing adequate hygiene and dressing of the insertion site and regular review of insertion site.
Replacing giving set and catheter at appropriate intervals.
–   Giving set every 72 hours, if lipid emulsions or blood products—24 hours.
–   Catheter—peripheral 48 h, central 7 days, tunneled line much longer.
–   Removal of catheter if not longer necessary.
Hospital-Acquired, Nosocomial Pneumonia (discussed in
Chapter 6 on pages 326-36)
Prevention
Pulmonary toilet
Change position second hourly: Elevate head to 30–45°
Deep breathing, incentive spirometry
Frequent suctioning
Bronchoscopy to remove mucous plugging
Other Respiratory Tract Infections
Tracheobronchitis, sinusitis—frequent in mechanically ventilated patients
risk factor for development nosocomial pneumonia and sepsis.
Urinary Tract Infections (UTI)—Urinary Catheter-Related
Infections
Source of uropathogens
Endogenous: Most common
–   Catheter insertion
–   Retrograde movement up the urethrea (70–80%)
–   Patient’s own enteric flora (E. coli )
Exogenous
–   Cross contamination of drainage systems
–   May cause clusters of UTI’s.
Etiology: Gram-negatives (E. coli, Klebsiella pn., Pseudomonas, Proteus
spp.), enterococci, Candida spp.

Risk factors: Length of catheterization (5%/day), opened drainage system,
diabetes, female sex, age above 50 years.
Colonization is often asymptomatic, but there is a risk of ascending infection
—pyelonephritis, bacteremia, sepsis.
Diagnosis:
Pyuria: >5 leukocytes per high-power field
Urine culture: Significant bacteriuria ≥105 CFU/mL.
Treatment
Catheter removal or change
Antibiotics in symptomatic UTI
Prevention
Avoid catheter when possible and discontinue ASAP—MOST IMPORTANT
Aseptic insertion by trained health care workers
Maintain closed system of drainage
Ensure dependent drainage
Minimize manipulation of the system
Silver coated catheters
Maintenance of good patient hygiene
Replacing catheter at appropriate intervals
ICU-bacteriological screening—urine culture at appropriate intervals.
Surgical Site Infections (SSI)
Infections in the site of surgery and related bacteremias.
CDC classification:
Superficial SSI: Skin and subcutaneous tissue involved
Deep SSI: Deep soft tissue, fascia, muscles
Organ SSI: Organs, cavities.
Microbiology: S. aureus, coagulase-negative staphylococci, enterococci, E.
coli, Pseudomonas, Enterobacter.
Antibiotic prophylaxis
Antibiotics: Bactericidal, effective against considered pathogens, with respect to local resistance, not
beta-lactamases inducers. Short course of prophylaxis—first dose IV at induction of anesthesia,
second dose if surgery > 3 hours.
Prevention of SSI
Preoperative:
–   Minimizing the preoperative hospital stay

–   Cutting better than shaving of surgical site
–   Antibiotic prophylaxis, if indicated
–   Surgical team clothing and washing
–   Skin decolonizationChlorhexidine
Intranasal Mupirocin for S. aureus  carriers
Intraoperative:
–   Regardful (tissue-saving) operation technique
–   Bleeding control
–   Excision of foreign bodies and devitalized tissue
–   Isolation of incised bowel
–   Minimizing of surgical staff and their movementPostoperative:  Aseptic care of the site, sterile covering
Gastrointestinal Infections
Antibiotic-associated colitis
Precipitated by previous antibiotic treatment, mainly lincosamides,
ampicillin, cephalosporins.
Clostridium difficile  toxin A (enterotoxin), toxin B (cytotoxin)
Transmission via spores may cause hospital epidemics.
Postantibiotic diarrhea, simple colitis
Pseudomembranous colitis
Toxic megacolon
Diagnosis:
Clinical: Diarrhea, fever, abdominal pains, vomiting, related to antibiotic
treatment.
Laboratory: Cl.difficile toxin detection—ELISA, antigen detection—
latex agglutination (stool culture on selective agar, cytotoxicity test on
tissue culture = gold standard, rarely available).
Colonoscopy: Typical morphology with pseudomembranes, typical
histology in biopsy specimens.
Treatment
Stop precipitating antibiotic
Rehydration, diet
Antibiotic: per oral. metronidazol 3–4 × 500 mg p.o. or vancomycin 4 × 125–250 mg treat at least
7 days
Probiotic drugs, colestipol, rifaximin have been tried

Toxic megacolon—colectomy
Central Nervous System Infections
CSF shunt-related, rare occurrence, mostly Staph. aureus and
Pseudomonas, often serious course (nosocomial ventriculitis) and high
mortality.
Strategies to Reduce Nosocomial Infection
Q. Write short essay/answer on measures to minimize nosocomial
infection.
Modify host: Risk factors such as age, underlying disease are difficult to
change.
Reduce patient exposure to pathogens.
Reduce the number and virulence of nosocomial pathogens.
Exposure Reduction
Use of aseptic technique during patient care.
Regular handwashing.
Proper isolation of patients known or suspected of harboring infectious
diseases.
Handwashing frequently is the single most important measure to prevent
nosocomial infections.
SEPSIS
Q. Discuss management of a patient with septic shock.
Q. Write short note on sepsis/SIRS/ MODS/Septic shock.
Systemic inflammatory response syndrome(SIRS)
SIRS is the body’s response to a clinical insult (e.g. infection, inflammation, stress, trauma, burns)
Must have at least 2 of the following:
–   Temperature >38.5°C or <36°C
–   Heart rate >90 beats/min
–   Respiratory rate >20 breaths/min or PaCO2<32 mm Hg
–   WBC >12,000 cells/mm3, <4000 cells/mm3, or >10% immature (band) forms.

Sepsis: SIRS + suspected or confirmed infection (documented via cultures or
visualized via physical exam/imaging). Latest definition of sepsis-Sepsis is
defined as life threatening organ dysfunction caused by the dysregulated host
response to infection. (Sepsis = suspected infection PLUS q SOFA = 2) q
SOFA- 3 criteria:Hypotension-systolic BP <100 mm Hg, altered mental
status-GCS <13, respiratory rate >22.
Severe sepsis:  Sepsis + at least one sign of organ hypoperfusion or dysfunction (this category is
removed as per 2016 guidelines).Septic shock:  Severe sepsis plus one of the following conditions:
–   MAP <60 mm Hg (<80 mm Hg if previous hypertension) after adequate fluid resuscitation.
–   Need for pressors to maintain BP after fluid resuscitation.
–   Adequate fluid resuscitation = 40–60 mL/kg saline solution (NS 5L-10L).
–   Lactate >2 mmol/L.Multiple organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS)
–   Altered organ function in an acutely ill patient.
–   Homeostasis cannot be maintained without intervention.
A continuum of severity describing the host systemic inflammatory response
(Fig. 4.34).
Fig. 4.34: Continuum of severity of sepsis.
(SIRS: systemic inflammatory response syndrome; CNS: central nervous system)
Etiology of Sepsis

Septic shock may be caused by gram-positive (most common) or gram-
negative bacteria, fungi , and, very rarely, protozoa or Rickettsiae. The
common gram-positive bacteria include Staphylococcus aureus,  enterococci,
Streptococcus pneumoniae, and gram-negative bacilli which are resistant to
usual antibiotics.
Risk factors for sepsis are listed in Table 4.55.
Pathogenesis of septic shock is illustrated in Figure 4.35.
Management of Sepsis
Surviving sepsis campaignStep 1: Identify sepsis
Step 2: Categorize sepsis
Step 3: Initiate treatment
Table 4.55: Risk factors for sepsis.
Genetic polymorphism
Cytokine responses
Coagulation
Mannose binding proteinsIntrinsic factors
Age
Nutrition
Comorbidities
Vaccination
Immunosuppression
Procedures
Urinary catheters
Intravenous cannula
Wound dressingsCommunity factors
Contacts
Disease outbreaks
Specific exposure
Surgery
Wounds
Emergency versus elective
Dirty versus clean
Prosthetic materialHospital factors
Duration of stay in hospital
Where in hospital (e.g. intensive care unit)
Outbreaks
Local antimicrobial resistance rates

Fig. 4.35: Pathogenesis of septic shock. Microbial products initiate endothelial cell activation/injury
activates endothelial cells, complement activation, activation of neutrophils and macrophages, factor
XII. These initiating events lead to end-stage multiorgan failure.
(DIC: disseminated intravascular coagulation; HMGB1: high mobility group box 1 protein; NO: nitric
oxide; PAF: platelet activating factor; TF: tissue factor)
Identifying acute organ dysfunction as a marker of severe sepsis is presented in Table 4.56.
Box 4.28 lists the principles of sepsis management.
Box 4.28:  Principles of sepsis management.
Recognize sepsis early and determine severity.
Organ dysfunction is determined by SOFA (Sequential Organ Failure Assessment Score) which
include paO 2, bilirubin, creatinine and platelet count.
Early antibiotics  are critical to resolution of shock.
Resuscitate severe sepsis and septic shock as soon as possible.
Early goal directed therapy
Initial resuscitation: Volume resuscitation with normal saline 30 mL/kg over first 30 min → if
mean arterial pressure >70 mm Hg start inotropes (discussed later).
Diagnosis
–   Blood culture:  Before the initiation of antimicrobial therapy, at least two blood cultures should
be obtained: (1) at least one drawn percutaneously and (2) at least one drawn through each
vascular access device if inserted longer than 48 hours.
–   Other cultures such as urine, cerebrospinal fluid, wounds, respiratory secretions or other body

fluids should be obtained as per the clinical situation.
–   Other diagnostic studies such as imaging and sampling should be performed promptly to
determine the source and causative organism of the infection.
Antibiotic therapy
–   Start intravenous antibiotic therapy within the first hour of recognition of severe sepsis
after obtaining appropriate cultures.
–   Empirical choice of antimicrobials should include one or more drugs with activity against
likely pathogens, both bacterial or fungal
♦   Penetrate presumed source of infection
♦   Guided by susceptibility patterns in the community and hospital
♦   Continue broad spectrum therapy until the causative organism and its susceptibilities are
defined
Source control:  Evaluate patients for focus of infection amenable to source control measures
(Table 4.57)
Fluid therapy
–   Crystalloids: always use first !
–   Table 4.56: Identifying acute organ dysfunction as a marker of severe sepsis.
Table 4.56: Identifying acute organ dysfunction as a marker of severe
sepsis.
Cardiovascular Respiratory CNS
Tachycardia
HypotensionTachypnea
PaO2<70 mm Hg
SaO2<90%
PaO2/FiO2≤300Altered consciousness
Confusion
Psychosis
Renal Hematological Liver
Oliguria
Anuria
↑ Creatinine↓ Platelets
↑ PT/APTT
↓ Protein C
↑ D-dimerJaundice
↑ Liver enzymes
↓ Albumin
↑ PT
Table 4.57: Measures to control source of infection.
Drainage
Intra-abdominal abscess
Thoracic empyemaSeptic arthritis
Pyelonephritis, cholangitis
Debridement
Necrotizing fasciitis
Infected pancreatic necrosisMediastinitis
Intestinal infarction
Device Removal

Infected vascular catheter
Urinary catheterColonized endotracheal tube
Definitive Control
Sigmoid resection for diverticulitis
Amputation for clostridial myonecrosisCholecystectomy for gangrenous cholecystitis
qSOFA-Quick SOFA
Respiratory rate >22/min, altered mentation,
SBP<100 mm HgAny two positive-poor prognosis
Vasopressors
–   Initiate vasopressor therapy if appropriate fluid challenge fails to restore adequate blood
pressure and organ perfusion.
–   Either norepinephrine or dopamines are first line agents to correct hypotension in septic shock.
♦   Norepinephrine is more potent and may be more effective than dopamine at reversing
hypotension in septic shock patients.
♦   Dopamine may be particularly useful in patients with compromised systolic function but
causes more tachycardia and may be more arrhythmogenic.
Inotropic Therapy
–   In patients with low cardiac output despite of adequate fluid resuscitation, dobutamine  can
be used to increase cardiac output.
–   Should be combined with vasopressor therapy in the presence of hypotension.
Steroids
–   In patients with septic shock who require vasopressor therapy to maintain blood pressure
intravenous corticosteroids are recommended.
–   Administer intravenous hydrocortisone 200–300 mg/day for 7 days in three or four divided
doses or by continuous infusion.
Recombinant Human activated Protein C (rhaPC) [drotrecogin alfa (activated)]: It is
recommended in patients at a high risk of death
–   APACHE II (Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation II) score ≥25, or
–   Sepsis-induced multiple organ failure, or
–   Septic shock, or
–   Sepsis induced acute respiratory distress syndrome
Patients should have no absolute or relative contraindication related to bleeding risk that outweighs
the potential benefit of rhAPC.Blood product administration:  Red blood transfusion should be given only when hemoglobin
decreases to <7 g/dL. Target hemoglobin of 7–9 g/dL.
Mechanical ventilation
–   Sepsis-induced acute lung injury (ALI)/ARDS (adult respiratory distress syndrome).
–   High tidal volumes, >6 mL/kg, coupled with high plateau pressures, >30 cm H2O, should be
avoided. A minimum amount of positive end expiratory pressure should be set to prevent lung
collapse at end-expiration.
Sedation, analgesia, and neuromuscular blockade in sepsis
–   The use of protocols and daily interruption/lightening of continuous sedative infusion have
shown to reduce the duration of mechanical ventilation and length of stay.

Glucose control: Following initial stabilization of patients with severe sepsis, blood glucose to
<150 mg/dL. Glycemic control strategy must include a nutrition protocol with the preferential use
of the enteral route.
Renal replacement: Continuous veno-venous hemofiltration and intermittent hemodialysis are
considered equivalent in acute renal failure. Continuous hemofiltration offers easier management
of fluid balance in hemodynamically unstable septic patients.Bicarbonate therapy:  Bicarbonate is not recommended for improving hemodynamics or reducing
vasopressor requirements or for the treatment of hypoperfusion induced lactic academia with pH
>7.15.
Deep vein thrombosis prophylaxis:  DVT prophylaxis with either low-dose unfractionated
heparin or low molecular weight heparin should be used in severe sepsis patients.
Stress ulcer prophylaxis:  Stress ulcer prophylaxis should be given to all patients with severe
sepsis. H2 receptor blockers are more efficacious than sucralfate and are the preferred agents.
Proton pump inhibitors compared to H2 blockers have not been assessed.
Early goal directed therapy (EGDT) (Table 4.58).
Q. Write short note on EGDT (early goal directed therapy).
Table 4.58: Early goal directed therapy (EGDT).
6-hour severe sepsis/septic shock bundle 24-hour severe sepsis and septic shock bundle
Early detection: Obtain serum lactate level.
Early blood culture/antibiotics:  Within 3
hours of presentation.
Hypotension (SBP <90, MAP <65) or
lactate >4 mmol/ Initial fluid bolus 20–40 mL
of crystalloid (or colloid equivalent) per kg of
body weight.Vasopressors:
–   Hypotension not responding to fluid
–   Titrate to MAP >65 mm Hg.
Septic shock or lactate >4 mmol/L:
–   CVP and ScvO 2measured.
–   CVP maintained >8 mm Hg.
–   MAP maintain >65 mm Hg.
PRBCs (packed RBCs) if hematocrit <30%.
Inotropes.Glucose control: Maintained on average
<150 mg/dL
Drotrecogin alfa (activated):  Administered
in accordance with clinical situation
Steroids:  For septic shock requiring
continued use of vasopressors for equal to or
greater than 6 hours.
Lung protective strategy: Maintain plateau
pressures <30 cm H 2O for mechanically
ventilated patients
DVT prophylaxis
Early enteral nutrition
Stress ulcer prophylaxis
ANTI-INFECTIVE THERAPY
Antimicrobial Combination Therapy
Limit combination therapy to special situations

Synergistic killing, e.g. β-lactam plus aminoglycoside for endocarditis
Mixed infections or severe infections of unknown cause, e.g. limb
infections in diabetic patients
To prevent the emergence of resistance, e.g. M. tuberculosis
Initial empiric therapy
Multidrug Therapy
Tuberculosis, infective endocarditis, malaria, HIV, leprosy.
Antibiotic Chemoprophylaxis
Infective endocarditis: Amoxicillin + Gentamicin
Splenectomy: Penicillin
Rheumatic fever: Penicillin
Tuberculosis: INH
Meningitis: Meningococcal and H. influenzae:  Rifampicin
Beta-lactam Antibiotics
Q. Write a short essay/note on β-lactam antibiotics.
Q. Mention four β-lactam antibiotics with dosage.
Q. Mention Cephalosporins and name drugs belonging to third
generations.
These antibiotics have a β-lactam ring structure and their bactericidal (lysis of
bacteria) action is due to their inhibition enzymes involved in cell wall
formation in the bacteria (penicillin binding proteins, PBP).
Types of beta-lactam antibiotics (Flowchart 4.3)
Adverse effects of beta-lactam antibiotics (Box 4.29)
Drug Resistance
Antibiotic resistance is a challenging and growing problem. The most
important mechanism of drug resistance is destruction of drugs by beta-
lactamase enzymes.
Box 4.29:  Adverse effects of beta-lactam antibiotics.
Generalized allergy to penicillin

Gastrointestinal upset and diarrhea
Mild reversible hepatitis
Leucopenia, thrombocytopenia and coagulation deficiencies, and interstitial nephritis and
potentiation of aminoglycoside-mediated renal damage
Thrombophlebitis with parenteral β-lactams.
Flowchart 4.3:  Classification of beta-lactam antibiotics.
β-Lactamases
Q. Write a short essay/note on β-lactamases.
Beta-lactam antibiotics have a β-lactam ring structure. They exert a
bactericidal action by inhibiting enzymes involved in cell wall synthesis
(penicillin binding proteins, PBP).
β-lactamases are bacterial enzymes produced by many gram-positive and
gram-negative bacteria. Theses enzymes can inactivate β-lactam
antibacterials by hydrolysis of β-lactam ring structure and results in
infective compounds. Production of β-lactamases by these bacteria is the
most important factor that contributes to β-lactam antibiotic resistance.Many serine-active β-lactamases inhibitors (e.g. clavulanic acid,
sulbactam and tazobactam) in combination with β-lactam antibiotics are
used to reduce drug resistance by bacteria containing β-lactamases.

Extended-Spectrum β-Lactamases (ESBL)
Several isolates of Enterobacteriaceae  and Pseudomonas have been
identified which produce newer β-lactamases. These enzymes include (1)
plasmid-mediated cephamycinases, (2) extended-spectrum β-lactamases
(ESBLs), and (3) carbapenem-hydrolyzing enzymes or carbapenemases.
Major sources of β-lactamases (Table 4.59)
Most commonly β-lactamases are produced by Klebsiella spp.,
Escherichia coli  but can occur in other GNB (gram-negative bacilii),
including Enterobacter, Proteus, Salmonella, and Citrobacter spp.,
Morganella amorganii , Shigella dysenteriae, Serratia marcescens,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Burkholderia cepacia.
Mutant, plasmid-mediated β-lactamases enzymes are derived from amino
acid substitutions in native β-lactamases (particularly TEM-1, TEM-2, and
SHV-1)
Typically associated with multidrug resistance (fluoroquinolones, co-
trimoxazole, aminoglycosides).
Table 4.59: Major sources of β-lactamases.
Types of β-lactamases Major sources
TEM, SHV Escherichia coli , Klebsiella pneumoniae
Cefotaxime hydrolyzing (CTX-M) Salmonella typhimurium, E. coli, K. pneumoniae
Oxacillin hydrolyzing (OXA) Pseudomonas aeurginosa
PER-1 P. aeruginosa, A. baumanii,S. typhimurium
PER-2 Salmonella typhimurium
VEB-1 E. coli, P. aeruginosa
Actions
β-lactamases are able to hydrolyze all penicillins, cephalosporins (except
cephamycins), and monobactams. These are associated with multidrug
resistance (fluoroquinolones, co-trimoxazole, aminoglycosides).
The ESBLs are a group of enzymes capable of hydrolyzing and cause
resistance to the oxyimino-cephalosporins (cefotaxime, ceftazidime,
ceftriaxone, cefuroxime and cefepime) and monobactams (aztreonam), but
not the cephamycins (cefoxitin, cefotetan) or carbapenems (imipenem,

meropenem, doripenem and ertapenem).
Risk factors: Predisposing to infection or colonization with ESBL-producing
pathogens are presented in Table 4.60.
Treatment recommendations for infections with ESBL producers (Table
4.61).
Carbapenem-Resistant Enterobacteriaceae
KPC (Klebsiella pneumoniae Carbapenemase)
Clonal outbreaks in New York, Israel, Greece, Colombia, Brazil, China,
Canada (Montreal)
Q. Write a short essay/note on New Delhi Metallo-β-lactamase (NDM-
1).
NDM-1 (New Delhi metallo-β-lactamase)
It is a novel metallo-β-lactamase (MBL) coded by a novel gene bla
(NDM-1) in Enterobacteriaceae.
Table 4.60: Risk factors predisposing to infection or colonization with
ESBL-producing pathogens.
1.  Critically ill patients/severely debilitated individuals
Prolonged stay in hospital or ICU unit
Invasive procedures: e.g. indwelling catheter, central venous catheter, tracheostomy,
endotracheal or nasogastric tube
Stay in long-term care facility
Decubitus ulcer
Total dependence on health care workers
2.  Prior antibiotic use in last 3 months
Exposure to 2nd, 3rd cephalosporins, aztreonam, penicillin, and quinolones
Delay in appropriate antibiotic therapy
Table 4.61: Treatment recommendations for infections with ESBL
producers.
1. No treatment needed for colonization with ESBL producers
2. Imipenem or meropenem
Bloodstream infection
Ventilator-associated pneumonia

Any producers that appear to have reduced susceptibility to ertapenem
3. Ertapenem or doripenem
Complicated infections of urinary tract
Diabetic food infections
Intra-abdominal infections
4. Quinolones:  Infections in patients with risk for allergy to carbapenems, if isolates are susceptible
5. Nitrofurantoin or fosfomycin:  Uncomplicated infection of lower urinary tract
6. Tigecycline, colistin, or polymyxin B
Isolates resistant to all other antibiotic options
Patients allergic to β-lactams
First it was reported in a Swedish male diabetic, who returned to Sweden
after having treatment for gluteal abscess in December 2007 at a hospital
in New Delhi. Since the immediate previous treatment was in New Delhi
it was named as NDM-1.Subsequently, Enterobacteriaceae family containing this genetic element
was detected in various regions of India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Britain and
many other countries.
MBL (metallo-β-lactamase) enzymes mediate resistance to almost β-
lactam agents (except monobactams, e.g. aztreonam) including
carbapenems.Organism carrying this gene has multidrug resistance and are susceptible
only to tigecycline and colistin.
MISCELLANEOUS
Amikacin
Q. Write short note on amikacin.
It is a semisynthetic derivative of kanamycin  and has pharmacokinetics,
dose and toxicity.
Outstanding feature: Amikacin has the wide spectrum of activity and
effective against many organisms that are resistant to other
aminoglycosides. However, it is effective in relatively higher dose against
Pseudomonas, Proteus, and Staphylococci .
Indications: The range of conditions in which amikacin can be used is as
same as for gentamicin. It is reserved for hospital acquired gram-
negative bacterial infections where gentamicin/tobramycin resistance

is high . It is effective against tuberculosis, but rarely used for its
treatment.
Toxicity: It causes more hearing loss than vestibular disturbance,
nephrotoxicity, neurotoxicity.
Dose: 15 mg/kg/day in 1–3 doses; urinary tract infections 7.5 mg/kg/day.
Best given as single daily infusion (minimizes the toxicity).
Indications of Doxycycline
Q. Write short note on indications of doxycycline.
Doxycycline is a tetracycline antibiotic. It is indicated for many different
bacterial infections, such as acne, urinary tract infections, intestinal
infections, eye infections, gonorrhea, chlamydia, etc.
Cephalosporins
Q. Write short note on cephalosporins.
Cephalosporins are group of semisynthetic antibiotics derived from
cephalosporin-C obtained from a fungus Cephalosporium . They are
chemically related to penicillins.
First generation cephalosporins: Cephalexin, cephradine, cefadroxil
Second generation cephalosporins: Cefuroxime, cefuroxime axetil,
Cefaclor
Third generation cephalosporins: Cefotaxime, ceftizoxime, ceftriaxone,
ceftazidime, cefoperazone, cefixime, cefpodoxime, cefdinir, ceftibuten,
ceftamet pivoxilFourth generation cephalosporins: Cefepime, cefpirome.
Side Effects of Tetracycline, Chloramphenicol, Quinolones
(Table 4.62)
Table 4.62: Side effects of tetracycline, chloramphenicol, quinolones,
lithium.
Drug Side effects
Tetracycline Dose related:  Epigastric pain, nausea,
vomiting, diarrhea, fatty liver, renal damage,
phototoxicity, brown discoloration of teeth,
antianabolic effect, increased intracranial

pressure, vestibular toxicity
Hypersensitivity
Superinfection
Chloramphenicol Bone marrow depression, hypersensitivity
reactions, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea,
superinfection, gray baby syndrome
Quinolones/fluoroquinolonesGIT:  Nausea, anorexia, vomiting, bad taste
CNS:  Dizziness, headache, restlessness,
anxiety, insomnia, tremor
Skin: Hypersensitivity, rash, pruritus
Tendonitis and tendon rupture
Q. Write short note on side effects of tetracycline, chloramphenicol,
quinolones.
Side Effects of Sulfonamides (Box 4.30)
Box 4.30:  Side effects of sulfonamides.
Nausea, vomiting and epigastric pain
Crystalluria
Hypersensitivity reactions
Hepatitis
Contact sensitization with topical use
Hemolysis in persons with G6PD deficiency
Precipitation of kernicterus in premature newborn
Q. Write short note on side effects of sulfonamides.
Classification of Antifungal Drugs (Table 4.63)
Q. Write short note on antifungal drugs.
Ketoconazole
Q. Write short note on ketoconazole.
Ketoconazole is antifungal drug belonging to the azole group. It inhibits
enzymes involved in steroid hormone biosynthesis and prevents the growth
of the fungus. Ketoconazole is available for oral administration (causes
severe hepatitis and it has been discontinued in many countries) and for
topical application (e.g. for the treatment of tinea, cutaneous candidiasis).
Antiviral Agents (Table 4.64)

Ivermectin
Q. Write short note on ivermectin.
It is an extremely potent semisynthetic derivative of the antinematodal
principle obtained from Streptomyces avermitilis.
Indications
Drug of choice for single dose treatment of onchocerciasis and
strongyloidiasis.
Bancroftian and brugian filaria
Cutaneous larva migrans and ascariasis.
Scabies and head lice.
Indications for Intravenous Gamma Globulin (Box 4.31)
Q. Write short note on indications for intravenous gamma globulin.
Table 4.63: Classification of antifungal drugs.
Type of drug Examples
1.  Antibiotic
Polyenes
Heterocyclic bezofuran 
Amphotericin B (AMB), nystatin, hamycin,
natamycin
Griseofulvin
2.  Antimetabolite Flucytosine
3.  Azoles
Imidazoles (topical)
Triazoles (systemic) 
Clotrimazole, econazole, miconazole,
oxiconazole (systemic, ketoconazole)
Fluconazole, itraconazole, voriconazole
4.  Echinocandin: Impairs b 1,3 glucan
synthesisCaspofungin, micafungin ,anidulafungin
5.  Other topical agents Tolnaftate, undecyleni cacid, benzoic acid,
quiniodochlor, ciclopirox olamine, butenafine,
sodium thiosulfate
6.  AllylamineTerbinafine
Table 4.64: Antiviral agents.
Category Drugs

Anti-influenza agents Amantadine, Oseltamir, Permivir, Rimantadine,
Zanamivir
Antiherpes virus agents Aciclovir, Cidofovir, Docosanol, Famciclovir,
Foscarnet, Fomivirsen, Ganciclovir, Idoxuridine,
Penciclovir, Trifluridine, Tromantadine,
Valaciclovir, Valganciclovir, Vidarabine
Antiretroviral agents NRTIs: Zidovudine, Didanosine, Stavudine,
Zalcitabine, Lamivudine, Abacavir, Tenofovir
NNRTIs:  Nevirapine, Efavirenz, Delaviridine
PIs: Saquinavir, Indinavir, Atazanavir, Ritonavir,
Nefinavir, Amprenavir, Lopinavir, Tipranavir
New ART:  Maraviroc, Enfluvitide
Other antiviral agents Fomivirsen, Enfuvirtide, Iniquimod, Interferon,
Ribavirin, Viramidine
Box 4.31:  Indications for intravenous gammaglobulin.
Transplantation
Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation
Kidney transplantation with a high antibody recipient or with an ABO incompatible donor
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in patients older than 20 years
Immunodeficiency
Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID)
Primary immunodeficiency disorders associated with defects in humoral immunity.
Others
Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy (CIDP)
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia
Kawasaki disease
Pediatric HIV type 1 infection
Box 4.32:  Mnemonic: Very Sick Person Must Take Double Eggs.
Varicella (Chicken pox): 1st day (rash is often 1st sign in children)
Scarlet fever: 2nd day
Pox (Small pox): 3rd day
Measles (Rubeola or 14 day measles): 4th day (Remember: Koplik spots appear in pre-eruptive phase
on 2nd day of fever)
Typhus: 5th day
Dengue: 6th day
Enteric fever: 7th day
Commonly Used Immunoglobulins

Human immunoglobulins:
–   Human normal immunoglobulins: Hepatitis A, measles, rabies, tetanus,
mumps.
–   Human specific immunoglobulins: Hepatitis B, varicella, diphtheria.
Non-human (antisera): Bacterial (e.g. diphtheria, tetanus, gas gangrene,
botulism), viral (e.g. rabies)
Infections Associated with Skin Rash (Table 4.65 and Box 4.32)
Q. Write short note on infections associated with skin rash.
Table 4.65: Infections associated with skin rash.
Macular/maculopapular: Measles, rubella, enterovirus, Epstein–Barr virus, cytomegalovirus,
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), dengue, typhoid, secondary syphilis, Rickettsiae spotted
fevers
Erythematous:  Scarlet fever, Lyme disease, Toxic shock syndrome (Staphylococcus,
Streptococcus), Human parvovirus B19
Vesicular:  Chickenpox (varicella zoster virus), Shingles (varicella zoster virus), herpes simplex virus
Petechial/hemorrhagic:  Meningococcal septicemia, any septicemia with disseminated intravascular
coagulation (DIC), Rickettsiae and viruses (Flavivirus, Bunyavirus, Arenavirus, Filovirus)
Urticarial:  Strongyloides, Schistosoma , Cutaneous larva migrans
Others:  Tick typhus (eschar), primary syphilis (chancre), anthrax (ulcerating papule), ulcers
associated with other STD’s

HIV Infection and AIDS

CHAPTER
5
INTRODUCTION
Q. Discuss the etiology/epidemiology, mode of transmission, clinical
features, stages, laboratory diagnosis and management of HIV-
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).
More than 36.7 million individuals worldwide are seropositive for human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
India has the third largest HIV epidemic in the world. In 2016, HIV
prevalence in India was an estimated 0.3%.
Overall, India’s HIV epidemic is slowing down, with a 32% decline in
new HIV infections (80,000 in 2016), and a 54% decline in AIDS-related
deaths between 2007 and 2015.
Characteristic Features of HIVAcquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) is caused by the retrovirus
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV). HIV is a single-stranded RNA
human retrovirus and possesses the RNA-dependent DNA polymerase
(reverse transcriptase (RT) enzyme).Discovered independently by Dr Luc Montagnier, Dr Anthony Gallo and
Dr Jay Levy in 1983–84.
The virus causes infection and depletion of CD4+ T lymphocytes.
Severe immunosuppression → leads to opportunistic infections, secondary
neoplasms, and neurologic manifestations.
AIDS: It is defined as clinical diagnosis of any stage 4 condition (defined
below) or CD4 cell count <200 cells/μL with confirmed HIV infection or a
CD4+ T-cell percentage less than 15% of total lymphocytes.Former names of the virus include: Human T-cell lymphotropic virus
(HTLV-III), lymphadenopathy associated virus (LAV), AIDS-associated

retrovirus (ARV).
ETIOLOGY
Q. Write short essay/note on etiology of HIV-AIDS.
Properties of HIV
AIDS is caused by HIV, which is a nontransforming human retrovirus
belonging to the lentivirus family. Retroviruses are RNA viruses having an
enzyme called reverse transcriptase, which prepares a DNA copy of the
RNA genome of the virus in host cell .
Genetic forms: HIV occurs in two genetically different but related main
forms—HIV-1 and HIV-2.HIV-1 is most common in the United States, Europe, and Central Africa.
HIV-1 comprises several subtypes with different geographic distribution.
Four major groups of HIV-1 are:
1. Group M (‘major’, 98% of infections worldwide): Group M subtypes
exhibit a high degree of diversity and consists of 9 subtypes: A–D, F–
H, J and K (subtypes E and I were subsequently shown to be
recombinants of other subtypes).
♦   Subtype C (Africa and India accounts for half of the strains and
more readily transmitted.
♦   Subtype B predominates in Western Europe, North Americas and
Australia.
♦   Subtypes A and D are associated with slower and faster disease
progression respectively.
2. Group O  (‘outlier’) subtypes are highly divergent from group M and
are largely confined to small numbers centred on Cameroon.
3. Group N (new-‘non-major and non-outlier’) is mostly restricted to
West Central Africa (e.g. Gabon).
4. Group P  related to gorilla strains of SIV (simian immunodeficiency
virus) has been identified from a patient from Cameroon.HIV-2 is common  in West Africa and India.
Structure of HIV (Fig. 5.1)

HIV-1 is spherical enveloped  ribonucleic acid (RNA) retrovirus from the
Lentivirus family. It is about 90–120 nm in diameter.
Each mature virion consists of electron-dense, cone-shaped core
surrounded by nucleocapsid cell which is covered by lipoprotein
envelope/membrane.
Fig. 5.1:  Diagrammatic representation of structure of the human immune deficiency virus (HIV)-1
virion.
Viral Core
Major capsid protein p24: This viral antigen and the antibodies against
this are used for the diagnosis of HIV infection  in enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
Nucleocapsid protein p7/p9.
Two identical copies of single stranded RNA genome. The inner cone-
shaped protein core (p24) houses two copies of the single-stranded RNA
genome and viral enzymes (mentioned below).
Three viral enzymes: (1) protease, (2) reverse transcriptase (RNA-
dependent DNA polymerase), and (3) integrase. When the virus infects a
cell, the retroviral RNA is not translated; instead it is transcribed by
reverse transcriptase into DNA. The DNA form of the retroviral genome is
called a provirus which can be integrated into the chromosome of host
cell.Nucleocapsid

The viral core is surrounded by a matrix protein p24 and p17, which lies
underneath the lipid envelope of the virion.
Lipid Envelope
The virus contains a lipoprotein envelope/membrane, which consists of lipid
derived from the host cell and two viral glycoproteins. These glycoproteins
are: (1) gp120 which project as numerous external (on the surface) knob-like
spikes, and (2) gp41 anchoring transmembrane pedicle. These glycoproteins
are essential for HIV infection of cells.
HIV Genome
It contains two main groups of genes and their products act as antigens.1. Standard genes: HIV-1 RNA genome contains three characteristic
standard retroviral genes, which are typical of retroviruses. These include:
gag (encodes the structural proteins of the core, including p24), pol
(codes for the enzymes crucial for viral replication, i.e. reverse
transcriptase, integrase and protease) and env (codes for envelope
glycoproteins gp120 and gp41). Initially, the protein products of the gag
and pol genes are translated into large precursor proteins and are later
cleaved by the viral enzyme protease to form → mature proteins.
2. Six regulatory/accessory genes: HIV contains accessory genes, e.g. tat,
rev, vif, nef, vpr, and vpu . They regulate the synthesis and assembly of
infectious viral particles and the pathogenicity of the virus.
Modes/Routes of Transmission
Q. Write short essay/note on modes of transmission of HIV infection
and high-risk groups.
Transmission of HIV occurs when there is an exchange of blood or body
fluids containing the virus or virus-infected cells. Exposure route and
percentage of transmission of HIV is presented in Table 5.1. High viral load
is one of the high-risk factor common to all mode of transmission.
Table 5.1: Exposure route and percentage of transmission of HIV.
Exposure route HIV transmission
Blood transfusion 90–95%
Perinatal 20–40% Sexual intercourse: 0.1 to 1%

Sexua l intercourse: 0.1 to 1%
Vaginal 0.05–0.1%
Anal 0.065–0.82%
Oral 0.005–0.01%
Injecting drugs use 0.63–2.14%
Needle stick exposure 0.13%
Mucous membrane splash to eye, oronasal 0.09%
The three major routes of transmission are:
1. Sexual transmission: It is the main route of infection  in more than 75%
of cases of HIV. Risk  of sexual transmission of HIV is increased when
there is coexisting sexually transmitted diseases, especially those
associated with genital ulceration  (e.g. syphilis, chancroid, and herpes).
Other risk factors include vaginal/rectal laceration, menstruation and
uncircumcised male partner.
Homosexual or bisexual men  or heterosexual contacts: It may be male-
to-male, or male-to-female or female-to-male transmission. Worldwide,
the major route of transmission is heterosexual .
HIV is present in genital fluids such as vaginal secretions and cervical
cells (in women) and semen (in men).The risk of contracting HIV after
exposure to infected body fluid is dependent on the integrity of the
exposed site, the type and volume of fluid, and the level of viremia in the
source person. Risk of HIV acquisition is decreased with circumcision in
heterosexual men.
Parenteral transmission:
i.   Intravenous drug abusers: Transmission occurs by sharing of
needles, and syringes contaminated  with HIV-containing blood.
ii.  Hemophiliacs: Mainly those who received large amounts factor VIII
and factor IX concentrates before 1985. Now increasing use of
recombinant-clotting factors have eliminated this mode of
transmission.
iii. Transfusion of blood or blood components: Recipients of blood
transfusion of HIV-infected whole blood or components (e.g.
platelets, plasma) was one of the modes of transmission. Screening of
donor blood and plasma for antibody to HIV has reduced the risk of
this mode of transmission. However, since a recently infected

individual may be antibody-negative (seronegative), there is a small
risk of acquiring AIDS through transfusion of blood.
iv. Splash of body fluids on mucosa (e.g. nose, mouth and eyes)
v.  Organs from HIV-infected donors can also transmit AIDS.
2. Perinatal transmission (mother-to-infant transmission): Major mode
of transmission of AIDS in children. Transmission of infection can occur
by three routes:
i.   In utero vertical transmission from mother to fetus: It is
transmitted by transplacental spread. It can occur in two ways: (1)
direct inoculation of virus or infected cells into the blood vessels at the
site of breach caused by trauma; and (2) by uptake into the mucosal
dendritic cells (DCs).
ii.  Perinatal/peripartum spread: During normal vaginal delivery or
child birth (intrapartum) through an infected birth canal  and in the
immediate period (peripartum). High-risk group includes older
gestational age and prolonged rupture of membranes.
iii. After birth through breastfeeding: It is transmitted by ingestion of
breast milk or from the genital secretions.
Transmission of HIV infection to healthcare workers: There is an
extremely small risk  of transmission to healthcare professional, after
accidental needle-stick injury or exposure of nonintact skin to infected
blood.
Routes by which HIV is not transmitted  (Box 5.1)
Box 5.1:  Routes by which HIV is not transmitted.Close personal contact (including kissing, hugging)
Sharing of utensils and insect bites
Household contact
Contact at school, swimming pool, etc.
PATHOGENESIS OF HIV INFECTION AND
AIDS
The interaction between HIV and the host immune system is the basis of
the pathogenesis of HIV disease. From the site of initial mucosal
exposure, virus enters the blood or tissues of an individual. HIV is

transported by dendritic cells from mucosal surfaces to regional lymph
nodes where it establishes a permanent infection. This is followed by
viremia and dissemination to lymphoid organs, which are the main sites of
viral replication.
Major targets: Two major targets of HIV infection are the immune
system and the nervous system.
Life Cycle of HIV
Life cycle of HIV consists of four main steps namely: (1) infection of cells by
HIV, (2) integration of the provirus into the host cell genome, (3) activation
of viral replication, and (4) production and release of infectious virus (Fig.
5.2).1. Infection of Cells by HIV:
Cell tropism: HIV can infect many tissues, but it has selective affinity
for host cells bearing the CD4 molecule receptor. The cells with such
receptors include CD4+ T-cells (T-helper lymphocytes) which are
present in the mucosal lymphoid tissue (largest reservoir of T-cells
and where majority of memory cells are lodged) and other CD4+ cells
such as monocytes/macrophages, dendritic cells and microglial cells
in the central nervous system. The HIV envelope contains two
glycoproteins, surface gp120 noncovalently attached to a
transmembrane protein, gp41.Gp120 of HIV binding to CD4 molecule receptor on the host cell is
the first step in HIV infection. Binding alone is not enough for
infection and requires participation of a coreceptor molecule.Conformational change: Binding to CD4 leads to a conformational
change in the HIV, that results in the formation of a new recognition
site on gp120 for the coreceptors CCR5 or CXCR4. Inhibition of this
binding will inhibit viral replication. T-cell tropic HIV strains mainly
use CXCR4 as a coreceptor and are called X4 strains, whereas
223macrophage-tropic strains, responsible for host-to-host
transmission, use CCR5 as a coreceptor and are referred to as R5
strains. Individuals homozygous for mutations within CCR5 gene
are resistant to infection by HIV1.

Fig. 5.2:  Various molecular steps involved in the life cycle of HIV.
Gp120 binding to chemokine receptor: New recognition site on
gp120 of HIV binds to chemokine receptors, i.e. CCR5 and CXCR4.
Penetration of host cell membrane by gp41: Binding of gp120 to the
chemokine coreceptors leads to conformational changes in gp41.
Membrane fusion: The conformational change in gp41 allows HIV to
penetrate the cell membrane of the target cells (e.g. CD4+ T-cells or
macrophages), leading to fusion of the virus with the host cell.Entry of viral genome into cytoplasm of host cell: Once internalized,
the virus core containing the HIV genome enters the cytoplasm of the
host cell.2. Integration of the proviral DNA into the genome of the host cell
After the internalization of the virus core, reverse transcriptase enzyme
initiates copying of the viral RNA into double-stranded DNA→ leading to
the synthesis of double-stranded complementary DNA
(cDNA/proviral DNA).
Episomal form: In quiescent T-cells, HIV cDNA may remain as a
linear episomal form in the cytoplasm of infected cell.
Integration of cDNA: In dividing T-cells, HIV cDNA enters the
nucleus, and becomes integrated into the genome of the host cell
utilizing the enzyme viral integrase. The provirus can then remain
latent or be active generation of new virions.
3. Viral replication: After the integration of proviral DNA, it can either be
latent or productive infection.
Latent infection: During this, the provirus remains silent for months
or years.

Productive infection: In this, the proviral DNA is transcribed  →
leading to viral replication  → formation of complete viral particles.
4. Production and release of infectious virus: The complete virus particle
formed, buds from the cell membrane and release new infectious
virus. This productive infection when extensive, leads to death of infected
host cells. HIV causes death of CD4+ cells resulting in significant
depletion of CD4+ T-cells.
The virus infection remains latent for long periods in lymphoid tissues.
Active viral replication is associated with more infection of cells and
progression to AIDS.
Dissemination: Virus disseminates to other target cells. This occurs either by
fusion of an infected cell with an uninfected one or by the budding of virions
from the membrane of the infected cell.
HIV Clinical Staging and Classification (Table 5.2)
Q. Write short essay/note on clinical staging and classification of HIV.
Different steps involved in HIV infection are: Viral transmission → acute
retroviral syndrome (2–3 weeks) → seroconversion (2–4 weeks) →
asymptomatic chronic HIV infection (8 years average) → symptomatic HIV
infection/AIDS (1.3 years average).
   Clinical staging of patients should be done at the initial medical
examination. Two clinical staging systems namely World Health
Organization (WHO) and Centers for Disease Control (CDC) (Table 5.3) are
being used. In both systems, patients are staged according to the most severe
manifestation. CDC classifies the patients into categories based on CD4
count and symptoms.
Table 5.2: WHO clinical staging classification of HIV infection.
WHO clinical staging of HIV infection
Primary HIV InfectionAsymptomatic
Acute retroviral syndromeClinical stage 4
Candidiasis of esophagus, trachea, bronchi or
lungs
Cryptococcosis—extrapulmonary
Cytomegalovirus disease (outside liver, spleen
and nodes)
HIV encephalopathyClinical Stage I
Asymptomatic
Persistent generalized lymphadenopathy

Clinical Stage 2
Unexplained moderate weight loss (<10% of
body weight)
Recurrent upper respiratory tract infections
(sinusitis, tonsillitis, otitis media, pharyngitis)
Herpes zoster
Angular cheilitis
Recurrent oral ulceration
Papular pruritic eruptions
Seborrheic dermatitis
Fungal nail infectionsIsosporiasis, chronic (>1 month)
Lymphoma (cerebral or B-cell non-
Hodgkin’s)
Mycosis-disseminated endemic
(coccidioidomycosis or histoplasmosis)
Pneumocystis pneumonia
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
Tuberculosis—extrapulmonary ( CDC includes
pulmonary)
Symptomatic HIV-associated nephropathy
Symptomatic HIV-associated cardiomyopathy
Cervical carcinoma—invasive
Cryptosporidiosis, chronic (>1 month)
Herpes simplex chronic (>1 month) ulcers or
visceral
HIV wasting syndrome
Kaposi’s sarcoma
Mycobacterial infection, non-tuberculous,
extrapulmonary or disseminated
Pneumonia, recurrent bacterial
Toxoplasmosis—cerebral
Septicemia, recurrent (including non-
typhoidal Salmonella) ( CDC only includes
Salmonella)
Leishmaniasis, atypical disseminatedClinical Stage 3
Unexplained severe weight loss (>10% of
body weight)
Unexplained chronic diarrhea for longer than
one month
Unexplained persistent fever (above 37.5°C
for >1 month)
Persistent oral candidiasis
Oral hairy leukoplakia
Pulmonary tuberculosis
Severe bacterial infections
Acute necrotizing ulcerative stomatitis,
gingivitis or periodontitis
Unexplained anemia (<8 g/dL), neutropenia
(<500/µL) or HIV associated immune
thrombocytopenia (<50,000/µL)
NATURAL HISTORY OF HIV INFECTION
(FIGS. 5.3 AND 5.4)
Virus usually enters the body through mucosal epithelia and clinical course
can be divided into three main phases:
1. Early Acute Phase
Primary HIV infection (PHI) refers to the first 6 month period following
acquisition of HIV. Fiebig stages of early HIV infection can be used to
detect early HIV infection (Table 5.4). HIV infection starts as an acute
infection, usually self-limited nonspecific illness. During this period,
uncontrolled viral replication occurs and results in high levels of HIV
circulating in the plasma (viremia) and genital tract. At this period, patient

is highly infectious. The 2–4 weeks immediately following infection may
be silent both clinically and serologically. It may be followed by acute
HIV syndrome (nonspecific signs and symptoms similar to many viral
diseases). These symptoms include sore throat, mucosal ulcers,
arthralgia, myalgias, fever, weight loss, lethargy, lymphadenopathy,
and fatigue. Other features, such as transient faint pink maculopapular
rash, diarrhea and vomiting may also occur. Neurological symptoms are
common, including myelopathy, neuropathy, headache, and photophobia.
The illness lasts up to 3 weeks and followed by complete recovery.
Table 5.3: Centers for Disease Control (CDC)—case definition
for HIV infection among adolescents and adults.
Stage CD4
countCD4 %* Clinical evidence
Stage 0 Early HIV infection
Stage 1 ≥500
cells/mm326 No AIDS-defining condition
Stage 2 200-499
cells/mm314-25 No AIDS-defining condition
Stage 3 <200
cells/mm3<14 or documentation of AIDS-defining condition
Stage unknown No data No data No information on presence of AIDS-defining
conditions

Fig. 5.3:  HIV disease progression—clinical latency.

Fig. 5.4:  Pathogenesis of HIV infection. HIV infects CD4+ T-cells and dendritic cells, and spreads
to lymph nodes. Viral replication in lymphoid node leads to viremia and widespread seeding of
lymphoid tissue. The viremia is controlled by the host immune response, and the disease enters a
phase of clinical latency. During this phase, viral replication in both T-cells and macrophages
continues. Ultimately, there is progressive decrease of CD4+ cells and patient develops clinical
symptoms of full-blown AIDS entering the crisis phase.
Table 5.4: Fiebig stages of early HIV infection.
Fiebig
stageCumulative
duration
(days)HIV-RNA p24 antigen Immunoassay Western blot

1 5 + – – –
2 10 + + – –
3 14 + + + –
4 19 + +/– + Indeterminate
5 88 + +/– + + (p31 band
negative)
6 Open-ended + +/– + + (p31 band
positive)
2. Middle Chronic Phase (Clinical Latency Period)
Minimal/no symptoms: This phase is characterized by dissemination of
virus, viremia, continuous viral replication in the lymph nodes and spleen
and development of immune response by host. The host immune response
can handle most infections with opportunistic microbes with no or
minimal clinical symptoms. It may have few or no clinical manifestations.
The symptoms may be due to minor opportunistic infections, such as
oral candidiasis (thrush), vaginal candidiasis, herpes zoster, and perhaps
mycobacterial tuberculosis.Persistent generalized lymphadenopathy (PGL): A subgroup of
patients may develop persistent generalized lymphadenopathy (PGL).
PGL is defined as lymphadenopathy (>1 cm) at 2 or more extrainguinal
sites for more than 3 months in the absence of causes other than HIV
infection. Biopsy reveals non-specific lymphoid hyperplasia. The lymph
nodes are usually symmetrical, firm, mobile and nontender. Nodes may
disappear as the disease progresses.Progressive decrease of CD4+ T-cells: There is continuous destruction
of CD4+ T-cells in the lymphoid tissue accompanied by steady decrease
in their number in the peripheral blood. During the early course of
disease, the loss of CD4+ T-cells can be replaced by new T-cells.
However, over a period of years, the continuous cycle of viral infection
and death of T-cells → leads to steady decrease in the number of CD4+ T-
cells both in the lymphoid tissue and in circulation. Direct killing of T-
cells by the virus is the major mechanism of T-cell depletion.Inversion of CD4+/CD8+ ratio: Normal CD4+/CD8+ ratio is 2:1. Loss
of CD4+ cells in AIDS patient leads to inversion of ratio of 0.5 or less.
HIV Infection of non-T-cells: HIV can infect non-T-cells such as
macrophages and dendritic cells (mucosal and follicular).

Abnormalities of B-cell Function
Polyclonal activation of B-cells → hypergammaglobulinemia →
circulating immune complexes.
Impaired humoral immunity → disseminated infections caused by
capsulated bacteria, such as S. pneumoniae and H. influenzae.
3. Final Crisis Phase/AIDS and Advanced HIV Infection
It is final phase of HIV with progression to AIDS . Within an average of 7–8
years, the patients present with fever, weight loss, diarrhea, generalized
lymphadenopathy, multiple opportunistic infections, neurologic disease,
and secondary neoplasms. Most of untreated (but not all) patients with HIV
infection progress to AIDS after a chronic phase lasting from 7 to 10 years.
AIDS is defined as a CD4 cell count <200 cells/μL or the presence of any
AIDS-defining condition (Box 5.2) regardless of the CD4 cell count.
Patterns of HIV ProgressionTypical progressors have a drop of 35–50 CD4 cells/year.
Rapid progressors (‘CD4 crash’) have a drop of 50 CD4 cells per month
after seroconversion. In these patients, the middle, chronic phase is
shortened to 2 to 3 years after primary infection, and they rapidly
progress to AIDS.
Slow progressors have a CD4 decline that is very slow compared to the
typical progressors.
Long-term non-progressors have CD4 counts that are stable at a baseline
for many years. It is defined as untreated patients who are asymptomatic
for 10 years or more, with stable CD4+ T-cell counts and low levels of
plasma viremia.Elite controllers are HIV-infected individuals who have no evidence of
viremia, as measured by standard assays (either <50 or <75 copies/mL)
and maintain high CD4 cell counts for prolonged periods.
BOX 5.2:  AIDS-defining conditions (CDC).
Bacterial infections, multiple or recurrent
Candidiasis of bronchi, trachea, or lungs
Candidiasis of esophagus
Cervical cancer, invasive
Coccidioidomycosis, disseminated or extrapulmonary
Cryptococcosis, extrapulmonary

Cryptosporidiosis, chronic intestinal (>1 month’s duration)
Cytomegalovirus disease (other than liver, spleen, or nodes), onset at age >1 month
Cytomegalovirus retinitis (with loss of vision)
Encephalopathy, HIV related
Herpes simplex: chronic ulcers (>1 month’s duration) or bronchitis, pneumonitis, or esophagitis
(onset at age >1 month)
Histoplasmosis, disseminated or extrapulmonary
Isosporiasis, chronic intestinal (>1 month’s duration)
Kaposi’s sarcoma
Lymphoid interstitial pneumonia or pulmonary lymphoid hyperplasia complex
Lymphoma, Burkitt (or equivalent term)
Lymphoma, immunoblastic (or equivalent term)
Lymphoma, primary, of brain
Mycobacterium avium complex or Mycobacterium kansasii, disseminated, or extrapulmonary
Mycobacterium tuberculosis of any site, pulmonary, disseminated or extrapulmonary
Mycobacterium, other species or unidentified species, disseminated or extrapulmonary
Pneumocystis jirovecii  pneumonia
Pneumonia, recurrent
Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy
Salmonella septicemia, recurrent
Toxoplasmosis of brain, onset at age >1 month
Wasting syndrome attributed to HIV
IMPORTANT INFECTIONS AND PRESENTING
PROBLEMS IN AIDS (Box 5.2)
Q. List of important/opportunistic infections in AIDS.
Q. Write short essay/note on AIDS-defining diseases and opportunistic
infections in HIV.
Q. HIV-opportunistic fungal infections and their prophylaxis.
Relation between CD4+ cell count and common illness in HIV patients is
presented in Figure 5.5.
Respiratory System
Q. Write short essay/note on upper/lower respiratory tract infections
and pulmonary complications in AIDS.

Acute Bronchitis and Sinusitis
They are prevalent during all stages of HIV infection. Sinusitis presents as
fever, nasal congestion, and headache. The maxillary sinuses are most
commonly involved and others frequently involved are ethmoid, sphenoid,
and frontal sinuses.Microorganisms: Infection is usually due to encapsulated organisms such
as H. influenzae and Streptococcus pneumoniae. Patients with low CD4+
T-cell counts may develop mucormycosis infections of the sinuses.
Fig. 5.5:  Relation between CD4+ cell count and common illness in HIV patients.
(PML: progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy; MAC: Mycobacterium avium complex; CMV:
cytomegalovirus infection)
Pneumonia
It is the most common manifestation of pulmonary disease in patients with
AIDS. It occurs as consequence of altered B-cell function and/or defects in
neutrophil function secondary to HIV disease.Microorganism: Most cases of bacterial pneumonia are due to

Streptococcus pneumoniae and H. influenzae. Other agents frequently
involved include S. aureus and P. aeruginosa.
Pulmonary Tuberculosis
Discussed later on pages 239-40.
Pneumocystis jirovecii Infection
Q. Write short essay/note on pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PJP),
its treatment and prophylaxis.
Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (previously known as pneumocystis
carinii ) is officially classified as a fungal pneumonia. PJP does not
respond to antifungal treatment.
Single most common cause of pneumonia in patients with HIV and
responsible for about 25% of cases of pneumonia in patients with HIV
infection.
Life cycle of pneumocystis jirovecii:  It consists of three stages namely
cysts, trophozoites (outside cyst) and sporozoites (inside cyst).
Clinical features
Key presenting feature of PCP (Pneumocystis pneumonia) is progressive
dyspnea. Fever and dry (non-productive) cough  or productive cough with
only scant amounts of white sputum are common.
They may complain of a characteristic sharp or burning, retrosternal chest
pain which is worse on inspiration. Acute onset is uncommon.
Physical examination reveals crepitations and features of consolidation
are unusual. Exercise oximetry, i.e. demonstrating fall in oxygen
saturation after exercise is quite classical.
Extrapulmonary sites may be involved by Pneumocystis jirovecii (e.g.
skin, meninges, brain, eyes, heart, liver, spleen and kidneys).
Diagnosis
Chest X-ray: Bilateral interstitial infiltrate spreading out from the hilar
regions (Fig. 5.6). Pneumatoceles may occur and may rupture, resulting in
a pneumothorax.High-resolution CT scan: More sensitive than chest X-ray and usually
shows typical ‘groundglass’ interstitial infiltrates.

Arterial blood gas: Hypoxemia with an increased alveolar-arterial
oxygen gradient and respiratory alkalosis.
–  Mild cases: Room air arterial oxygen (pO2) >70 mm Hg or alveolar-
arterial O2 difference <35 mm Hg.
–  Moderate-to-severe cases: pO2 <70 mm Hg or alveolar-arterial) O2
difference >35 mm Hg.
Serum LDH: Elevated
Pulmonary functions: Restrictive pattern with reduced diffusion
capacity.
Diagnosis: It is made by examination of induced (hypertonic saline
nebulization) sputum stained with silver stains, PCR or
immunofluorescence of bronchoalveolar lavage or transbronchial biopsy.
–  Methenamine silver stains the cyst wall  while Giemsa stains the
wall of the trophozoites and sporozoites. Trophozoites are in plenty in
the lungs.
Fig. 5.6: Chest X-ray of Pneumocystis pneumonia showing bilateral perihilar infiltrates
Management (Table 5.5)
Prophylaxis
Primary prophylaxis is indicated in patients with CD4 cell count <200/mm3 or if there is a history of
oropharyngeal candidiasis. Secondary prophylaxis is indicated in all patients who have recovered
from PCP.
Alternative treatments for mild-to-moderate PCP include dapsone/trimethoprim,
clindamycin/primaquine, and atovaquone. IV pentamidine is the treatment of choice for severe
disease in the patient unable to tolerate TMP/SMX. Adjunctive steroids needed if the patient is

hypoxic.
–  Trimethoprim 160 mg + sulphamethoxazole 800 mg/day, i.e. one single-strength tablet daily
(TMP-SMX at a dose of one double-strength tablet daily confers cross-protection against
toxoplasmosis also) OR
–  Aerosolized pentamidine 300 mg once a month OR
–  Dapsone 50 mg BID.
–  Others include atovaquone, dapsone plus pyrimethamine plus leucovorin
Table 5.5: Treatment options for Pneumocystis jirovecii  infection.
Mild cases Moderate-to-severe cases (PaO 2<70 mm Hg)
Trimethoprim 5 mg/kg 6 hourly +
sulphamethoxazole 25 mg/kg 6 hourly orally ORTrimethoprim 5 mg/kg 6 hourly +
sulphamethoxazole 25 mg/kg 6 hourly IV OR
Trimethoprim 5 mg/kg 6 hourly + dapsone 2
mg/day ORPentamidine 4 mg/kg/day IV OR
Pentamidine 4 mg/kg/day IV OR Clindamycin (600 mg qid) + primaquine (30 mg
od)
Atovaquone 750 mg BID In all cases, add prednisolone 40 mg BID for 5
days, then 40 mg/day for 5 days and then 20
mg/day for 11 days.Atypical Mycobacterial Infections
Atypical mycobacterial infections are also seen with an increased
frequency in patients with HIV infection. Mycobacterium avium  complex
(MAC) infection is a late complication of HIV infection, occurring
predominantly in patients with CD4+ T-cell counts of <50/µL.
The most common atypical mycobacterial infection is with M. avium or
M. intracellulare species—the Mycobacterium avium complex (MAC).
Prior infection with M. tuberculosis decreases the risk of MAC infection.
Mode of infection of MAC
MAC infections arise from organisms that are ubiquitous in the
environment, including both soil and water.
Person-to-person transmission
Portals of entry: Respiratory and GI tract.
Clinical features
Common presentation is disseminated disease with fever, weight loss,
and night sweats, abdominal pain, diarrhea, massive splenomegaly

and lymphadenopathy.
Bilateral, lower lobe infiltrate suggestive of miliary spread. Alveolar or
nodular infiltrates and hilar and/or mediastinal adenopathy can also occur.
Anemia and elevated liver alkaline phosphatase are common.
Treatment
Azithromycin (600 mg daily) or clarithromycin (500 mg twice daily)+/– ethambutol (15 mg/kg PO
once daily)/rifabutin for minimum 12 months.
Chemoprophylaxis against disseminated MAC disease is needed if CD4+ count are <50/µL.
Preferred prophylactic agents include azithromycin (1200 mg once weekly) or daily clarithromycin
(500 mg twice daily).
Other Respiratory Infections
Rhodococcus equi  is a gram-positive, pleomorphic, acid-fast non-spore
forming bacillus that can cause pulmonary and disseminated infection in
HIV-infected patients.
Fever and cough with expectoration are the common presenting
complaints.
X-ray shows cavitary lesions and consolidation.
Coccidioides immitis is a mould that is endemic in the southwest United
States.
It can cause a reactivation pulmonary syndrome in patients with HIV
infection.
Most patients have CD4+ T-cell counts < 250/µL.
Patients present with fever, weight loss, cough, and extensive, diffuse
reticulonodular infiltrates on chest X-ray.
Nodules, cavities, pleural effusions, and hilar adenopathy are also seen.
Invasive aspergillosis is not an AIDS-defining illness and is generally not
seen in patients with AIDS in the absence of neutropenia or administration of
glucocorticoids.Presents as pseudomembranous tracheobronchitis.
Primary pulmonary infection of the lung may be seen with histoplasmosis.
Idiopathic interstitial pneumonia is a benign infiltrate of the lung and is
due to the polyclonal activation of lymphocytes is common.
Gastrointestinal Disease

Q. Write short essay/note on gastrointestinal manifestations of AIDS.
Esophageal Diseases
Esophagitis develops in as many as 90% of the patients with AIDS. It is
usually due to Candida, CMV and Herpes simplex virus.
Esophageal candidiasis (Fig. 5.7A) is the most common cause of pain on
swallowing (odynophagia), dysphagia and regurgitation in HIV patients.
Systemic azole therapy (e.g. fluconazole 200 mg daily for 14 days) is
usually curative.Diarrhea
Chronic diarrhea is a very common in patients with advanced HIV and is a
major cause of wasting. The presentation and etiology (Table 5.6) of acute
diarrhea are similar to in HIV-uninfected patients.
Figs. 5.7A and B:  (A) Esophageal candidiasis; (B) Oral candidiasis in patient with AIDS.
Treatment
Protozoal, CMV and mycobacterial infections usually produce protracted diarrhea, and fluid and
electrolyte imbalance. Nitazoxanide  is the treatment of choice for Cryptosporidium  infection. Co-
trimaxazole (TMP-SMX) is drug of choice for treatment of isosporiasis.
ART is indicated in all patients with opportunistic infections because immune restoration often
leads to eradication of infections.
Table 5.6: Cause of diarrhea in HIV patients.
Infections HIV related
Bacterial:  Salmonella, Shigella, Campylobacter,
Escherichia coli Clostridium difficile
Fungal:  Histoplasmosis, CoccidioidomycosisHIV invading gut epithelium (AIDS enteropathy)
GI malignancies

and Penicilliosis
Protozoa:  Cryptosporidia, Microsporidia,
Isospora belli, Giardia, Entameba histolytica
Enterocytozoon bieneusi
Septata intestinalis
Viral:  Cytomegalovirus (CMV), herpes,
adenovirus, astrovirus, Calicivirida
Mycobacterium avium complex, Mycobacterium
tuberculosisLymphoma
Kaposi’s sarcoma
Mucocutaneous Diseases (Figs. 5.8A to F)
Q. Write short note on mucocutaneous/oral lesions in AIDS.
Mucocutaneous manifestations are extremely common in HIV. These
include warts (Fig. 5.8A), molluscum contagiosum (Fig. 5.8B), herpes
simplex (Fig. 5.8C and D), herpes varicella zoster (Figs. 5.8E), bacillary
angiomatosis (caused by Bartonella infection), oral candidiasis (Fig.
5.7B), anogenital warts and Kaposi’s sarcoma (Fig. 5.8F).
Neurological Disease (Box 5.3)
Box 5.3:  Neurological manifestations of HIV infection.
Directly due to HIV:Sensory neuropathy
Vacuolar myelopathy
Dementia: HIV-associated neurocognitive disorders (HAND)
Unmask autoimmune diseases:
Polymyositis
Myasthenia gravis
Acute inflammatory demyelinating neuropathy (GBS)
Multiple sclerosis
Opportunistic infections
Complications of ART
Immune reconstitution syndrome
Q. Write short essay/note on neurological manifestations of AIDS.
Infection of the Nervous System
It occurs at an early stage of HIV. These include: (1) meningitis
(acute/aseptic meningitis); (2) HIV associated neurocognitive disorders
(HAND) also known as AIDS dementia complex (ADC), and (3) sensory

polyneuropathy. These lesions are due both to the release of neurotoxic
products by HIV itself and to cytokine abnormalities secondary to immune
dysregulation.
Acute meningitis: During acute infection, CNS invasion occurs in more than
90% cases. The clinical spectrum ranges from silent CSF pleocytosis, aseptic
meningitis, and infectious mononucleosis-like syndrome, multiple cranial
nerve palsies to acute encephalopathy. CSF shows lymphocytosis along with
raised proteins (<200 mg/dL). CT is normal and recovery is usually complete.
Figs. 5.8A to F: (A) Genital warts; (B) Molluscum contagiosum; (C) Genital herpes (male); (D)
Genital herpes (female); (E) Herpes zoster hand; (F) Kaposi’s sarcoma.
Aseptic meningitis may occur any time in the course of HIV infection;
however it is rare following the development of AIDS. This is probably an
immune-mediated disease.
HIV-Associated Neurocognitive Disorders (HAND) include
asymptomatic neurocognitive impairment (ANI), mild neurocognitive
disorder (MND), and HIV-associated dementia (HAD).
Typically, HAND presents with executive dysfunction and memory
impairment. There is prominent disruption of attention, multitasking, impulse
control, judgment and memory encoding and retrieval. HAND can also be
associated with motor dysfunction such as bradykinesia, loss of coordination
and gait imbalance.
Sensory polyneuropathy: It develops in advanced HIV infection and occurs
mainly in the legs and feet or hands. Severe forms cause intense pain (usually

in the feet), that disrupts sleep, impairs mobility and reduces the quality of
life.
Autonomic neuropathy: It may develop causing postural hypotension and
diarrhea.
Fig. 5.9:  MRI of progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PMLE).
Viral Infections
Progressive multifocal leucoencephalopathy (PML): It is a progressive
disease caused by JC virus (JCV). It presents with stroke-like episodes and
cognitive impairment characterized by focal neurological abnormalities
including impairment of vision (blindness due to involvement of the occipital
cortex), aphasia, hemiparesis and ataxia that progress to altered sensorium
and death within 6 months.
CT scan shows non-enhancing, focal hypodense lesions. MRI shows
characteristic appearances characterized by distinct white matter lesions in
areas of the brain corresponding to clinical deficits (Fig. 5.9). Confirmation is
by detection of JC virus DNA in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) by PCR is
diagnostic.
Treatment  is mainly by starting ART and prognosis remains poor despite ART.

Fig. 5.10: Indian ink preparation of CSF showing Cryptococcus.
Herpes simplex encephalitis: It may be insidious in onset as compared to an
immunocompetent host. Despite treatment with acyclovir, prognosis is poor.
Herpes zoster may also produce myelitis or radiculitis.
CMV encephalitis: This presents as slowly progressive disease with
behavioral disturbance, cognitive impairment and a reduced level of
consciousness. Identification of CMV DNA in the CSF supports the
diagnosis. Response to anti-CMV therapy is poor. Cytomegalovirus may also
cause myelitis and retinitis (retinal hemorrhage resulting in blindness).
Fungal InfectionsQ. Write short note on cryptococcal meningitis, its diagnosis and
management.
Cryptococcal meningitis: Cryptococcus neoformans is the most common
cause of meningitis in AIDS patients affecting 5–7% of patients.
Patients usually present with headache, vomiting and mild confusion.
Lumbar puncture opening pressure will be characteristically high. CSF
pleocytosis may be mild or even absent, and protein and glucose

concentrations are variable. However, CSF cryptococcal antigen tests and
culture are usually positive and this test has as sensitivity and specificity
of almost 100%. Indian ink staining on CSF (Fig. 5.10) may show the
Cryptococcus neoformans.
Treatment  is with amphotericin B (0.7 mg/kg/day) (plus flucytosine 25 mg/kg QID if available) for
2 weeks, followed by fluconazole (400 mg/day) for 8–10 weeks. Relapse rates are high and hence,
continuous therapy with fluconazole (200 mg/day) is recommended.
Bacterial Infections
Tuberculosis meningitis: It is common in AIDS patients. It may present in a
manner similar to cryptococcal meningitis. CSF findings of tuberculous
meningitis are similar to those in HIV-uninfected patients. It usually shows
elevated cell counts (lymphocytes) and protein along with low glucose. CT
scan may show multiple ring lesions suggestive of tuberculomas.
Syphilis: It may present as neurosyphilis, manifestations of which include
optic neuritis, uveitis, meningitis, encephalitis and cerebral infarction.
Protozoan Infections
Cerebral toxoplasmosis: It is the most common opportunistic infection of
CNS caused by Toxoplasma gondii.It presents with headache, confusion, seizures, ataxia and focal deficits.
The characteristic findings on contrast CT scan (Fig. 5.11) are multiple
contrasts enhancing lesions space-occupying lesions with ring
enhancement on contrast and surrounding edema.Appearance of Toxoplasma choroioretinitis is shown in Figure 5.12.
Toxoplasma serology shows evidence of previous exposure [positive
immunoglobulin (Ig) G antibodies].
Definitive diagnosis is by brain biopsy but this is usually not necessary.

Fig. 5.11: MRI of cerebral toxoplasmosis
Treatment  is sulfadiazine 1000-1500 mg four times a day with pyrimethamine 200 mg loading,
followed by 50 mg once daily, together with folinic acid, to reduce the risk of bone marrow
suppression. However, cotrimoxazole is also effective and less toxic. Clindamycin can be substituted,
if patients are sensitive to sulfadiazine.
Prophylaxis:  is given in toxoplasma-seropositive patients with a CD4+ count <100 cells/µL.
Preferred regimen is one double-strength tablet of TMP-SMX daily. If patients cannot tolerate
TMP-SMX, alternative is to give dapsone + pyrimethamine + leucovorin.
Miscellaneous CNS Manifestations
Primary CNS lymphoma (PCNSL) is a high-grade B-cell lymphomas
associated with EBV infection. It occurs in about 5% of cases and may
present with encephalopathy, focal deficits, seizures of lymphomatous
meningitis. Characteristically, CT scan demonstrates a single,
homogeneously enhancing, periventricular lesion with surrounding edema.
PCR for EBV DNA in the CSF has a high sensitivity and specificity for
PCNSL. Brain biopsy is definitive, but carries a risk of morbidity. The
prognosis is very poor.

Fig. 5.12:  Toxoplasma choroioretinitis.
Ocular Diseases
Retinopathy
Ocular toxoplasmosis usually presents with a vitritis and retinitis without
retinal hemorrhages.
HIV retinopathy is a microangiopathy that causes cotton-wool spots,
which are of benign in nature.
Herpes zoster may lead to ocular pain, conjunctival infection and corneal
opacification.
Varicella zoster virus can also cause rapidly progressive outer retinal
necrosis.

Fig. 5.13: Fundoscopic appearance of CMV retinitis.
CMV Retinitis
CMV retinitis is the most serious infection of the eyes. It occurs when the
CD4 count is below 100 cells/µL.
Usually unilateral but may progress to involve both eyes.
Presenting features: Depend on the area of retina involved. Painless,
progressive loss of vision being most common with macular involvement.
Fundoscopy (Fig. 5.13): Hemorrhages and exudates are seen in the retina,
which follow the vasculature of the retina (so-called ‘pizza pie’
appearances/‘frosted branch angiitis’).Diagnosis is usually clinical. However, demonstration of CMV DNA by
PCR of vitreous fluid is diagnostic.
Treatment  should be started immediately, with either oral valganciclovir (900 mg twice daily), IV
ganciclovir (5 mg/kg twice daily) or foscarnet (90 mg/kg twice daily) given intravenously for at least
3 weeks or until retinitis is quiescent. Ganciclovir or valganciclovir stops progression of the disease,
but vision does not recover. Ganciclovir may cause myelosuppression and foscarnet is nephrotoxic.
Cardiovascular DiseasesThe most common heart disease is coronary heart disease. Cardiovascular

disease may result from the classical risk factors, a direct consequence of
HIV infection or as a result of ART.
Dilated cardiomyopathy associated with congestive heart failure (CHF) in
a HIV-infected patient is referred to as HIV-associated cardiomyopathy.
Pericardial effusions may be seen in advanced HIV infection. Predisposing
factors include TB, CHF, mycobacterial infection, cryptococcal infection,
pulmonary infection, lymphoma, and KS (Kaposi’s sarcoma).
Psychiatric DiseasesAnxiety and mood disturbance may be caused by pre-test issues such as
worries about being infected and disclosure, receiving a positive result.
Mild cognitive dysfunction is a common in later-stage disease and usually
improves with HAART.
Disorders of mental state may also result from drugs directly (e.g.
depression with efavirenz) or indirectly.
Diseases of Kidney and Genitourinary System
Due to direct consequence of HIV infection, due to opportunistic infection,
neoplasms or due to drug toxicity.
HIV-associated nephropathy (HIVAN) presents with proteinuria. Edema
and hypertension are rare.
–  Ultrasound examination shows enlarged and hyperechoic kidneys.
–  Definitive diagnosis is by renal biopsy.
Nephrotic syndrome subsequent to focal segmental glomerulosclerosis is
seen in 80%, and mesangial proliferation in 10–15% of the cases.
Drug-induced toxicity: Many nephrotoxic drugs are used in the
management of HIV-associated pathology, particularly pentamidine,
amphotericin B, adefovir, tenofovir foscarnet and sulfadiazine.
Cotrimoxazole may compete with tubular secretion of creatinine and cause
its increase in the blood.
Hematological ConditionsAnemia is caused by bone marrow infiltration with opportunistic
infections, neoplasms, bone marrow suppression with drugs, as a direct
affect of HIV, blood loss from Kaposi’s sarcoma or malabsorption as a
result of a GI infection.

Leucopenia results from bone marrow infiltration or due to drug toxicity.
Lymphopenia is a good marker of HIV.
Thrombocytopenia occurs very early and may be the first indicator of
HIV in some cases.
Pancytopenia may develop due to opportunistic infection, malignancies,
Mycobacterium avium intracellulare infection, disseminated
cytomegalovirus and lymphoma.
Table 5.7: Various cancers associated with HIV infection.
Malignant tumor Causative virus
AIDS-Defining
Kaposi’s sarcoma KS herpes virus (KSHV), also called human
herpes virus 8 (HHV8)
Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (systemic and CNS) Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), HHV8
Invasive cervical carcinoma Human papilloma virus  (HPV)
Non-AIDS Defining
Anal cancer HPV
Hodgkin’s disease EBV
Leiomyosarcoma (pediatric) EBV
Squamous carcinoma (oral) HPV
Merkel cell carcinoma Merkel cell polyoma virus (MCV)
Hepatocellular carcinoma (hepatoma) Hepatitis B virus (HBV), Hepatitis C virus
(HCV)
CANCERS IN HIV (TABLE 5.7)
Q. List important cancers in AIDS.
Q. Write short note on Kaposi’s sarcoma.
Kaposi’s sarcoma (refer Fig. 5.8F) is a vascular neoplasm involving skin,
mucus membrane and viscera (lymph nodes, GIT, lungs). Skin lesions are
erythematous/violaceous macules. plaques or nodules. Cutaneous lesions can
be treated with radiation, cryotherapy or intralesional vinlastine. Extensive
disease will need interferon-alpha with liposomal doxarubucin and paclitaxel.

DIAGNOSIS OF HIV INFECTION OR AIDS
Q. Write short note on laboratory tests for the diagnosis HIV infection.
HIV infection is diagnosed either by the detection of virus specific antibodies
(anti-HIV) or by direct identification of viral material.
Detection of Virus Specific Antibodies (anti-HIV)
Antibodies against the virus are detectable within 3–12 weeks after infection.
Detection of IgG antibody to envelope components: This is the most
commonly used marker of infection. The routine tests used for screening
are based on ELISA techniques. Confirmation is by western blot test.
ELISA detects antibodies against viral proteins and is the most sensitive
and best screening test for the diagnosis of AIDS. Up to 3 months (mean 6
weeks) may be needed (from the initial infection) for the detection of
antibody in the serum (serological latency, or window period). These
antibodies to HIV have no protective function and persist for life. Similar
to all IgG antibodies, anti-HIV will cross the placenta. This is responsible
for the presence of antibody at birth in all babies of HIV-infected mother.
In this situation, anti-HIV antibody is not a reliable marker of active
infection and in uninfected babies anti-HIV antibody will be gradually lost
over the first 18 months of life.A Serologic Testing Algorithm for Recent HIV Seroconversions
(STARHS ) is being used in research studies to see how many people were
recently infected within the previous 4–6 months.
IgG antibody to p24 (antip-24): This antibody can be found during the
earliest weeks of infection and during the asymptomatic phase. It is
frequently lost as the disease progresses.Genome detection assays: Nucleic acid based assays that amplify and test
for components of the HIV genome are used to aid diagnosis of HIV in the
babies of HIV-infected mothers or in early infection when antibody may
not be present, or in subtyping HIV variants for medicolegal reasons.Viral p24 antigen (p24ag): This is detectable shortly after infection but
has usually disappeared by 8–10 weeks after exposure. It can be a useful
marker in individuals who have been infected recently but have not had
time to mount an antibody response.Western blot assays: Most specific or the confirmatory test for HIV.

Direct Detection of Viral Material/Infection
p24 antigen capture assay
Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
DNA-PCR: For measuring the amount of viral particles (HIV-RNA) in
the blood (viral load).
Isolation of virus in culture: Culture of virus from the monocytes and
CD4+ T-cells. This is a specialized technique available in some
laboratories to aid diagnosis and as a research tool.
Hematological Abnormalities
Normochromic, normocytic anemia, lymphopenia, leucopenia,
thrombocytopenia and decrease in T-helper cells (CD4+ counts).
MANAGEMENT OF A PATIENT WITH HIV
INFECTION
Q. Write short essay/note on monitoring HIV therapy.
General Measures
These include balanced diet, quitting smoking and intake of alcohol, adequate rest and practice of
safer sex so as to avoid infection of partner and also to avoid infection with other organism that
may hasten the progress of the disease.
An important aspect of treatment is counseling and proper education of the patient.
Antiretroviral Drugs
Q. Write short essay/note on antiretroviral therapy/highly active antiretroviral therapy
(HAART) with dosages in AIDS and side effects.
Antiretroviral drugs are capable of suppressing viral replication. This has transformed HIV
from a progressive illness with a fatal outcome to a chronic manageable disease. Combination
antiretroviral therapy (cART), also called as highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) ,
is the cornerstone of management of patients with HIV infection.
Goals of cART (Box 5.4):
Indications for antiretroviral therapy are mentioned in Box 5.5.
Box 5.4:  Goals of combination antiretroviral therapy (cART).
Reduce the viral load
Improve the CD4 count to over 200 cells/mm3 which reduces the HIV-related disease
Improve the quantity and quality of life
Reduce transmission of HIV.
Categories of Antiretroviral Drugs (Table 5.8)

Site of action of antiretroviral therapy (ART) is depicted in Figure 5.14.
Reverse transcriptase inhibitors
Nucleoside/nucleotide analog:  Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs)
Mechanism of action:  NRTIs need to be phosphorylated intracellularly for activity to occur. They
diffuse into the infected cells and inhibit the synthesis of DNA by reverse transcription. These
active nucleosides are incorporated into the growing viral DNA and cause premature termination
of DNA chain.
These were the first group of agents to be used against HIV, initially as monotherapy and later as
dual drug combinations. Usually, two drugs of this class are combined to provide the ‘backbone’
of a HAART regimen. All the drugs in this class cause mitochondrial toxicity, which manifests as
peripheral neuropathy, pancreatitis, lipoatrophy, and hepatic steatosis.
Box 5.5:  Indications for antiretroviral therapy.
ART should be initiated in all adults living with HIV, regardless of WHO clinical stage and at any
CD4 cell count.
As a priority, ART should be initiated in all adults with severe or advanced HIV clinical disease
(WHO clinical stage 3 or 4) and adults with CD4 count ≤350 cells/mm3.
ART at any CD4 count in PLHIV (people living with HIV)
–  Active TB disease
–  HBV co-infection with severe chronic liver disease
–  HIV-positive partners in serodiscordant couples
–  Pregnant and breastfeeding women
–  Children younger than five years of age.
–  Infants diagnosed in the first year of life.

Fig. 5.14: Site of action of antiretroviral therapy (ART).
Table 5.8: Categories of antiretroviral drugs used for the treatment of HIV
infection.
1.  Drugs that inhibit the viral reverse transcriptase enzyme
A. Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs)
Zidovudine (AZT, ZDV)
Zalcitabine (ddC)
Didanosine (ddI)
Abacavir (ABC)Stavudine (d4T)
Lamivudine (3TC)
Emtricitabine (FTC)
B.  Nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitor (nRTI)
Tenofovir disoproxilfumarate (TDF)
C.  Non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs)
Nevirapine (NVP)
Delavirdine (DLV)
Efavirenz (EFV)
2.  Protease inhibitors (PIs)
Indinavir (IDV)
Ritonavir (RTV)
Saquinavir (SQV)Lopinavir/ritonavir (LPV/RTV)
Atazanavir (ATV)
Darunavir (TMC114)

Nelfinavir (NFV)
Amprenavir (APV)Fosamprenavir (FOSAPV)
Tipranavir (TPV)
3.  Integrase strand transfer inhibitors (INSTIS)
Oral—raltegravir, elvitegravir, and dolutegravir
Injectable, long-acting INSTI (cabotegravir)
4.  Drugs that interfere with viral entry
A. Fusion inhibitors:  Enfuvirtide (eT20)
B. CCR5 antagonists (CCR5 inhibitors):  Maraviroc
5.  Pharmacokinetic enhancers (CYP3A inhibitors)
Cobicistat: PIs and integrase inhibitor elvitegravir, are administered in combination with another
agent (e.g. low-dose ritonavir or cobicistat) to increase trough plasma drug concentrations,
increase drug half-lives, and increase maximum plasma concentrations). This improves the
potency of the antiviral agent and enables lower and less frequent dosing of the parent drug,
thereby decreasing pill burden 
Dosage and adverse events of antiretroviral drugs that inhibit the viral reverse transcriptase enzyme is
presented in Table 5.9.
Nucleotide analogs (nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NtRTIs))  have a similar
mechanism of action but only require two intracellular phosphorylation steps for activity (as opposed
to the three steps for nucleoside analogs).They include nucleotide analogs that inhibit reverse transcriptase inhibitor.
At present, only tenofovir disoproxil fumarate is available for use.
Non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs)
Mechanism of action:  NNRTIs bind directly to the reverse transcriptase enzyme causing
inhibition of its function. NNRTIs affect cytochrome P450.
Advantages:  They are generally small molecules and are widely disseminate throughout the body
and have a long half-life.
They are highly active against HIV-1 but are ineffective against HIV-2.
Side effects:  Nevirapine may produce skin rash  (refer Fig. 23.3) and elevation of liver enzymes
(hepatitis). Second generation NNRTIs (e.g. etravirine and rilpivirine) are with fewer adverse
effects have some activity against viruses resistant to other compounds of the NNRTI class.
Avoid Efavirenz during first trimester of pregnancy.
Dosage and adverse events of non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs) is presented
in Table 5.10.
Protease inhibitors (PIs)
Q. Write short essay/note on antiretroviral protease inhibitor drugs.
Mechanism of action:  These drugs act competitively on the HIV aspartyl protease enzyme
(inhibit enzyme protease of HIV), which is involved in the production of functional viral proteins
and enzymes. It leads to impaired viral maturation and immature dysfunctional viral particles are
produced.
Side effects:
–   Abnormalities of fat metabolism and control of blood sugar:  PIs have been linked with
abnormalities of fat metabolism. It has been associated with body fat redistribution that

manifests physically as thinning of arms, legs and face and/or deposition of fat in the
abdominal and shoulder regions along with lipomas (lipodystrophy). The effects on fat
metabolism may produce raised serum cholesterol and triglycerides, insulin resistance and
rarely elevated blood glucose levels, which may increase cardiovascular risk. Some PIs (e.g.
indinavir) may produce hyperglycemia.
–  Associated with deterioration in clotting function in people with hemophilia.
Dosage and adverse events of protease inhibitors (PIs) is presented in Table 5.11.
Table 5.9: Dosage and adverse events of antiretroviral drugs that
inhibit the viral reverse transcriptase enzyme.
Name of the drug Adult dose Adverse events
Abacavir 600 mg PO QD or 300 mg PO BID Hypersensitivity reaction (may include
fever, rash, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea,
malaise, shortness of breath, cough,
pharyngitis); patients positive for
HLA-B*5701 are at highest risk for
hypersensitivity (perform HLA
screening before initiating) risk of
myocardial infarction.
Didanosine >60 kg: 400 mg PO QD<60 kg: 250
mg PO QDPeripheral neuropathy, pancreatitis,
nausea, lactic acidosis
Emtricitabine 200 mg PO QD Minimal toxicity, hyperpigmentation
Lamivudine 300 mg PO QD or 150 mg PO BID Minimal toxicity, severe acute
exacerbation of hepatitis may occur
with HBV-coinfection upon
discontinuation, pancreatitis
Stavudine >60 kg: 40 mg PO BID<60 kg: 30
mg PO BIDPeripheral neuropathy, pancreatitis,
lactic acidosis, lipoatrophy,
hyperlipidemia
Tenofovir 300 mg PO QD (once daily) Renal insufficiency, proteinuria,
glycosuria, hypophosphatemia,
osteopenia, and acute tubular necrosis
Zidovudine 300 mg BID Headache, malaise, anorexia, nausea,
vomiting, lactic acidosis, and loss of
limb fat.
Table 5.10: Dosage and adverse events of non-nucleoside reverse
transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTIs).
Name Adult dose Adverse events
Delavirdine 400 mg PO (per oral) TID (thrice daily) Rash, headache
Efavirenz 600 mg PO once daily. Take on empty stomach Rash, CNS (e.g. somnolence, vivid

to decrease adverse drug reactions dreams, confusion, visual
hallucinations), hyperlipidemia
Etravirine 200 mg PO BID (twice daily) Rash, nausea
Nevirapine 200 mg PO (per oral) TID (thrice daily)XR
(extended release): 400 mg PO qdRash, hepatitis
Rilpivirine 25 mg PO qd with meal Depressive disorders, insomnia,
headache, rash
Table 5.11: Dosage and adverse events of protease inhibitors
(PIs).
Name Adult dose Adverse events
Atazanavir 400 mg PO qd or 300 mg + ritonavir
100 mg PO qd (once daily)Indirect hyperbilirubinemia, prolonged
PR interval, hyperglycemia, skin rash
(20%), hyperlipidemia
Darunavir 800 mg qd + ritonavir 100 mg PO
qd or 600 mg BID + ritonavir 100 mg
PO BIDRash, nausea, diarrhea,
hyperlipidemia, hyperglycemia
Fosamprenavir 700 mg BID + ritonavir 100 mg PO
BID or 1400 mg PO BID or 1400 mg
+ ritonavir 100–200 mg PO qdRash, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea,
hyperlipidemia, hyperglycemia
Indinavir 800 mg PO TID (thrice daily)800 mg
PO BID + ritonavir 100–200 mg PO
BIDNephrolithiasis, nausea, indirect
hyperbilirubinemia, hyperlipidemia,
hyperglycemia
Lopinavir/ritonavir 400 mg/100 mg PO BID or 800
mg/200 mg PO qdNausea, vomiting, diarrhea, asthenia,
hyperlipidemia, hyperglycemia
Nelfinavir 1250 mg PO BID or 750 mg PO TID Diarrhea, hyperlipidemia,
hyperglycemia
Ritonavir Boosting dose for other PIs: 100–400
mg/day Nonboosting dose 600 mg
BIDNausea, vomiting, diarrhea, asthenia,
hyperlipidemia, oral paresthesias,
hyperglycemia
Saquinavir 1000 mg + ritonavir 100 mg PO BID
Unboosted not recommendedNausea, diarrhea, headache,
hyperlipidemia, hyperglycemia, PR
and QT interval prolongation
Tipranavir 500 mg + ritonavir 200 mg PO BID
Unboosted not recommendedHepatotoxicity, rash, hyperlipidemia,
hyperglycemia, intracranial
hemorrhage
Integrase Strand Transfer Inhibitors (INSTIS)They selectively inhibit HIV integrase, thereby by blocks viral replication by preventing insertion
of HIV-DNA into the human DNA genome.
These are very well tolerated with rare side effects of insomnia, depression, dizziness and skin
reactions.

Drugs that interfere with viral entry
Fusion inhibitors
They block the initial fusion of HIV with host cell-surface receptors.
Enfuvirtide (T20) is being used from this class of drugs. It is an injectable peptide derived from
HIV gp41 that inhibits gp41mediated fusion of HIV with the target cell. It is given by
subcutaneous route. It does not inhibit HIV-2.
It is synergistic with NRTIs and PIs.
Advantage:  Because it has an extracellular mode of action, drug–drug interactions is minimal.
Side effects:  Related to the subcutaneous route of administration and may cause reactions at the
injection site.
Coreceptor blockers (CCR5 inhibitors)
Maraviroc is a chemokine receptor antagonist which blocks the cellular CCR5 receptor entry by
HIV. The drug is metabolized by CYP p450 (3A), hence has the potential for drug–drug
interactions. A specialized assay is therefore needed to screen for coreceptor tropism.
Advantages of early ARTReduces risk of progression to AIDS and/or death, TB, non-AIDS-defining illness and increased
the likelihood of immune recovery.
Reduces sexual transmission  in HIV-serodiscordant couples
More convenient and less toxic regimens widely available
Costs and epidemiological benefits
The increased cost of earlier ART would be partly offset by subsequent reduced costs (such as
decreased hospitalization and increased productivity) and preventing new HIV infections.
Evaluation Before Initiating HAART (Table 5.12)
Table 5.12: Evaluation before initiating HAART.
Phase of HIV
managementRecommended Desirable (if feasible)
HIV diagnosis HIV serology,
CD4
TB screeningHBV (HBsAg) serology
Cryptococcus antigen if CD4 ≤100 cells/µL
Screening for STIs (sexually transmitted
infections)
Assessment for major NCDs (non-communicable
diseases) and comorbidities
Follow-up before
ARTCD4 cell count (every 6–12 months)
ART initiation CD4 cell count Hemoglobin for AZT (Zidovudine)
Pregnancy test
Blood pressure
Urine dipsticks for glycosuria and serum
creatinine for TDF
LFT (liver function tests) for NVP (Nevirapine)
Receiving ART CD4 (every 6 months) Serum creatinine for TDF (tenofovir

HIV viral load (at 6 months
after initiating ART and
every 12 months)disoproxilfumarate)
(HAART: highly active anti-retroviral therapy)
Antiretroviral Regimens (Table 5.13)
Q. Write short essay/note on antiretroviral regimens in HIV.
Most commonly used regimen:  PI with two NRTIs, or one NNRTI with two NRTIs or three
NRTIs.
Initiation therapy: Begin with an effective regimen. Consideration should also be given to the
number of pills/day, frequency of dosing, food requirements, toxicity and drug interactions with
other drugs used by the patient.
Starting ART: All drugs should be started simultaneously at full dose (except ritonavir and
nevirapine where dose escalation is recommended). Fixed-dose combinations and once-daily
regimens are preferred for antiretroviral therapy.With EFV no increased risk of birth defects compared with other ARV drugs during the first
trimester of pregnancy.
TDF/FTC or TDF/3TC is the preferred NRTI backbone for: (i) HIV + HBV; (ii) HIV with TB; and
(iii) pregnant women. Infants born to mothers with HIV who are at high risk of acquiring HIV
should receive dual prophylaxis with AZT (twice daily) and NVP (once daily) for the first 6 weeks
of life, whether they are breastfed or formula fed
Table 5.13: Various antiretroviral regimens in ART as per 2017 guidelines.
First-line ART Preferred first-line
regimensAlternative first-line regimens
Adults
(including pregnant and
breastfeeding women and
adults with TB and HBV
coinfection)Tenofovir
disoproxilfumarate (TDF) +
Laminvudine (3TC) or
Emtricitabine (FTC) +
Efavirenz (EFV)AZT + 3TC + EFV
AZT + 3TC + NVP (Nevirapine)
TDF + 3TC (or FTC) + NVP
TDF + 3TC (or FTC) + DTG or
TDF + 3TC (or FTC) + EFV 400
Adolescents
(10 to 19 years) ≥ 35 kgTDF (or ABC) + 3TC (or FTC) + DTG
TDF (or ABC) + 3TC (or FTC) +
EFV400
ABC + 3TC + EFV
ABC + 3TC + NVP
AZT + 3TC + EFV
AZT + 3TC + NVP
TDF + 3TC (or FTC) + NVP
Children 3–10 years and
adolescents < 35 kgAbacavir (ABC) +
Laminvudine (3TC) +
Efavirenz (EFV)ABC + 3TC + NVP
AZT + 3TC + EFV
AZT + 3TC + NVP
TDF + 3TC (or FTC) + EFV

TDF + 3TC (or FTC) + NVP
Children <3 years Abacavir (ABC) or
Zidovudine (AZT) +
Laminvudine (3TC) +
Lopinavir/ritonavir
(LPV/RTV)ABC + 3TC + NVP
AZT + 3TC + NVP
(ART: active anti-retroviral therapy; 3TC: lamivudine; ABC: abacavir; AZT: zidovudine; DTG:
dolutegravir; EFV: efavirenz; FTC: emtricitabine; NVP: nevirapine; PI: protease inhibitor; TDF:
tenofovir)
EFV is the preferred NNRTI for
–  HIV and TB (pharmacological compatibility with TB drugs)
–  HIV + HBV coinfection (less risk of hepatic toxicity)
–  Pregnant women including first trimester.
Immune recovery following HAART
–  First phase (3–6 months)–Redistribution: Release of activated
memory CD4 cells trapped in lymphoid tissues and reduction in
apoptotic cell death.
–  Second phase (6 months to 4 years)–Reconstitution: Naive CD4 cells
and memory CD4 contribute to reconstitution.
Treatment of common opportunistic infections in AIDS is presented in Table
5.14.
Table 5.14: Treatment of common opportunistic infections in AIDS.
Opportunistic infection Treatment
First line Alternate
1.   Candida (mucosal) Clotrimazole 200–600 mg
OR fluconazole 50–100
mg/dayKetaconazole 200 mg/day
2.   Candida (systemic) Amphotericin 0.3 mg/kg/day  
3.   Cryptococcus Amphotericin 0.3 mg/kg/day
+ flucytosine 25–37 mg/kg
QIDAmphotericin 0.7 mg/kg/day plus
Fluconazole
4.   Cytomegalovirus Ganciclovir 5 mg/kg BID
(twice daily) IVFoscarent 60 mg/kg TID
5.   H. simplex (oral) Acyclovir 200–400 mg five
times/day 
6.   H. simplex
(encephalitis)Acyclovir 10 mg/kg TID IV Vidarabine 15 mg/kg/day

7.   Herpes zoster  (local) Acyclovir 30 mg/kg/day in
five doses 
8.   Herpes zoster
(disseminated)Acyclovir 10 mg/kg TID
(thrice daily)Vidarbine 10 mg/kg/day
9.   Isospora belli Co-trimoxazole 7 mg/kg  
10.  Pneumocystis jirovecii Refer Table 5.5 Refer Table 5.5
11.  Toxoplasma Pyrimethamine 50–100
mg/day + sulphadiazine 2 g
QID (four times daily)Pyrimethamine 5–100 mg/day +
clindamycin 500 mg QID
Treatment Failure (Table 5.15)
Table 5.15: Definition of various types of treatment failure in
HIV infections.
Failure Definition
Clinical failure Adults and adolescents: New or recurrent clinical event indicating severe
immunodeficiency (WHO clinical stage 4 condition) after 6 months of effective
treatment
Children:  New or recurrent clinical event indicating advanced or severe
immunodeficiency (WHO clinical stage 3 and 4 clinical condition with
exception of TB) after 6 months of effective treatment
Immunological
failureAdults and adolescents: CD4 count falls to baseline (or below) or persistent
CD4 <100 cells/µL
Children<5 years—persistent CD4 <200 cells/µL or <10%
>5 years—persistent CD4 <100 cells/µL
Virological failure Plasma viral load >1000 based on two consecutive viral load measurements after
3 months, with adherence support
Treatment of failure: Second-line ART in adults should consist of two
nucleoside reverse-transcriptase inhibitors (NRTIs) plus a ritonavir-boosted
protease inhibitor (PI). The following sequence of second-line NRTI options is
recommended:After failure on a TDF + 3TC (or FTC)-based first-line regimen, use AZT +
3TC as the NRTI backbone in second-line regimens.
After failure on an AZT or d4T + 3TC-based first-line regimen, use TDF +
3TC (or FTC) as the NRTI backbone in second-line regimens.
Tuberculosis in HIV Infection
Q. Write short essay on tuberculosis in HIV infection, HAART and
antitubercular drugs.

Leading cause of morbidity and mortality in HIV infection. Most common
opportunistic infection. Can occur at any CD4 level.
About 25–65% persons with HIV infection have tuberculosis.
Estimated annual risk of re-activation among those co-infected with HIV
and TB is about 5–8% with a cumulative lifetime risk of 30% or more
compared to a cumulative lifetime risk of 5–10% in HIV-negative adult
patients.Course of HIV infection is accelerated subsequent to the development of
TB.
Prevalence of multidrug resistant TB is higher in HIV-positive compared
to HIV-negative persons. However, this is not caused directly by HIV
infection.
Clinical FeaturesActive TB occurs throughout the course of HIV disease.
Clinical presentation of TB in HIV-infected persons depends on the level
of immunosuppression resulting from HIV infection. In patients with
relatively intact immune function (CD4+ count >200/mm3), pulmonary
TB is more frequently seen than extrapulmonary TB.
Chest radiographic findings include upper lobe infiltrates and cavitation,
similar to those in HIV-negative individuals with pulmonary tuberculosis,
lower lobes are also frequently involved (Fig. 5.15A), sputum smears is
often positive for acid-fast bacilli. In patient with tuberculoma CT head
may show space occupying lesion (Fig. 5.15B). Patient may present with
matted cervical lymph nodes (Fig. 5.15C) or cutaneous tuberculosis—
lupus vulgaris (Fig. 5.15D)
As immune suppression progresses, extrapulmonary tuberculosis becomes
increasingly common. The disease is often disseminated.
Treatment
Q. Write short note on HAART and antitubercular drugs in HIV.
ART should be commenced in all HIV-infected individuals with active tuberculosis
irrespective of CD4 cell count
TB treatment should be commenced first and ART subsequently, as soon as possible within the
first 8 weeks of starting TB treatment
The recommended preferred ART regimen in naive patients on TB treatment is AZT + 3TC +
EFV or TDF + 3TC or FTC + EFV

In case of intolerance or contraindications to EFV, a NVP-based regimen or a triple NRTI
regimen (AZT + 3TC + ABC or AZT + 3TC + TDF) are recommended.
Protease inhibitors (PIs) and NNRTIs are antiretroviral agents that may inhibit or induce
cytochrome P-450 isoenzymes (CYP450). Rifampicin induces CYP450 and may substantially
decrease blood levels of the antiretroviral drugs.NRTIs are not metabolized by CYP450. Concurrent use of NRTIs and rifampicin is not
contraindicated and does not require dose adjustments.
Rifampicin can be used for the treatment of active TB in three situations:
1. A patient on NNRTI efavirenz and two NRTIs.
2. Patient on PI ritonavir and one or more NRTIs.
3. A patient on combination of two PIs, ritonavir and saquinavir (not used in most cases).
Figs. 5.15A to D: (A) Chest X-ray showing tuberculosis involving left lower lobe; (B) CT head
showing space occupying lesion- tuberculoma; (C) Matted cervical lymph nodes due to tuberculosis;
(D) Cutaneous tuberculosis—lupus vulgaris in a HIV patient.
In individuals who need a boosted PI-based regimen, rifabutin based TB treatment is
recommended. If rifabutin is not available, use of rifampicin and LPV/r or SQV/r containing
regimen with additional RTV dosing is recommended with close monitoring.Rifabutin may be used in a dose of 300 mg/day in patients on NRTIs, NVP and SQV alone.
However, its dose should be reduced to 150 mg two or three times per week when it is
administered to patients taking ritonavir or ritonavir/iopinavir and to 150 mg once a day when
used with IDV or NFV. On the other hand, its dose should be increased to 450–600 mg daily when
it is used concurrently with efavirenz.
RisksImmune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS) (refer page 241)

Reduced adherence due to high pill burden
More laboratory monitoring needed (LFTs: liver function tests, Hb: hemoglobin estimation)
Management of HIV/AIDS during Pregnancy
Q. Write short essay/note on the management of HIV/AIDS during pregnancy.
All pregnant women should routinely be tested for HIV at an early stage in pregnancy, with rapid
tests for those presenting in or just after labor.
The course of HIV disease progression is not altered by pregnancy.
Pre-ART dramatically reduced the risk of mother-to-child transmission of HIV to less than 1%.
All pregnant women who qualify for ART for their own HIV infection should start treatment at the
beginning of the second trimester. If they have severe disease, they should start ART in the first
trimester itself. Efavirenz should be avoided in the first trimester.Two ART strategies are presently used to prevent mother-to-child transmission: commence
standard ART and discontinue at delivery or after weaning; or zidovudine monotherapy, usually
started at 28 weeks, augmented with single-dose nevirapine at delivery.
The risk of mother-to-child transmission is lower in cesarean section than vaginal delivery.
Breastfeed
HIV is also transmitted by breastfeeding.
WHO recommends that where replacement feeding is ‘acceptable, feasible, affordable, sustainable
and safe’ (‘AFASS’ criteria), HIV-infected women should avoid breastfeeding.
In resource-limited situations, breastfeeding is still recommended.
Immune Reconstitution Inflammatory Syndrome (IRIS)
Q. Give a brief account of immune reconstitution inflammatory
syndrome (IRIS).
A pathologic inflammatory immune recognition of antigens associated
with a known or unknown replicating infection or persistent non-
replicating antigens from a previous infection.
Results in spectrum of presentations ranging from clinical worsening of a
treated opportunistic infection (OI), atypical presentation of an
unrecognized OI or autoimmune disorders such as Graves’ disease.The constellation of clinical symptoms, signs or investigational parameters
resulting from such inflammatory response is called immune
reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS).Categories
1. Related to underlying opportunistic infection
–   Inflammatory ‘unmasking’ of a previously untreated infection.
–   Paradoxical clinical deterioration of an infective process for
which patient is on appropriate treatment.

2. Autoimmune: Graves’ disease
3. Malignancies: Worsening of Kaposi’s sarcoma
The term immune reconstitution disease (IRD) is sometimes used to
distinguish IRIS manifestations related to opportunistic diseases from IRIS
manifestations related to autoimmune diseases. A variety of fungal,
parasitic, mycobacterial and viral opportunistic infections are associated
with manifestations of IRIS. IRD is common in patients with underlying
untreated mycobacterial or fungal infections and IRIS is found in 10–30%
of patients.IRIS is most common in patients with CD4+ T-cell counts <50 cells/μL
and who have a sudden drop in HIV-RNA levels following the initiation
of cART.Signs and symptoms may develop from 2 weeks to 2 years after the
initiation of cART. These include localized lymphadenitis, prolonged
fever, pulmonary infiltrates, hepatitis, increased intracranial pressure,
uveitis, sarcoidosis, and Graves’ disease.Clinical course can be protracted, and severe cases can be fatal.
Management
Continue HAART in the majority of cases. However, if the manifestations of IRIS are considered
to be life or organ-threatening, discontinuation of HAART is sometimes necessary.
Corticosteroids or NSAIDs may help decrease the inflammatory response in some patients with
IRIS.
Treat the infection or malignancy.
Postexposure Care of a Healthcare Worker
Q. Write short note on postexposure care of a healthcare worker
(HCW).
Risk of Transmission
HIV—0.3% after a percutaneous exposure and 0.09% after a mucous membrane exposure,
if the source patient has HIV infection.
HBV—2-40% (source patient is positive for both HBsAg and HBeAg—37-62%; source
patient is positive for HBsAg but is HBeAg negative—23–37%)
HCV—1.8%
Determine Risk Associated with Exposure
Type of fluid to which healthcare worker (HCW) has been exposed (e.g.

blood, visibly bloody fluid, other potentially infectious fluid or tissue is
considered infectious).
Type of exposure: Percutaneous injury, mucous membrane or non-intact
skin exposure is considered significant.
–  Less severe: solid needle or superficial injury
–  More severe: Large-bore hollow needle, deep puncture, visible blood
on device, needle used in patient’s artery or vein
Infection status of source
–  Class 1: Asymptomatic HIV infection or known low viral load (<1,500
copies/mL)
–  Class 2: Symptomatic HIV, AIDS, acute seroconversion, or known
high viral load
A known source: Patient should be tested for anti-HIV, HbsAg and anti-
HCV with their consent.
Indication for postexposure prophylaxis (PEP): When the risk is
deemed to be significant after a careful risk assessment, in both
occupational and non-occupational settings.PEP is also given for rape victims.
Q. Postexposure prophylaxis of HIV
Management of Postexposure
Postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) is 80% effective
Decontamination
Wash the area with soap and water.
Avoid squeezing or milking the wound.
Do not use caustic agents (e.g. bleach). 
Initiating postexposure prophylaxis (PEP)
Start within 72 hours
2–3 drug regimen based on risk
PEP should be given for 28 days, if tolerated.
Table 5.16: Postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) regimens.
Exposure Type Infection Status of Source
HIV+, class 1 HIV+, class 2
Less severe Recommend basic Recommend expanded ≥3-

2-drug PEP drug PEP
More severe Recommend
expanded 3-drug
PEPRecommend expanded ≥3-
drug PEP
 Unknown HIV
statusUnknown source
Less severe Generally, no PEP
warranted; consider
basic 2-drug PEP if
source has HIV risk
factorsGenerally, no PEP
warranted; consider basic 2-
drug PEP if exposure to
HIV-infected persons is
likely
More severe Recommend
expanded 3-drug
PEPRecommend expanded ≥3-
drug PEP
Postexposure prophylaxis (PEP) regimens (Table 5.16)Basic regimen for PEP
–  One nNRTI and one NRTI (tenofovir + emtricitabine), or
–  Two NRTIs (zidovudine + lamivudine, zidovudine + emtricitabine, lamivudine + stavudine,
lamivudine + tenofovir, stavudine + didanosine).
Expanded regimen includes an additional third drug (ritonavir/lopinavir, indinavir, nelfinavir or
efavirenz). Most commonly used third drug is ritonavir/lopinavir.
Agents not recommended for PEP  includes nevirapine, delavirdine, abacavir and zalcitabine.
–  Zidovudine is no longer recommended:  because there is: (i) no clear advantage in efficacy
over tenofovir; and (ii) higher rates of treatment-limiting side effects.
–  Recommendations place emphasis on the importance of initiating occupational PEP as soon as
possible, ideally within 2 hours of exposure.
♦   First dose of PEP should be offered while evaluation is underway.
♦   PEP should not be delayed while awaiting source patient or results of the exposed baseline
HIV test.
Preferred HIV-PEP regimen:  Raltegravir 400 mg PO twice daily PLUS  tenofovir DF 300 mg +
emtricitabine 200 mg—Fixed Dose Combination once daily.
Monitoring the exposed healthcare worker (HCW)
HCW should be monitored for any serious side effects of the antiretroviral drugs.
Complete blood counts and renal and hepatic function tests should be done at baseline and
then 2 weeks after initiating chemoprophylaxis.
Baseline HIV-antibody test and test for hepatitis B and C infections should be done that are
repeated at 6 weeks, 12 weeks and 6 months postexposure.
Postexposure Prophylaxis for Hepatitis B (Table 5.17)
Management depends on:

Source hepatitis B surface antigen status.
Whether exposed person vaccinated.
Whether exposed person has immunity.
Table 5.17: Recommended PEP for hepatitis B (HB) virus.
Vaccination/Ab response
status of exposed patientTreatment when source patient is
HBsAg hepatitis B surface
antigen positiveHBsAg negative Source unknown
or not available
for testing
Unvaccinated/nonimmune HBIG (Hepatitis B
immunoglobulin) ×1; initiate
HB vaccine seriesInitiate HB
(hepatitis B)
vaccine seriesInitiate HB
vaccine series
Previously vaccinated,
known responderNo treatment No treatment No treatment
Previously vaccinated,
known nonresponderHBIG (Hepatitis B
immunoglobulin) × 1 and
initiate revaccination or
HBIG × 2No treatment No treatment
unless high-risk
source; if high-
risk source, treat
as if source were
HBsAg positive
Previously vaccinated,
response unknownSingle vaccine booster dose No treatment No treatment
unless high-risk
source; if high-
risk source, treat
as if source were
HBsAg positive
Still undergoing vaccination HBIG × 1; complete series Complete series Complete series
Postexposure Prophylaxis for Hepatitis CNo vaccine or treatment will prevent infection . Immune globulin not recommended; does not
work
Early infection effectively treated with Peg-interferon +/– ribavirin
Preexposure prophylaxis (PrEP)
Guidelines for preexposure prophylaxis (PrEP) were released in May 2014. Addresses the role of
PrEP in the following adult populations:
Men who have sex with men
Heterosexual men and woman
Injection drug users
Sero-discordant couples
Only medication to be used in this setting is tenofovir/emtricitabine.
HIV Vaccine
Need:  In spite of the remarkable achievements in development of antiretroviral therapies and

recent advances in new prevention technologies, the rate of new HIV infections continues to
outpace efforts on prevention and control.
Challenges
–  HIV mutates rapidly; HIV mutates in one day as much as influenza viruses do in a year.
–  The virus has developed multiple mechanisms to evade the body’s defenses.
–  Targets the cells (CD4) that coordinate the immune response to viral infections.
–  Broadly neutralizing antibodies usually appear between 2–4 years but by that time the
antibodies cannot save them because they are overwhelmed by the mutating virus.
AIDS VaccinesRecombinant protein (HIV gp120) adjuvant with alum. Failed in Phase II trials
Recombinant adeno-associated virus vaccine (rAAV)
Recombinant adenovirus type-5 vaccine containing HIV gag, pol  and nef genes
RV144:  Canarypox vector prime + monomeric gp120 boost, 31% efficacy in Phase III trials.
Mississippi Baby
The ‘Mississippi baby’ was born to an HIV-positive mother who had not received any treatment
during pregnancy. Doctors began treating the child by the time she was 30 hours old, but the family
stopped antiretroviral therapy at 18 months. She remained off the drugs for the next 27 months with
no signs of the virus in her blood. She was monitored closely. However, at 4 months of age the CD4
cells dropped and in a few weeks the HIV virus levels were detectable. She is presently on treatment.
Berlin Patient
Timothy Ray Brown had HIV for 12 years before he became the first person in the world to be cured
of the infection following a stem cell transplant in 2007. The stem cell donor had a specific genetic
mutation called CCR5 Delta 32 that protects a person against HIV infection. After the stem cell
transplant, Brown was able to stop all antiretroviral treatment and the HIV has not returned till now.

Respiratory System

CHAPTER
6
INTRODUCTION, BASIC APPROACH,
SYMPTOMATOLOGY AND INVESTIGATIONS
Q. Write short note on the normal arterial blood gas (ABG) levels.
Table 6.1 depicts normal arterial blood gas levels.
Table 6.1: Normal arterial blood gas (ABG) levels.
Arterial oxygen tension (PaO 2) 90–104 mm Hg
Arterial carbon dioxide (PaCO 2) 35–45 mm Hg
Arterial oxygen saturation (SaO 2) 95 to 99%
Arterial blood pH (pH) 7.35–7.45 Units
Arterial bicarbonate (HCO 3) 22–30 meq/L
Base excess (BE) 0 ± 2 mmol/L
Hypercapnic Encephalopathy
Q. Write short essay/note on hypercapnic encephalopathy [Carbon
dioxide (CO2) narcosis].
Definition
Hypercapnia is defined as a raised arterial carbon dioxide (PaCO2) of
45 mm Hg (6 kPa) at rest.
Hypercapnic encephalopathy: When PaCO2 exceeds 90 mm Hg (12
kPa), severe hypercapnia causes confusion, progressive drowsiness and
CO2 narcosis.
Causes of Hypercapnia (Table 6.2)

Usually results from alveolar hypoventilation .
Table 6.2: Causes of hypercapnia.
Central depression of respiratory drive
Brain-stem lesions
Central sleep apnea, obesity hypoventilation
Sedatives: MorphineReduced alveolar ventilation due to pathology
within the lungs
Chronic bronchitis
Emphysema
Neuromuscular
Peripheral neuropathy, GB syndrome,
poliomyelitis
Myasthenia gravis
MyopathiesReduced chest wall  (including diaphragmatic)
movements
Trauma
Kyphoscoliosis pectus excavatum
Ankylosing spondylitis
Clinical Features
Headache: Severe generalized or bilateral frontal or occipital headache
(especially severe on waking up ).
Depresses the level of consciousness. Hypercapnia depresses the level of
consciousness.
–   In mild cases, it produces intermittent drowsiness, indifference or
inattention, reduction of psychomotor activity and forgetfulness.
–   In severe cases, it causes mental dullness, drowsiness, confusion,
seizures stupor and coma. If left untreated, acute hypercapnic
respiratory failure can cause death.
Signs (Box 6.1)
Box 6.1:  Signs of hypercapnia.
Asterixis
Altered sensorium
Flushed warm extremities
Bounding peripheral pulses
Fasciculations (muscle twitching)
PapilledemaInvestigations
Arterial Blood Gas (ABG) study: For confirmation of hypercapnia.
Other relevant investigations depending on the underlying cause.

Treatment
Mechanical ventilation with intermittent positive-pressure respirator. Non-invasive ventilation
(NIV) may be sufficient in patients with mild symptoms. BiPAP: 8–12 cm H 2O (inspiratory
pressure) and 3–5 cm H 2O (expiratory pressure).
Maintenance of acid-base and electrolyte balance.
Treatment of the underlying cause. Respiratory stimulants (Doxapram, Medroxyprogesterone,
Acetazolamide) are used with variable benefits.
Precaution : In chronic hypercapnia [e.g. chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD)], oxygen should be administered in a controlled manner
(about 2 L/minute) and morphine and other sedatives should be avoided.
Hypoxemia
Q. Write short note on hypoxemia.
Definition: Hypoxemia is defined as arterial oxygen tension (PaO2) of less
than 80 mm Hg (10.6 kPa) in a young healthy adult. As the age advances,
the normal arterial oxygen tension (PaO2) falls gradually.
Causes of Hypoxemia (Table 6.3)
Table 6.3: Causes of hypoxemia.
Ventilation-perfusion mismatch in the lung
Chronic bronchitis
Emphysema
Acute asthma
Pulmonary embolism
Interstitial lung diseases
Right-to-left shunts
Congenital cyanotic heart diseases
Pulmonary collapse/atelectasis
Consolidation, e.g. pneumoniaHypoventilation
Central depression of respiratory drive:
Brainstem lesions, central sleep apnea
Peripheral neuromuscular disease:
Myasthenia gravis peripheral, neuropathy,
myasthenia gravis, myopathiesMalfunctioning of mechanical ventilators
Decreased inspired oxygen concentration
High altitudes
Malfunctioning of mechanical ventilators
Hypoxemia is rare due to reduced diffusion.
Clinical Features
Acute hypoxemia: It closely resembles acute alcoholism and is
characterized by impaired judgment and motor incoordination. On
examination patient has tachypnea, cyanosis, cold peripheries, thready

pulses, hypotension.
Chronic hypoxemia: Of long-standing duration presents with fatigue,
drowsiness, inattentiveness, apathy, delayed reaction time and reduced
work capacity.
Consequences: Centers in the brainstem gets affected and death may
occur due to respiratory failure.
Investigations
Arterial Blood Gas (ABG) study: For confirmation of hypoxemia.
Calculate the alveolar-arterial O2 (PAO2-PaO2) gradient: To
differentiate various causes of hypoxemia.
Treatment:  Treat the underlying cause or mechanism.
Clubbing
Q. Define clubbing. Enumerate the causes and give the mechanism of
clubbing. Enumerate cardiac causes.
Definition: Clubbing (also called Hippocrates fingers) is defined as a
selective bulbous enlargement of the distal segment of a digit  (fingers and
toes) due to an increase in connective tissue especially on the dorsal aspect
resulting in loss of the onychonychial angle (Figs. 6.1A and B).
Mechanisms
Some of hypotheses are:
Role of platelets: Megakaryocytes from the bone marrow normally break
up to the platelets in the pulmonary capillaries. Whenever there are shunts
or abnormal circulation (e.g. neoplasm), these megakaryocytes bypass the
pulmonary capillaries and reach the systemic circulation. These
megakaryocytes preferably lodge in the tips of the digits and locally
release platelet derived growth factor (PDGF) and vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF). These growth factors along with other mediators
increase endothelial permeability and activate and cause proliferation of
connective tissue cells (e.g. fibroblasts).Humoral: Unknown humoral substances dilate vessels in the fingertip
(e.g. acromegaly)

Persistent hypoxia: Causes opening of deep arteriovenous fistula in
fingers (e.g. tetralogy of Fallot).
Reduced ferritin  in systemic circulation: Causes dilation of arteriovenous
anastomoses.
Vagal theory: Persistent vagal stimulation causes vasodilation and
clubbing (e.g. lung carcinoma).
Toxic: Subacute bacterial endocarditis (SABE).
Metabolic: Thyrotoxicosis.
Figs. 6.1A and B:  (A) Normal finger; (B) Clubbing of finger.
(IPD: interphalangeal distance; DPD: distal phalangeal distance).
Grades of Clubbing (Table 6.4)
The process of clubbing usually takes years but in few conditions (e.g. lung
abscess, empyema), it may develop quite fast.
Table 6.4: Grades of clubbing.

Grade Features
1 Increased fluctuation due to softening of the nail bed (increased ballotability)
2 Loss of the normal <165° onychodermal angle (Lovibond angle) between the
nail bed and the nail fold (cuticula)
3 Thickening of the whole distal (end part of the) finger (resembling a parrot beak
or drumstick)
4 Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (Pain and tenderness at distal end of long bones
due to subperiosteal new bone formation)
Causes (Table 6.5): Clubbing may be hereditary, idiopathic, or acquired and
associated with a variety of disorders. Various methods of eliciting clubbing
are listed in Box 6.2.
Table 6.5: Causes of clubbing.
RespiratoryNeoplasms:  Bronchogenic carcinoma
(especially squamous cell carcinoma),
metastasis to lung, mesothelioma
Suppurative lung disease:  Bronchiectasis, lung
abscess, cystic fibrosis, empyema
Asbestosis (with mesothelioma)
Sarcoidosis
Cystic fibrosis
Pulmonary AV fistula
Interstitial lung diseases
Cardiovascular
Infective endocarditis
Cyanotic congenial heart diseases, atrial
myxoma, Eisenmenger’s syndrome
Gastrointestinal
Inflammatory bowel disease (ulcerative colitis
and Crohn’s disease)
Primary biliary cirrhosis
HepatomaMiscellaneous
Hereditary, idiopathic (pachydermoperiostitis
or Touraine-Solente-Gole syndrome)
Unidigital clubbing occurs in repeated trauma
Unilateral Clubbing
Hemiplegia (long standing)
Vascular disease
–   Aneurysm:  Subclavian artery,
brachiocephalic trunk
–   Pre-subclavian coarctation of aorta (left-
sided clubbing)
–   Pancoast tumor
–   Unilateral erythromelalgia
–   AV fistula used for hemodialysis
–   Infected arterial graft
Phalangeal depth ratio: It is defined by the ratio of digit’s depth measured
at the junction between skin and nail (nail bed) and at the distal
interphalangeal joint. Normally, the depth at distal interphalangeal joint is
more than the depth at nail bed. In clubbing fingers, there is reversal of this
ratio. A phalangeal depth ratio of over 1 indicates clubbing. It can be
measured by a caliper or a digital photograph.

Figs. 6.2A to C:  Various signs of clubbing.
Pseudoclubbing: It is increase in longitudinal curvature of the nail with
loss of nail and nail plate material. It is characterized clinically by
asymmetrical involvement of fingers and radiographically by resorption of
the terminal tufts (acro-osteolysis).There is no over-growth of connective
tissue as observed in clubbing.
Box 6.2:  Various methods of eliciting the signs of clubbing.
1. Lovibond’s profile sign (Fig. 6.2A)
2. Curth’s modified profile sign (Fig. 6.2B)
3. Fluctuation test
4. Schamroth’s window test (Fig. 6.2C)
5. Phalangeal depth ratio
Causes of pseudoclubbing: (1) Subungual tumor or cyst and (2)
subperiosteal bone resorption (e.g. scleroderma, thyroid acropachy, vinyl
chloride poisoning, acromegaly, hyperparathyroidism, leprosy, chronic renal
failure, acrometastasis, etc.).
Primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (PHO), a rare hereditary disorder
with digital clubbing, subperiosteal new bone formation, and arthropathy. It
is associated with mutations in the 15-hydroxy-prostaglandin dehydrogenase
(15-PGDH).
Abnormalities in Nails due to Systemic Diseases (Table 6.6)Q. Write short note/essay on abnormalities in nails due to systemic
diseases.
Table 6.6: Abnormalities in nails due to systemic diseases.
Abnormality and description Associated systemic disease

SHAPE OR GROWTH CHANGE
Clubbing Discussed above (Table 6.5)
Koilonychia:  Spoon-shaped nails (transverse
and longitudinal concavity)Iron deficiency anemia, rarely in
hemochromatosis, Raynaud’s disease, SLE,
hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism
Pitting:  Punctate depressions in nails Psoriasis, Reiter’s syndrome, pemphigus, lichen
planus, alopecia areata, rheumatoid arthritis
Onycholysis:  Distal nail plate separated from
nail bed, white discoloration of the affected
part of the nailPsoriasis, local infection, hyperthyroidism,
sarcoidosis, trauma, amyloidosis, connective
tissue disorders, pellagraBeau’s lines:  Transverse linear depressions
over nails, move distally with the growth of
nailAny severe systemic illness that disrupts nail
growth, Raynaud’s disease, pemphigus, trauma
Onychomadesis:  Proximal separation of nail
plate from nail bedTrauma, drug sensitivity, poor nutrition,
pemphigus vulgaris, Kawasaki disease
Yellow nails:  Nail has a ‘heaped-up’ or
thickened appearance, yellow in color, with
obliteration of lunulaLymphedema, pleural effusion,
immunodeficiency, bronchiectasis, sinusitis,
rheumatoid arthritis, nephrotic syndrome,
thyroiditis, tuberculosis, Raynaud’s disease
COLOR CHANGETerry’s (white) nails:  Most of the nail plate
turns white with obliteration of lunula,
uniformly affects all nailsLiver failure, cirrhosis, diabetes mellitus, CHF,
hyperthyroidism, malnutrition
Half-and-half nails (Lindsay’s nails):
Proximal portion of nail bed is white because
of nail-bed edema (half-brown, half-white
appearance)Renal failure, HIV infection, Crohn’s disease
Azure lunula (blue nails) Hepatolenticular degeneration (Wilson’s
disease), silver poisoning, quinacrine therapy
Mees’ lines:  Transverse white bands affecting
multiple nails, move distally with nail growthArsenic poisoning, Hodgkin’s lymphoma, CHF,
leprosy, malaria, chemotherapy
Muehrcke’s lines:  Pairs of transverse white
lines that disappear on applying pressure, do
not move with growth of nailSpecific for hypoalbuminemia of any cause
Dark longitudinal streaks Melanoma, benign nevus, chemical staining,
normal variant in darkly pigmented people
Splinter hemorrhage:  Longitudinal, thin,
reddish lines occurring beneath the nail plateSubacute bacterial endocarditis, SLE, rheumatoid
arthritis, peptic ulcer disease, malignancies, oral
contraceptive use, pregnancy, psoriasis, traumaTelangiectasia:  Irregular, twisted and dilated
vessels at the distal portion of cuticle covering
the nail bedRheumatoid arthritis, SLE, dermatomyositis,
scleroderma
Longitudinal striations Alopecia areata, vitiligo, atopic dermatitis,

psoriasis
Cyanosis (Fig. 6.3)
Definition: Bluish discoloration of the skin and mucous membrane. It
results from an increased concentration of reduced
hemoglobin/ deoxyhemoglobin (>5 g/dL) or abnormal hemoglobin
derivatives (e.g. methemoglobin, sulfhemoglobin, etc.) in the capillary blood
perfusing the area. Cyanosis is normally detected when the oxygen saturation
(SaO2) is <85%.
Types of Cyanosis (Table 6.7)
Table 6.7: Types of cyanosis and difference between them.
Features Central cyanosis Peripheral cyanosis
Mechanism Inadequate oxygenation of
systemic arterial blood
(hypoxic hypoxia)Sluggish peripheral circulation
(stagnant hypoxia)
Sites to look Tongue and oral mucosa Acral:  Tip of the nose, ear
lobules, outer aspect of lips,
finger tips, nail bed, extremities
Associations Clubbing, polycythemia
Extremities Warm Cold
Warming extremities No change Cyanosis disappears
Oxygen inhalation Slight improvement No change
ABG PaO 2 Low <85% Normal 85–100%
Pulse volume May be high Usually low
Dyspnea Usually present Usually absent
Exercise Worsens May improve

Fig. 6.3:  Cyanosis characterized by bluish discoloration of mucous membrane of tongue.
Causes of Cyanosis
Central cyanosis
Cardiac
–   Congenital cyanotic heart diseases ( Remember 5 ‘T’s and 2 ‘E’s): Transposition of great
arteries, tetralogy of Fallot, truncus arteriosus, tricuspid valve abnormalities, total anomalous
pulmonary venous return (TAPVR), Eisenmenger’s syndrome (cyanosis tardive) and Ebstein’s
anomaly.
–   Acute pulmonary edema (due to left-sided heart failure).
Pulmonary:  Acute severe asthma, COPD, cor pulmonale, respiratory failure, respiratory
depression, lobar and bronchopneumonia, tension pneumothorax, acute laryngeal edema, acute
pulmonary embolism
High altitude (due to low partial pressure of oxygen)
Polycythemia
Enterogenous or pigment cyanosis:  Methemoglobinemia and sulfhemoglobinemia.
Peripheral cyanosis
Low cardiac output:  Congestive heart failure.
Local vasoconstriction:  Cold, frostbite, Raynaud’s phenomenon, shock.
Arterial obstruction:  Peripheral vascular diseases (atherosclerosis, Buerger’s disease).
Venous obstruction:  Superior vena caval syndrome.

Hyperviscosity syndrome:  Multiple myeloma, polycythemia, macroglobulinemia.
Others:  Cryoglobulinemia, mitral stenosis.
Mixed cyanosis
All causes of central cyanosis may also cause peripheral cyanosis
Cardiogenic shock with pulmonary edema
Congestive cardiac failure due to left sided heart failure
Polycythemia (rarely).
Differential cyanosis:  Cyanosis only in lower limbs seen in PDA with reversal of shunt.
Cyanosis only in upper limbs (reverse differential cyanosis): Coarctation of aorta (ductal type) with
transposition of great arteries.
Cyanosis in left upper limb and both lower limbs:  PDA with reversal of shunt and preductal
coarctation of aorta
Intermittent cyanosis:  Ebstein’s anomaly
Cyclical cyanosis:  Bilateral choanal atresia
Orthocyanosis:  Development of cyanosis only in upright position due to hypoxia occurring in erect
posture. Seen in pulmonary arterio-venous malformation.
Cyanosis absent despite of sufficient reduced hemoglobin: In severe anemia, carbon monoxide
poisoning.
Hyperoxia test (Cardiac vs Pulmonary cyanosis): After giving 100%
oxygen for 10 minutes, a repeat ABG is done and if PaO2 is <150 mm Hg
then the cause is cardiac and if the PaO2 improves to >200 mm Hg, the cause
is respiratory.
Pseudocyanosis: Caused by metals (gold, silver, mercury, arsenic) and drugs
(minocycline, phenothiazines, chloroquine, amiodarone).
Respiratory (Pulmonary) Function Tests (Table 6.8)
Q. Write short note on pulmonary function tests and give their clinical
significance.
Q. Write short note on FEV1 (Forced expiratory volume in one second).
Table 6.8: Pulmonary function test (PFT).
PFT tracings have:
Four lung volumes:  Tidal volume, inspiratory
reserve volume, expiratory reserve volume,
and residual volume
Five capacities:  Inspiratory capacity,
expiratory capacity, vital capacity, functional
residual capacity, and total lung capacityFlow-volume curves
Blood gases and pulse oximetry
Transfer factor (diffusion)
Exercise tests
Exhaled nitric oxide

Abbreviations used in pulmonary function tests are presented in Table 6.9.
Table 6.9: Abbreviations used in pulmonary function tests.
Abbreviations Explanation
FVC (Forced vital capacity) Volume of air expired with a maximal effort after
deep inspiration
FEV 1 (Forced expiratory volume in one second) Volume of air expired in the first second after
deep inspiration
VC (Vital capacity) Maximum amount of air that can be expelled
from the lungs after the deepest possible breath
TLC minus RV or maximum volume of air
exhaled from maximal inspiratory level (60–70
mL/kg) (3100–4800 mL). VC decreases with age
PEF (Peak expiratory flow) Volume of forcibly expired air during the first 10
seconds after deep inspiration
TLC (Total lung capacity) Sum of all volume compartments or volume of
air in lungs after maximum inspiration (4–6 L)
FRC (Functional residual capacity) Sum of RV and ERV or the volume of air in the
lungs at end-expiratory tidal position (30–35
mL/kg) (2300–3300 mL)
Measured with multiple-breath closed-circuit
helium dilution, multiple-breath open-circuit
nitrogen washout, or body plethysmography
It cannot be measured by spirometry
RV (Residual volume) Volume of air remaining in lungs after maximum
exhalation (20–25 mL/kg) (1700–2100 mL)
Indirectly measured (FRC-ERV)
It cannot be measured by spirometry. RV
increases with age
IRV (Inspiratory reserve volume) Maximum volume of air inhaled from the end-
inspiratory tidal position (1900–3300 mL)
ERV (Expiratory reserve volume) Maximum volume of air that can be exhaled from
resting end-expiratory tidal position (700–1000
mL)
TV (Tidal volume) Volume of air inhaled or exhaled with each
breath during quiet breathing (6–8 mL/kg)
IC (Inspiratory capacity) Sum of IRV and TV or the maximum volume of
air that can be inhaled from the end-expiratory
tidal position (2400–3800 mL)
EC (Expiratory capacity) TV + ERV
DLCO (Diffusing capacity of lung for carbon
monoxide)Also known as transfer factor, DLCO measures
the transfer of inhaled gases into the pulmonary
capillaries

Measurement of Airway Obstruction (Fig. 6.4)
Ventilatory capacity
Ventilatory capacity include FEV1 (volume of air expired in the first second
after deep inspiration) and FVC (volume of air expired with a maximal effort
after deep inspiration) and PEF  (peak expiratory flow rate).
Normally, FEV1/FVC ratio is around 75%.
Fig. 6.4:  Diagrammatic representation of various lung volume measurements.
(TLC: total lung capacity; VC: vital capacity; RV, residual volume; IC: inspiratory capacity; FRC:
functional residual capacity; IRV: inspiratory reserve volume; TV: tidal volume; ERV: expiratory
reserve volume; RV: residual volume)
Patterns of abnormalities:
i.   Obstructive ventilatory defect: It is characterized by narrowing of
airways during expiration (e.g. bronchial asthma, chronic bronchitis and
emphysema). These disorders show markedly reduced FEV1, reduced
or normal VC and reduced FEV1/VC. In airflow limitation, the FEV1 is
reduced as a percentage of FVC. With increasing airflow limitation FEV
falls proportionately more than FVC, so the FEV1/FVC ratio is reduced.
Reversibility of airflow limitation: When FEV1 is disproportionately
reduced resulting in FEV1/FVC ratios of less than 70%; spirometry
should be repeated following inhaled short-acting β2-adrenoceptor
agonists (e.g. salbutamol). A large improvement in FEV1 (over 400

mL) is seen in bronchial asthma and, to some extent, in chronic
bronchitis.
ii.  Restrictive ventilatory defect: In restrictive lung disease, FEV1 and
FVC are reduced proportionately and the FEV1/FVC ratio may be
normal  or may even increase because of enhanced elastic recoil. This
pattern is seen in interstitial inflammation and/or fibrosis that lead to
progressive loss of lung volume.
Peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR):
Peak flow meters are cheap and simpler than spirometer. Patient is asked
to take a full inspiration to total lung capacity and then blow out forcefully
into the peak flow meter. PEFR measures the volume of forcibly expired
air during the first 10 seconds after deep inspiration. Reduced values are
found in airflow obstruction and are not useful in assessing restrictive
ventilatory defect. It is mainly useful for diagnosis, to monitor
exacerbations and response to treatment in asthma.Lung volumes
Lung volumes include total lung capacity (TLC) and residual volume
(RV). Both can be measured by spirometry.
Total lung capacity (TLC—the total amount of air in the lungs after
taking the deepest breath possible).
Vital capacity (VC) is the maximum amount of air that can be expelled
from the lungs after the deepest possible breath is recorded separately.
Patient is asked to make a full but unhurried (‘relaxed’) exhalation into the
spirometer.
Residual volume (RV) is the volume of air in the lungs at the end of full
expiration. It is calculated by subtracting the VC (vital capacity) from the
TLC (total lung capacity).
Interpretation:In obstructive lung disease, both TLC and RV are increased.
In restrictive lung diseases (due to parenchymal lung disease), both TLC and RV are reduced.
Extraparenchymal diseases with restriction during both inspiration and expiration (ankylosing
spondylitis, kyphoscoliosis), RV is increased while TLC is reduced.
Flow volume loops (Table 6.10 and Fig. 6.5)
Flow volume loops measure flow rates against expired volume and shows the

site of airflow limitation (obstruction) within the lung. At the start of
expiration from TLC, maximum resistance is from the large airways. This
affects the flow rate for the first 25% of the curve. As air is exhaled, lung
volume reduces and the flow rate depends on the resistance offered by
smaller airways.
Table 6.10: Flow volume loops in various disorders.
Disease states FVC FEV 1 FEV 1/FVC
Obstructive Normal Reduced Reduced
Stiff lungs Reduced Reduced Normal
Respiratory muscle
weaknessReduced Reduced Normal
Fig. 6.5:  Flow volume loop for common respiratory diseases.
FEV1 is the volume exhaled during the first second of the FVC maneuver.
Decreased in both obstructive and restrictive lung disorders.
FEF 25–75% is the mean expiratory flow during the middle half of the
FVC maneuver; reflects flow through the small (<2 mm in diameter)
airways.
Interpretation of percent predicted: Normal (>79%), mild obstruction (60–
79%), moderate obstruction (40–59%), severe obstruction (<40%).
FEV1/FVC is the ratio of FEV1 to FVC × 100 (expressed as a percent); an

important value because a reduction of this ratio from expected values is
specific for obstructive rather than restrictive diseases. Normal value
(FEV1/FVC) is 75–85 %, <70% of predicted value in mild obstruction,
<60% of predicted value in moderate obstruction and <50% of predicted
value in severe obstruction.
Spirometry Interpretation: Obstructive versus restrictive defect (Table
6.11).Arterial blood gases (ABG) and oximetry (refer Table 6.1)
These tests include measurement of (i) hydrogen ion (H+) concentration, (ii)
PaO2 and PaCO2, and (iii) oxygen saturation and bicarbonate concentration
(derived from the above values) in an arterial blood. These are performed by
automatic analyzers.
Uses: (1) To assess the degree and type of respiratory failure (for
management of status asthmaticus and acute respiratory distress syndrome—
ARDS) and (2) for measuring acid-based status.
Tests for Gas Exchange Function
a.  Alveolar-arterial O2 tension gradient:Sensitive indicator of detecting regional V/Q inequality
It is the difference between the amount of the oxygen in the alveoli
[i.e. the alveolar oxygen tension (PAO2)] and the amount of oxygen
dissolved in the plasma (PaO2).
b.  Dyspnea differentiation index (DDI):
To differentiate dyspnea due to respiratory/cardiac diseases
DDI-Lower in respiratory pathology
c.  Diffusing capacity of lung (DL): Defined as the rate at which gas enters
into blood divided by its driving pressure.
The diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide (DLCO) is also known as
the transfer factor. It measures the ability of the lungs to transfer gas
from inhaled air in the alveoli to the red blood cells in pulmonary
capillaries.

Diseases associated with reduced and increased gas transfer are listed
in Table 6.12.
Table 6.11: Spirometry interpretation—obstructive versus restrictive defect.
Obstructive disorders Restrictive disorders
Limitation of expiratory airflow as airways
cannot empty as rapidly compared to normal (e.g.
narrowed airways from bronchospasm,
inflammation, etc.)Characterized by reduced lung
volumes/decreased lung compliance
FVC normal or ↓
FEV 1 ↓ (significantly decreased)
FEF25–75% ↓
FEV 1/FVC ↓ (>0.7)
TLC normal or ↑FVC ↓ (significantly decreased)
FEV 1 ↓
FEF 25–75% normal to ↓
FEV 1/FVC normal to ↑ (>0.7)
TLC ↓
Examples: Asthma, emphysema, cystic fibrosis Examples: Interstitial fibrosis, scoliosis, obesity,
lung resection, neuromuscular diseases, cystic
fibrosis
Table 6.12: Diseases associated with reduced and increased DLCO.
Reduced DLCO (ventilation is in excess of blood
flow [a high VQ,-DEAD SPACE- “wasted air”])Increased DLCO (blood flow is in excess of
ventilation [a low VQ, - SHUNT- “wasted
blood”]) Emphysema, lung resection, pulmonary
embolism, anemia
Pulmonary fibrosis, sarcoidosis—increased
thicknessSevere obesity, asthma, polycythemia, supine
position, exercise, and left to right shunt
Tests for Cardiopulmonary Interactions
Reflects gas exchange, ventilation, tissue O2, CO2.
Qualitative: History, examination, ABG, stair climbing test
Quantitative: 6 minute walk test.
1. Stair climbing test: If able to climb 3 flights of stairs without
stopping/dyspnea at his/her own pace-reduced morbidity and mortality. If
not able to climb 2 flights: High-risk.
2. 6 minute walk test: Gold standard. Cardiopulmonary reserve is measured
by estimating maximum O2 uptake (VO2 Max) during exercise. Modified
if patient cannot walk—bicycle/arm exercises. If patient is able to walk

for >2000 feet during 6 min period VO2 max >15 mL/kg/min, if 1080 feet
in 1 min: VO2 of 12 mL/kg/min. Simultaneously oximetry is done and if
SpO2 falls >4% high-risk.
Exhaled Nitric Oxide
Nitric oxide is produced by the bronchial epithelium. Its production
increases in asthma and other diseases associated with inflammation of
airway.
Measurement of exhaled NO may be helpful in asthma that is difficult to
control. Measuring fractional exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) helps to
identify patients who are likely to benefit from treatment with
corticosteroids. FeNO also predicts the likelihood of steroid
responsiveness more consistently than spirometry, bronchodilator
response, peak flow variation, or airway hyperresponsiveness to
methacholine. A FeNO greater than 50 ppb in adults or greater than 35
ppb in children suggests eosinophilic airway inflammation.
BRONCHIAL ASTHMAQ. Define and classify bronchial asthma. Discuss the etiology,
pathophysiology, clinical features, investigations, diagnosis,
complications and management/treatment of bronchial asthma.
Definition
Definition: Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disorder of the airways
(bronchial tree) in which breathing is periodically rendered difficult by
widespread narrowing of the bronchi  (reversible bronchoconstriction).
It is clinically, characterized by recurrent episodes (paroxysms) of
wheezing, breathlessness (dyspnea), tightness of the chest, and cough .
Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA)—2015 Definition of Asthma
“Asthma is a heterogeneous disease, usually characterized by chronic airway
inflammation. It is defined by the history of respiratory symptoms such as
wheeze, shortness of breath, chest tightness and cough that vary over time
and in intensity, together with variable expiratory airflow limitation.” These
episodes are usually associated with widespread but variable airflow

obstruction that is often reversible either spontaneously or with treatment.
Characteristics of Asthma
1. Airflow narrowing: It is due to combination of muscle edema and viscid
bronchial secretion. It is generally reversible spontaneously or with
treatment.
2. Airway hyper-reactivity (AHR)/bronchial hyper responsiveness
(BHR): It is characterized by increased tendency for airways
(tracheobronchial tree) to narrowing response to triggers (stimuli) that
have little or no effect in normal individuals.3. Bronchial inflammation: Inflammation of the bronchial walls by T
lymphocytes, mast cells, eosinophils with associated plasma exudation,
edema, smooth muscle hypertrophy, mucus plugging and epithelial
damage.
Table 6.13: Classification of asthma.
According to type of antigen
1.  Early-onset asthma (atopic/ allergic/extrinsic)
2.  Late-onset asthma ( non-atopic/intrinsic/ idiosyncratic) without evidence of allergen sensitization
According to the agents or events that trigger bronchoconstriction
1.  Seasonal
2.  Exercise-induced
3.  Drug-induced (e.g. aspirin)
4.  Occupational asthma
5.  Asthmatic bronchitis in smokers
6.  Cough variant asthma (CVA) in which cough is the only asthma symptom
Classification (Table 6.13)
Differentiating features of early-onset asthma and late-onset asthma is
presented in Table 6.14.Q. How will you differentiate early-onset (atopic) asthma from late-
onset (non-atopic) asthma?
Table 6.14: Differentiating features of early-onset asthma and late-onset
asthma.
Features Early-onset (atopic) asthma Late-onset (non-atopic) asthma

Onset Early age usually begins in
childhoodLate age
Individuals Atopic individuals Non-atopic individuals
Role of external allergens Have strong role No role
Family history Positive history of asthma or
allergic diseases (e.g. eczema,
urticaria, or hay fever)Less common or absent
Triggering events Environmental allergens (e.g.
dusts, pollens, animal dander,
and foods)Respiratory infections due to
viruses (e.g. rhinovirus,
parainfluenza virus)
Inhaled air pollutants (e.g.
smoke, fumes)
Serum level of IgE Increased Normal
Skin hypersensitivity test to
common inhalant allergensPositive Negative
Response to provocation tests Positive Negative
Risk Factors and Triggers (Table 6.15)
Table 6.15: Risk factors and triggers involved in asthma.
Risk factors
Endogenous factorsGenetic predisposition
Atopy
Airway hyperresponsiveness
Gender and age
Ethnicity
Obesity
Early viral infectionsEnvironmental factors
Allergens (indoor/outdoor)
Occupational sensitizers
Respiratory infections
Triggers
Inhaled allergens
Upper respiratory tract viral infections
Air pollution (e.g. sulfur dioxide, irritant
gases)
Passive smoking (tobacco smoke)Drugs (β-blockers, aspirin)
Physical factors:  Exercise, cold air and
hyperventilation
Emotional stress
Irritants (household sprays paint fumes)
Risk Factors
Endogenous factors
Genetic predisposition: Major etiological factor in atopic asthma is
genetic predisposition to type I hypersensitivity (atopy) reaction  and
exposure to environmental trigger. One of the susceptibility locus is on

the chromosome 5 (5q) → several genes involved in regulation of IgE
synthesis and mast cell and eosinophil growth and differentiation.
Atopy: Atopic individuals tend to have higher serum IgE levels, and a
positive family history of allergy is found in 50% of atopic individuals.
Patients with asthma commonly suffer from other atopic diseases (e.g.
allergic rhinitis, atopic dermatitis/eczema).
Airway hyperresponsiveness: It is an abnormality in which there is
excessive tendency for airways to contract (bronchoconstrictor) too
easily in response to multiple inhaled triggers that usually does not have
any effect on normal individuals.Gender and age: More common in boys than girls and, after puberty,
women slightly more commonly than men. Most cases begin before the
age of 25 years.
Environmental factors
Hygiene Hypothesis proposes that individuals with lack of infections in
early childhood  are more prone to asthma than children brought up on farms
who are exposed to a high level of endotoxin. Intestinal parasite infection
may also be associated with a decreased risk of asthma. Conversely, early
childhood in a ‘dirtier’ environment (exposure to inhaled and ingested
products of microorganisms) may allow the immune system to avoid
developing allergic responses.
Pathogenesis (Pathophysiology) of AsthmaA. Airway inflammation
Inflammation is chronic and involves many cell types and inflammatory
mediators.
Strong TH2 response: Genetic predisposition with susceptibility genes
makes individuals prone to develop strong TH2 (type of T lymphocytes)
reactions against environmental antigens (allergens).
TH2 cells secrete cytokines: Which promote allergic inflammation and
stimulate B cells to produce IgE .
Cells involved in the inflammatory response
Important cells involved in asthma are: Mast cells, eosinophils, dendritic
cells (macrophages) and lymphocytes.

1. Mast cells
Early reaction is characterized by bronchoconstriction , increased
mucus production , and vasodilation with increased vascular
permeability (causes edema).
Late phase reaction: It is characterized by inflammation and airway
remodeling.
2. Eosinophils
Mediators release from eosinophils: LTC4, and basic proteins such
as major basic protein (MBP), eosinophil cationic protein (ECP) and
eosinophils peroxidase (EPX). They are toxic to epithelial cells.
Corticosteroid rapidly decreases the number and reduces the activation
of eosinophils.
Sputum eosinophilia is of diagnostic help and is a biomarker of
response to therapy.
3. Dendritic cells and lymphocytes.

Fig. 6.6:  Pathogenesis of asthma.
They release prostaglandin, thromboxane, LTC4, LTB4 and platelet activating
factor (PAF).
B. Airway Remodeling
Airway remodeling is the group of structural and functional changes in
the bronchial wall due to repeated bouts of inflammation observed in
chronic asthma.
–   An increase in size and number  (hypertrophy/hyperplasia) of the
submucosal glands

–   Hypertrophy and/or hyperplasia of the bronchial wall smooth
muscle
–   Increased vascularity
–   Deposition of subepithelial collagen  accompanied by fibrosis and
thickening of the basement membrane.
Pathogenesis of asthma is summarized in Figure 6.6.
Clinical Features
Q. Write a short note on the clinical presentation of severe acute asthma
(status asthmaticus).
Clinical features are studied under three headings namely (1) episodic, (2)
severe acute (status asthmaticus), and (3) chronic asthma.
Usually, atopic individuals develop episodic asthma and non-atopic
individuals develop chronic asthma.
1. Episodic Asthma
Occurs as episodes with asymptomatic between asthmatic attacks.
Frequency and duration of attacks vary.
Present with relatively sudden onset of paroxysms of wheezing and
dyspnea.
May develop spontaneous or triggered by allergens, exercise or viral
infections.
It may be mild to severe and may last for hours, days or even weeks.
2. Severe Acute Asthma (Status Asthmaticus)
Q. Write a short note on the clinical presentation of severe acute asthma
(status asthmaticus).
It is the most severe form of asthma in which the severe acute paroxysm
persists for days and even weeks.
Presents with severe dyspnea and unproductive cough.
During this attack, patients prefer an upright position fixing the shoulder
girdle to assist the accessory muscles of respiration.
Physical signs include sweating, central cyanosis, tachycardia and pulsus
paradoxus. The bronchoconstriction  and asthmatic symptoms does not

respond  despite the initial administration of standard acute asthma
therapy.
It may cause severe airflow obstruction leading to severe cyanosis and
even death .
3. Chronic Asthma
Chronic persistent symptoms and include chest tightness, wheeze and
breathlessness on exertion.
Characterized by episodes of spontaneous cough and wheeze worst during
the night.
Chronic productive cough with mucoid sputum, punctuated by recurrent
attacks of purulent expectoration from frank infection. They are prone to
repeated attacks of ‘severe acute asthma’. Features sometimes resemble
those of chronic bronchitis.
Physical SignsDuring an attack:
–   Inspection: Increased respiratory rate with use accessory muscles of
respiration.
–   Percussion: Hyperresonant percussion note over the lungs.
–   Auscultation
♦   Breath sounds are vesicular with prolonged expiration.
♦   High-pitched polyphonic expiratory and inspiratory rhonchi.
♦   Very severe attacks may results in a silent chest which is ominous
sign.In between the attacks: Chest may not reveal any abnormal physical
signs.
Chronic asthmatics: Usually reveal few scattered rhonchi.
Table 6.16 shows classification of asthma severity and initiating treatment in
persons ≥ years of age.
Various Causes of Wheeze (Box 6.3)
Q. Write short essay/note on wheeze and its causes.
Investigations

The diagnosis is mainly clinical and based on a characteristic history. There
is no single satisfactory diagnostic test for asthma.
1. Lung Function Tests
Pulmonary function tests useful in asthma are FEV1, VC and PEFR.
Spirometry: It is useful, especially in assessing reversibility. Simple
spirometry useful in confirming the airflow limitation with a reduced
FEV1, FEV1/FVC ratio, and PEF. Asthma can be diagnosed if there is
greater than 15% improvement in FEV1 or PEFR following the
inhalation of a bronchodilator.
Peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR): It is useful in demonstrating the
variable airflow limitation. PEFR measurements to be done on waking,
prior to taking a bronchodilator and before bed after a bronchodilator.
The diurnal variation in PEFR of more than 20% (the lowest values
typically being recorded in the morning) is considered diagnostic. It is
also provides good measure of disease severity.Carbon monoxide (CO) transfer test: Increased in asthma.
Table 6.16: Classification of asthma severity and initiating treatment in
persons ≥12 years of age.
Components of Severity Classification of Asthma Severity (≥12 years of age)
Intermittent Persistent
Mild Moderate Severe
Impairment
Normal
FEV1/FVC:
8–19 years:
85%
20–39
years: 80%
40–59
years: 75%
60–80
years: 70%Symptoms ≤2 days/week >2 days/week
but not dailyDaily Throughout the
day
Nighttime
awakenings≤2x/month 3–4x/month >x/week but
not nightlyOften 7x/week
Short-acting
beta2- agonist
use for
symptom
control≤2 days/week >2 days/week
but not daily,
and not more
than 1x on
any dayDaily Several times per
day
Interference
with normal
activityNone Minor
limitationSome
limitationExtremely limited
Lung function Normal
FEV 1
between
exacerbationsFEV 1 >80%FEV 1
>80%
predicted
FEV 1/FVC
normalFEV 1
>60% but
<80%
predictedFEV 1/FVCFEV 1 <6 0%
predicted
FEV 1/FVC
reduced >5 %

FEV 1 >80%
predicted
FEV 1/FVC
normalnormal FEV 1/FVC
reduced
5%
Risk Exacerbations
requiring oral
systemic
corticosteroids0–1/year
 
Recommended step for
initiating treatmentStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 or 5
and consider short course of oral
systemic corticosteroids
in 2–6 weeks, evaluate level of asthma control that is achieved and
adjust therapy accordingly
Exercise tests: It used in the diagnosis of asthma in children. The child is
asked to run for 6 minutes on a treadmill (heart rate should be above 160
beats per minute). A negative test does not rule out asthma.
Box 6.3:  Various causes (D/D) of wheeze.
Bronchial asthma
Cardiac asthma
Chronic obstructive lung disease (COPD)
Recurrent pulmonary emboli
Systemic vasculitis, including Churg Strauss syndrome and polyarteritis nodosa
Carcinoid tumors
Others:  Eosinophilic pneumonia, GERD, foreign body aspiration, mediastinal mass,
tracheomalacia. vocal cord dysfunction
Airway Responsiveness (AHR): AHR is sensitive but nonspecific.
Histamine or methacholine bronchial provocation test:
To detect the presence of airway hyperresponsiveness (a feature of
asthma).
Useful in patients whom cough is the only/main symptom and is useful
in the differential diagnosis of chronic cough.
Contraindicated on individuals who have poor lung function (FEV
<1.5 L) or a history of ‘brittle’ asthma.
Indirect challenge tests release of endogenous mediators that cause the
contraction of airway smooth muscle. These include exercise eucapnic
voluntary hyperpnea (EVH), ultrasonically nebulizer hypertonic saline
and dry-powder mannitol.

2. Imaging
Chest X-ray
–   Usually normal between attacks without any diagnostic features.
–   During an acute episode or in chronic severe disease there may
hyperinflated lungs (overinflation).
–   May be helpful in excluding complications such as pneumothorax,
lobar collapse (if mucus occludes large bronchus) or in detecting
the pulmonary infiltrates associated with allergic
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis.
High-resolution computed tomography (CT): May show areas of
bronchiectasis (complication) and thickening of the bronchial walls,
but these changes are not diagnostic of asthma.3. Measurement of Allergic Status
Skin prick tests (SPT):  SPT is performed by intradermal injections of
common allergens (house dust mite, cat fur, grass pollen) and checking
the development of a wheal and flare reaction. They are positive in
allergic asthma and negative in intrinsic asthma.Elevated serum IgE levels: Measurement of total and allergen-
specific IgE in serum may be seen.
4. Blood and Sputum Tests
Patients with asthma may show increased numbers of eosinophils
(eosinophilia) in peripheral blood (>0.4 ×10+/L) but sputum
eosinophils is a more specific diagnostic finding. Sputum examination
may reveal Curschmann spirals, Creola bodies and Charcot-Leyden
crystals. Serum periostin is also a marker of Th2 associated airway
inflammation and a better predictor of airway eosinophilia than blood
eosinophil counts or FENO.5. Exhaled Nitric Oxide (FENO)
It is used as a noninvasive test to measure airway inflammation and as
an index of efficacy of corticosteroid response in children
(demonstration of insufficient response to anti-inflammatory therapy).6. Trial of Corticosteroids
Patients with severe airflow limitation should be given a formal trial of
corticosteroids. Prednisolone 30 mg orally/day is given for 2 weeks
with lung function measured before and immediately after the course.

A substantial improvement in FEV (>15%) confirms the presence of a
reversible airflow obstruction and indicates that the administration of
inhaled steroids will be beneficial to the patient.
7. Arterial Blood Gas Analysis
Hypoxia and hypocarbia during acute attack
Hypercarbia during sever acute asthma.
Differential Diagnosis of Asthma (Table 6.17)
Q. Give the differential diagnosis of a 45-year-old male presenting with
acute breathlessness.
Table 6.17: Differential diagnosis of asthma.
Disease Features
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) History of smoking
Less reversible airflow obstruction
Reduced DLCO (diffusing capacity of lung for
carbon monoxide)
Bronchiectasis May be secondary to many disorders
Copious purulent sputum
Computed tomography usually diagnostic
Reactive airways viral syndrome Transient, usually resolves after several weeks
Rhinosinusitis Nasal congestion and postnasal drip
Common comorbid illness accompanying asthma
Gastroesophageal reflux disease Common comorbid illness accompanying asthma
Congestive heart failure Exertional dyspnea
Moist basilar rales, S 3 gallop, orthopnea, pink
frothy/blood-tinged sputum
Echocardiography helpful
Laryngeal dysfunction Stridor
May co-exist with asthma
Upper airway obstruction May or may not exhibit stridor
Flow-volume loop may be helpful
Endoscopy diagnostic
Recurrent episodes of bronchospasm Carcinoid tumors, recurrent pulmonary emboli.
Churg Strauss syndrome
Differences between bronchial asthma and cardiac asthma are present in
Table 6.18.Q. Write short essay/note on:

Enumerate the drugs used in the treatment of chronic bronchial
asthma.
Management of acute severe asthma.
List the drugs used for prophylaxis against asthma.
Status asthmaticus.
Long-term complications of asthma.
Management
Management is discussed under following headings namely:
Avoid Identified Aggravating Factors/Allergens
This is important in the management of occupational asthma and atopic asthma.
Avoid causative allergens such as pets, moulds and certain foodstuffs particularly in childhood.
If it is due to single allergen, it is easy to reduce or avoid the exposure. However, when multiple
allergens are responsible, avoidance is difficult.
Table 6.18: Differences between bronchial asthma and cardiac asthma.
Features Bronchial Asthma Cardiac Asthma
Pathology Bronchospasm Pulmonary edema
Age Young Elderly (above 50–60 years)
Sex/gender Both genders Mostly male
Past history Of eczema, urticaria (allergy)
susceptibility to cold, allergy to
pollen, groundnuts, eggsNo history of allergy, history of
left ventricular failure, right
ventricular failure
Family history Other family members may
have similar diseaseHypertension may run in
families
Personal history Highly sensitive individual Nil
Onset Acute, usually in early hours of
morning or late hours of nightAcute usually at midnight (very
specific) 2 to 3 hours after sleep
Symptoms
Dyspnea Expiratory dyspnea Both expiratory and inspiratory
dyspnea
Expectoration Scanty and mucoid sputum Profuse and frothy sputum
Palpitation Absent Present
On examination
Respiratory Expiratory wheeze present Basal crepitations and sweating
present
Cyanosis Present during acute severe
asthmaCyanosis present
Pulse rate May be high Very high (may be pulsus
alternans)
Blood pressure Normal or slightly more systolic BP usually high

Heart sounds Heart sounds are distant S3, Gallop rhythm may be
present
Control of Risk Factors Causing Exacerbation
The rapid identification and removal of extrinsic causes of asthma and risk factors that exacerbate
asthma should be done.
Active and passive smoking should be avoided.
Control if there is associated rhinitis and GERD (gastroesophageal reflux disease).
Control obesity.
Individuals intolerant to aspirin should avoid NSAIDs.
Avoid inadequate use of inhaled corticosteroids.
Avoid overuse of inhaled short acting β-agonists (e.g. more than one canister of 200 doses/month).
Follow proper inhalation techniques.
Desensitization or Immunotherapy
Desensitization is performed by repeated subcutaneous injections of gradually increasing doses of the
extracts of allergen(s). However, its benefit is doubtful. GINA 2017 recommends adding SLIT
(sublingual immunotherapy)  in adult HDM (house dust mite)-sensitive patients with allergic
rhinitis who have exacerbations despite ICS treatment, provided FEV1 is 70% predicted.
Drug Therapy (Table 6.19)
Drug therapy is used to control or suppress clinical manifestations.
The drugs useful in asthma can be divided into bronchodilators (rapidly relieve of symptoms
through relaxation of airway smooth muscle), and controllers (inhibit the underlying inflammatory
process).
Table 6.19: Drugs useful in asthma.
Bronchodilators Controllers
β-adrenoreceptor
agonists
Methylxanthines
AnticholinergicsInhaled
Corticosteroids
Systemic
Corticosteroids
Steroid-sparing
therapies, cromones
antileukotrienesAnti-lgE
Immunotherapy
Alternative
Therapies
Miscellaneous agents,
SLIT
Bronchodilators
1. β 2-adrenoreceptor agonistsβ-adrenoreceptor: There are two types of β-adrenoreceptor namely, β 1 and β 2-
adrenoreceptors. β 1-adrenoreceptors are expressed in the heart and β 2-adrenoreceptors are
widely expressed in the airways (in bronchial smooth muscles).
β2-adrenoreceptors agonists (β 2-agonists) can be divided into short-acting  β2-agonists
(SABAs) (e.g. salbutamol, levosalbutamol, and terbutaline) and long-acting β 2-agonists

(LABAs) (e.g. bambuterol, salmeterol and formoterol).
a. Catecholamines: Catecholamines used are adrenaline, isoprenaline and isoetharine.
Adrenaline:  Most commonly used agent in this group. However, it is not a β 2-selective and
produces significant undesirable cardiovascular side effects. The usual dose is 0.3–0.5 mL
of a 1:1000 solution administered subcutaneously. It may be repeated thrice at an interval of
20 minutes. They are useful in children.
b. Salbutamol, levosalbutamol, terbutaline, fenoterol:  These drugs are highly selective for
β2-adrenoreceptors and act predominantly on the respiratory tract.
♦   Powerful and rapidly but short acting bronchodilators that relaxes bronchial smooth
muscles.
♦   Routes of administration: They are active by inhalation, oral, intravenous,
subcutaneous route of administration, but the preferred route is inhalation . Inhalation
is extremely effective, since, it rapidly decreases airflow obstruction. Intravenous
administration has no advantages over inhalation. Other routes of administration are
preferable avoided and reserved for selected indications.
♦   Dose:
◊   Salbutamol:  2–4 mg thrice a day orally or two puffs of 100 µg each as required.
◊   Terbutaline:  2.5–5 mg thrice a day or two puffs of 100 µg each as required.
◊   Levosalbutamol:  Two puffs of 50 µg each as required.
♦   Side effects:  Main untoward effects are tremor and palpitation. Prolonged use of β 2-
adrenoreceptor agonists are preferable avoided because they worsen bronchial hyper-
responsiveness. Tachycardia which is less with levosalbutamol compared to salbutamol.
c. Bambuterol:  It is a long acting β 2-adrenoreceptor agonist which is converted into
terbutaline in the body.
♦   Dose:  10–20 mg once in a day orally.
♦   Side effects:  More than inhaled β-agonists and include tachycardia, palpitations and
tremors.
d. Salmeterol and formoterol: They are highly selective, potent and long-acting β 2-
adrenoreceptor agonist. They are given once or twice a day by inhalation (either as aerosol
or dry powder).
♦   Uses: Routinely used in place of short-acting β 2-stimulants when the patient requires
regular β 2-stimulant therapy. Not to be used as monotherapy but to be used as add on
therapy along with ICS (inhaled corticosteroids) when the response to ICs is suboptimal.
♦   Salmeterol has a slow onset of action whereas formoterol has a rapid action. Hence,
formoterol is suitable for immediate control of symptoms as well.
♦   Dose:
◊   Salmeterol:  Two puffs of 25 µg each two to three times a day.
◊   Formoterol:  Two puffs of 6 µg each one to three times a day.Q. Write a short note on action of methylxanthines.
2.  Methylxanthines
They are of little value as monotherapy but they are beneficial as add-on therapy in patients not
controlled with inhaled corticosteroids (ICS). Methylxanthines as an add-on therapy are less
effective than long-acting inhaled β 2-agonists.
a.  Theophylline

–   Theophylline is a medium-potency bronchodilator.
–   Actions: i) improve the movement of airway mucus, ii) improves diaphragm contractility
and iii) reduces the release of mediators.
–   Route of administration: Intravenous, oral or as suppository. Therapeutic plasma
concentrations of theophylline range from 10 to 20 µg/mL. However, the dose required to
achieve this concentration varies from patient to patient.
–   Type of preparation:
♦   Acute attacks are treated with short-acting theophylline preparations.
♦   For maintenance therapy, long-acting theophylline preparations are used. They are given
once or twice a day. Single daily dose in the evening controls nocturnal asthma.
–   Dose: Usual dose is 100–200 mg (of plain preparation) three times/day, and 300 mg
twice/day or 450–600 mg once/day for sustained-release preparation.
–   Side effects:  Nervousness, nausea, vomiting, anorexia and headache. When plasma levels
exceed 30 µg/mL, seizures and cardiac arrhythmias can occur.
–   Precautions:  Theophylline (and aminophylline) clearance is decreased in elderly, liver
disease, congestive heart failure, and with concurrent use of erythromycin, allopurinol and
cimetidine. Its clearance is increased with concurrent use of phenobarbitone and phenytoin,
and in smokers.
Q. Write short essay/note on adverse effects of and precautions in using aminophylline.
b.  Aminophylline
–   Aminophylline is a bronchodilator that is effective when given orally, intravenously and as
a suppository. The preferred route of administration is intravenous and may have some role
in the management of status asthmaticus (severe acute asthma).
–   Mechanism of action:  Bronchodilator effect is by inhibition of phosphodiesterases in
airway smooth-muscle cells which increases cyclic AMP.
–   Dose: Loading dose of 5 mg/kg given slowly intravenously over 20 minutes. This is
followed by a maintenance dose of 0.5 mg/kg/hour delivered as a continuous intravenous
infusion. Patients already on theophylline, loading dose is preferably withheld or in extreme
cases given in a reduced amount at 0.5 mg/kg.
–   Rapid infusion of the bolus can lead to sudden death due to cardiac arrhythmias.
c.  Doxophylline (doxofylline)
♦   Mechanism of action:  Bronchodilator effect is by inhibition of phosphodiesterases in
airway smooth-muscle cells which increases cyclic AMP. It has a better safety profile than
theophylline. It also inhibits PAF-induced bronchoconstriction and subsequent production
of thromboxane A 2.
♦   Dose:  400 mg twice a day.
3.  AnticholinergicsAntimuscarinic bronchodilators:  They are less effective than β2-agonists in asthma therapy,
but may be used as an additional bronchodilator in patients with asthma that is not controlled
by Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) and LABA combinations. They may be useful during asthma
exacerbations, but are less useful in stable asthma. For example, Ipratropium, Tiotropium.
Controller Therapies
Q. Write short essay/note on inhaled corticosteroid therapy.
1.  Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS)

Inhaled corticosteroids are the most effective controllers for asthma.
Mechanism of action:  Corticosteroids are not bronchodilators, but they are the most effective
anti-inflammatory agents used in asthma which reduces number of inflammatory cells as well
as their activation in the airways. They decrease bronchial hyper-responsiveness and relieve or
prevent airflow obstruction. They also reverse β 2-receptor down regulation produced by long-
term use of β 2-agonists.
Uses:  Beneficial in treating asthma of any severity and age. They are now given as first-line of
therapy for persistent asthma.
Dose: Usually given twice daily. Higher doses may be necessary in severe cases.
–   Beclomethasone dipropionate (200 µg), budesonide (200 µg) or fluticasone (125 µg) is
given twice daily as aerosols or dry powder form.
–   Ciclesonide is given in a dose of 80–160 µg once a day. Others include flunisolide and
mometasone.
Advantages:
–   Rapid improvement of the symptoms and lung function  (within several days).
♦   They are effective in preventing asthma symptoms exercise-induced asthma (EIA)
and nocturnal exacerbations and also prevent severe exacerbations.
♦   Early treatment with ICS can prevent irreversible changes in airway function that
develops in chronic asthma.
–  Reduces airway responsiveness (AHR)
–  Reduces the number of courses of oral corticosteroid therapy (OCS).Side effects:
–   Local: Hoarseness (dysphonia/husky voice) and oropharyngeal candidiasis. These side
effects can be minimized by the use of a spacing device along with the metered-dose
inhaler, and gargling with water after use.
–   Systemic:  Relatively free from systemic side effects at the conventional doses. Long-term
use may result in osteoporosis, skin thinning and adrenal suppression.
2.  Systemic corticosteroids
a.  Oral corticosteroids and steroid sparing agents
–   Oral corticosteroids (OCS):  Oral corticosteroids are necessary in patients controlled by
inhaled corticosteroids (ICS).
–   Dose: It should be kept as low as possible to minimize side effects. Prednisolone is started
as a single morning dose of 40–60 mg oral/day. Thereafter, the dose is reduced by half
every 6 hours. Methyl prednisolone is given in a dose of 40–125 mg every 6 hours.
–   Steroid sparing agents:  Some patients may require continuing treatment with oral
corticosteroids. Various immunomodulatory treatments can be used to in these patients with
severe asthma who have serious side effects with this therapy. Treatment of these patients
with low doses of methotrexate (15 mg weekly) can reduce the dose of oral steroids needed
to control the disease. Ciclosporin also improves lung function in few steroid-dependent
asthmatics.
b.  Parenteral corticosteroids
–   Corticosteroids are used intravenously (hydrocortisone or methylprednisolone) for the
treatment of acute severe asthma.
–   Dose:
♦   Hydrocortisone: Loading dose of 4 mg/kg intravenously followed by 2–3 mg/kg every 6
hours.

♦   Methylprednisolone: 40–125 mg every 6 hours.
Indications for corticosteroids in bronchial asthma
–  Acute asthma which does not respond to or even worsen despite bronchodilator therapy.
–  Severe acute asthma (status asthmaticus).
3.  Cromones (anti-inflammatory drugs)
Cromones are not bronchodilator. They inhibit the degranulation of mast cells, thereby
preventing release of mediators from these cells.
Cromones are not beneficial in the long-term control of asthma due to their short duration of
action.
Only used as a prophylactic treatment of asthma. For example, sodium cromoglycate,
cromolyn, nedocromil and ketotifen.
Sodium cromoglycate:  Useful in children with atopic asthma and in few cases of non-atopic
asthma. Sodium cromoglycate is administered as an inhalation. Therapy is started between the
attacks or in periods of relative remission. If there is no response within 4 to 6 weeks, the drug
can be discontinued.Nedocromil sodium:  It is given as an inhalation at a dose of 4 mg two to four times daily.
Ketotifen  is not a chromone. It is an antihistaminic that inhibits release of mediators. It is
useful in the prophylactic treatment of asthma at a dose 1–2 mg twice daily by mouth. The
main side effects are drowsiness and weight gain.
4.  Anticholinergics
Q. Write short note/essay on tiotropium/ipratropium bromide uses and side effects.
Anticholinergics such as atropine sulfate and atropine methyl nitrate were previously used, but
they are presently not used because of their systemic side effects.
Currently used anticholinergics are ipratropium bromide and tiotropium. These are non-
adsorbable quaternary ammonium compounds with minimal side effects. These are
administered as aerosol or in dry-powder form. Ipratropium is also given as nebulization
solution.Uses:  They are useful in two situations:
1.   Patients with co-existent heart disease, in whom methylxanthines and β2-adrenoreceptor
agonists causes significant tachycardia.
2.   In refractory cases, bronchodilator action of β 2-adrenoreceptor agonists is enhanced by the
addition of ipratropium bromide or tiotropium.
Dose:
–   Ipratropium: Two puffs of 20 μg each four times/day.
–   Tiotropium:  Two puffs of 9 µg each once a day.
–   Ipratropium: 250–500 µg nebulization; may be repeated if necessary.
Side effects:  Dryness of mouth and bitter taste.
5.  Leukotriene modifiers
These include leukotriene receptor antagonists—LTRAs  (montelukast, zafirlukast, pranlukast)
and 5-lipoxygenase inhibitors (Zileuton).
Uses:  Used as add on therapy.
–   In patients who do not respond to the conventional agents.
–   In patients who require high doses of inhaled steroids (ICS). They can be used as a second
choice to inhaled corticosteroids in mild persistent asthma.
Dose

–   Zafirlukast:  20 mg BID
–   Montelukast:  10 mg once a day in the evening.
Side effects:  Uncommon and include headache, abdominal pain, skin rashes, angioedema,
pulmonary eosinophilia and arthralgia. Zileuton may cause liver damage.
Anti-lgE—Monoclonal Antibodies
Omalizumab, recombinant humanized monoclonal antibody against IgE that neutralizes/chelates
free circulating IgE without binding to cell-bound IgE. It prevents the binding of circulating IgE to
receptors on mast cells and basophils, and decrease release of mediators. Thus, it inhibits IgE-
mediated reactions. Monoclonal antibodies ( mepolizumab and reslizumab ) against interleukin-5
(IL-5), a potent chemoattractant for eosinophils, are indicated for the treatment of severe
eosinophilic asthma poorly controlled with conventional therapy.Useful in patients with allergic asthma.
Disadvantage: Treatment is very expensive. Patients should be given a 3- to 4-month trial of
therapy to show objective benefit.
Administration: Given as a subcutaneous injection once every 2–4 weeks, depending on total
serum IgE level and body weight.
Side effects:  No significant side effects, very rarely can produce anaphylaxis.
Anti-TNF therapy (infliximab or etanercept): May be beneficial in severe corticosteroid
refractory asthma.
Miscellaneous
Proton pump inhibitor (PPI) may be used in patients with symptomatic gastroesophageal reflux
disease and suboptimally controlled asthma.
Bronchial Thermoplasty
Invasive procedure for severe asthma. In this therapy, controlled thermal energy is delivered to the
airway wall during a series of bronchoscopies. It results in a prolonged reduction in airway smooth
muscle mass. But patient still needs to use their asthma-maintenance medications after the
procedure.Risks:  Lung collapse, bleeding and additional breathing problems, mostly related to the
bronchoscope.
Benefits:  Patient may use rescue inhalers less often and are able to engage strenuous physical
activity than before.
General Measures in Asthmatics
Avoid:
–   Opiates, sedatives and tranquilizers in acutely-ill patients with asthma.
–   β-blockers and parasympathetic agonists in asthmatics.
Expectorants and mucolytic agents have no significant role in the management of bronchial
asthma.
Prevention/treatment of exercise-induced asthma
Prevention of episode by the inhalation of 2 metered doses of salbutamol or terbutaline a few
minutes before exercise. However, regular use may lead to loss of their effect.
Regular use of sodium cromoglycate or leukotriene modifiers is often needed. Additional use of
inhaled β 2- adrenoreceptor agonists may be necessary before exercise.
Assessment of asthma control (Table 6.20)
Features which suggest that asthma is under control are listed in Box 6.4.

Complications of asthma is mentioned in Box 6.5.
Box 6.4:  Features of controlled asthma.
Daytime symptoms develop two times or less/week
No limitation of daily activities including exercise
No awakening in the night due to symptoms
Need for short-acting β-agonists twice or less/week
No exacerbations
Box 6.5:  Complications of asthma.
Pneumonia
Collapse of part or all of the lung
Respiratory failure
Status asthmaticus
Global Initiative for Asthma (GINA) Severity Grades (refer Table 6.22)
Severe asthma:
–   It is an asthma which requires treatment with high dose inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting
β2-agonist and/or leukotriene receptor antagonists for the previous year or systemic
corticosteroids for >50% of the previous year to prevent from becoming uncontrolled asthma
or
–   Asthma which remains uncontrolled despite this therapy.
Table 6.20: Assessment of asthma control.
Characteristics Controlled
asthmaPartly
controlled
asthmaUncontrolled
asthma
Daytime symptoms
more than
twice/weekNo Any 1 or 2
characteristics
presentAny 3 or more
characteristics
partly
controlled
asthmaLimitation of
activities due to
asthmaNo
Nocturnal
symptoms/awakening
due to asthmaNo
Need for
reliever/rescue
medicine more thanNo

twice/week
Stepwise Management of Chronic Asthma (Table 6.21 and Fig. 6.7)
Q. Write short essay/note on step care management of bronchial asthma.
All asthmatics should be educated regarding self-monitoring and correct use of inhalers.
Table 6.21: Stepwise management of asthma.
Step Management
Step 1: (only for intermittent/less
frequent symptoms)Short-acting inhaled β 2-agonist as
required (required in all steps)
Step 2: Daily symptoms Regular inhaled preventer
therapy
Low-dose inhaled
corticosteroids up to 800 μg
daily OR
Leukotriene receptor antagonists
(LTRA), (if patient develops
side effects to inhaled
corticosteroids), SLIT
(Sublingual immunotherapy)
Step 3: Severe symptoms Inhaled corticosteroids and long-
acting inhaled β 2-agonistContinue low-dose inhaled
corticosteroids plus long-acting
β2-agonist OR
Medium or high dose inhaled
corticosteroids OR
Low-dose inhaled
corticosteroids plus leukotriene
receptor antagonists (LTRA),
ORLow-dose inhaled
corticosteroids plus sustained-
release oral theophylline

Step 4: Severe symptoms
uncontrolled with high dose inhaled
corticosteroidsHigh dose inhaled corticosteroid
and regular bronchodilatorsMedium or high dose inhaled
corticosteroids (up to 2000 μg
daily) plus long-acting β 2-
agonistMay add leukotriene receptor
antagonists (LTRA)
May add sustained–release
theophylline
Step 5: Severe symptoms
deterioratingRegular oral corticosteroidsAdd oral corticosteroids
(prednisolone 40 mg daily)
Consider anti-IgE treatment
(omalizumab)
Anti-IL5: reslizumab (IV) added
to mepolizumab (SC) for ≥18
years
Step 6: Severe symptoms
deteriorating in spite of
prednisoloneHospital admission

Fig. 6.7:  Stepwise management of asthma in adults.
(LABA: long-acting inhaled b2-agonist; LTRA: leukotriene receptor antagonists; SR: sustained-
release)
Once the patient is on treatment for several months, asthma severity can be assessed by using step-
wise criteria.
–   Mild asthma:  Well controlled with step 1 and 2.
–   Moderate asthma:  Controlled with step 3 treatment
–   Severe asthma:  Needs step 4 or 5 treatment to prevent it to progress to uncontrolled asthma.
Step-down Therapy
Once asthma is controlled, the dose of inhaled (or oral) corticosteroid should be reduced to the lowest
dose at which effective control of asthma is maintained.
The Control-based Asthma Management Cycle GINA 2017 (Fig. 6.8)
Treatment of Severe Acute Asthma (Status Asthmaticus)
Q. Write short essay/note on management of status asthmaticus.
Acute severe asthma is the term used for an exacerbation of asthma that has not been controlled by
the use of standard medication.
Treatment at Home
Give high concentrations of oxygen  (40–60%) through a mask if available.
Bronchodilator therapy:  Any one of the following should be given.
–   Nebulized salbutamol  5 mg or terbutaline  10 mg every 20 minutes for 3 doses.

–   Salbutamol/terbutaline through metered-dose inhalers (four to eight puffs with a spacer every
20 minutes for 3 doses), followed by 4–8 puffs every 2–4 hours.
Corticosteroids
–   Give IV hydrocortisone sodium succinate 200 mg.
–   Give oral prednisolone 60 mg.
Admit to hospital if there is no response within 1 hour or if patient becomes drowsy.
Fig. 6.8:  The control-based asthma management cycle GINA 2017.
Management in Hospital
Initial assessment: Take brief history, perform rapid examination of the patient and assess the
severity (Table 6.22).
Administer high concentration of oxygen (40–60%).
Table 6.22: Assessment of severity of asthma.
Mild Moderate Severe Respiratory
arrest imminent
Breathless Walking
Lying
down
possibleTaking
Sitting
preferredAt rest
Hunched
forward
Talking in Sentences Phrases Words

Alertness Possibly
agitatedUsually
agitatedUsually
agitatedDrowsy or
confused
Respiratory rate Increased Increased Often
>30/min
Accessory
muscles/suprasternal
retractionsUsually
notUsually Usually Paradoxical
thoracoabdominal
movement
Wheeze Moderate Loud Usually
loudAbsent
Pulse/min <100 100–120 >120 Bradycardia
Pulsus paradoxus Absent May be
presentOften
presentPossibly absent
due to muscle
fatigue
PEF after
bronchodilator>80% Approx.
60–80%<60%
Adapted from: O’Byme P. GINA. Executive Committee.
Global strategy for asthma management and prevention. 2004. National Institutes of Health.
Publication No. 02-3659.
Management Algorithm of Acute Asthma (Flowchart 6.1)
Exacerbations of AsthmaQ. Write short essay on management of acute severe asthma.
Precipitating factors of exacerbations:  Viral infections (most common), others include moulds,
pollens and air pollution.
Treatment of Mild-to-Moderate Exacerbation
β2-agonists (via inhaler or nebulizer) every 20 minutes for 3 doses (as mentioned above).
Oral corticosteroids if there is no immediate response.
Patient is reassessed every hour.
Treatment of Severe Exacerbation
Give high concentration of oxygen (40–60%).
Bronchodilators
–   Administer nebulized (in oxygen) salbutamol  (5 mg) or terbutaline (10 mg) or levosalbutamol
(1.25–2.5 mg) immediately and may be repeated after a few minutes if there is no response.
–   β2-agonist (subcutaneously or intravenously)  are indicated in patients with excessive cough,
too weak to inspire adequately or moribund.
–   Terbutaline is administered subcutaneously (0.25–0.5 mg) or intravenously (0.1–10
µg/kg/minute).
–   Epinephrine (adrenaline) may be administered in children and young adults. Adult dose is
0.2–0.5 mg as 1:1000 solution subcutaneously every 20 minutes

–   Add nebulized ipratropium bromide 0.5 mg to nebulized salbutamol 5 mg/terbutaline 10 mg
to those patients who do not respond within 15–30 minutes. It can be repeated every 20
minutes for 3 doses.
–   Aminophylline can be given intravenously to those patients who do not respond to nebulized
bronchodilators. Give a loading dose of 5 mg/kg/hour as an infusion.
Corticosteroids
–   In severely ill patients, hydrocortisone sodium succinate 100 mg is administered
intravenously at presentation and then repeated 4–6 hourly for 24 hours.
Antibiotics are indicated only if there is respiratory infection.
Role of magnesium sulfate either intravenously or by nebulization is not clear.
If no improvement with above measures, perform endotracheal intubation  and mechanical
ventilation .
–   Indications for intubation:  Cardiac or respiratory arrest, severe hypoxia (PaO 2 <60 mm Hg),
hypercapnia (PaCO 2 >50 mm Hg), acidosis (pH <7.3), exhaustion or deterioration in mental
status.
NIV (non-invasive ventilation)  using continuous positive pressure of BiPAP machines and tight
fitting face mask reduces the work of breathing without intubation. It is useful in assisting
breathing. It is used in a cooperative and alert patient who has impending respiratory failure but
does not require immediate intubation.Treatment with 70–80% helium with oxygen may be useful, since it reduces airway resistance and
improves efficacy of bronchodilators.
Assessment of response to treatment is done by noting the patient distress, respiratory rate, FEV 1,
heart rate, presence of pulsus paradoxus and serial arterial blood gas (ABG) studies.
More severe cases should remain in hospital for 2–5 days with regular monitoring of oxygen
saturation and peak flow rates. Bronchial thermoplasty may be beneficial for moderate to severe
persistent asthma. This reduces the mass of airway smooth muscle, reducing bronchoconstriction.
Flowchart 6.1:  Management algorithm of acute asthma.

(UDV: unit dose vial).
Occupational Asthma
Q. Write a short note on occupational asthma.
Occupational asthma is relatively common.
Etiology
It is a type of asthma caused by specific occupational sensitizer (proteins
or glycopeptide). Often associated with allergic rhinitis/conjunctivitis.
Once the individual is sensitized, subsequent low exposure is capable of
producing specific IgE antibodies and can induce asthma.
Latency period between first exposure to sensitizer and onset of work-
related symptoms can range from weeks to years.
Triggering occupational agents include: Fumes (epoxy resins, plastics),
organic and chemical dusts (wood, cotton, platinum), gases (toluene
diisocyanate), animal allergens, plants and plant products (flours and

cereals) and other chemicals (formaldehyde, penicillin products). Work-
exacerbated asthma is defined as preexisting or concurrent asthma that
subjectively worsens in the workplace.
Management
Primary prevention (e.g. avoiding sensitizer agent).
Secondary prevention (e.g. medical surveillance program).
Tertiary prevention (e.g. appropriate treatment), i.e. treatment as per asthma severity.
Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis (Extrinsic Allergic Alveolitis)
Q. Discuss the clinical features, diagnosis and management of
hypersensitivity pneumonitis (extrinsic allergic alveolitis).
Q. Write short note on farmer’s lung.
Definition
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP) or extrinsic allergic alveolitis is an
immune-mediated lung disease that occur secondary to inhalational exposure
to a variety of antigens leading to a widespread diffuse inflammatory reaction
in the alveoli and small airways (bronchioles).
Pathogenesis
It is an immune-mediated condition that develops in response to inhaled
antigens that are small enough to deposit in distal airways and alveoli. It
involves TH1 and TH17 lymphocyte subsets. Examples of hypersensitivity
pneumonitis are presented in Table 6.23.
Clinical Features
Depend on type, intensity and duration of exposure to offending antigen.
Most of the present following months or years of continuous or intermittent
inhalation of offending agent.
Clinical forms: It can present as acute, subacute or chronic form. Most
patients (80–95%) are non-smokers.1. Acute form
Onset: Usually manifests 4–8 hour following exposure to the causative
antigen and is often intense in nature.

Symptoms: Fevers, chills, cough and malaise accompanied by dyspnea.
Resolution: Symptoms resolve within hours to days, if there is no
further exposure to the causative antigen.
2. Subacute form: Onset of respiratory (cough, dyspnea and cyanosis) and
systemic symptoms is more gradual lasting for weeks or months.
3. Chronic form:
Present with an even more gradual onset of symptoms than subacute
form with progressive dyspnea, cough, fatigue, weight loss, and
clubbing of the fingers.It usually occurs in patients with continuous low-dose exposure to the
causative antigen.
Clinically cannot be distinguished from pulmonary fibrosis due to
other causes.
Complications: Long-standing disease leads to diffuse pulmonary interstitial
fibrosis, pulmonary hypertension resulting in corpulmonale.
Table 6.23: Examples of hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
Disease Sources of antigen Antigen
Farming/Food processing
Farmer’s lung Grain, moldy hay Thermophilic actinomycetes,
fungus
Bagassosis Sugarcane Thermophillic actinomycetes
Mushroom worker’s lung Mushroom Thermophilic actinomycetes;
mushroom spores
Coffee worker’s lung Coffee beans Coffee bean dust
Malt worker’s lung Mouldy barley Aspergillus species (clavatus)
Miller’s lung Infested wheat flour Sitophilus granarius (wheat
weevil)
Tobacco grower’s lung Tobacco Aspergillus species
Birds and other animals
Bird fancier’s lung Avian droppings (most often
from pigeons and parakeets)Protein in avian excreta, feathers
Other occupational and environmental exposures
Humidifier fever and air-
conditioner lungHumidifiers and air
conditioners (contaminated
water)Bacillus subtilis, Aureobasidium
pulluans; Candida albicans,
ameba, thermophilic
actinomycetes)
Woodworker’s lung Wood dust Alternaria species

Investigations
Chest X-ray: Findings are nonspecific. It may show diffuse micronodular
shadowing with the subsequent development of streaky shadows,
particularly in the upper zones. Very advanced cases produce honeycomb
lung.High resolution computed tomography (HRCT): Shows reticular and
nodular changes with ground-glass opacity.
Blood: Raised ESR and neutrophilia (especially in acute form). Eosinophil
counts and IgE levels are usually normal.
Lung function tests: Show a restrictive ventilatory defect with normal
FEV1: FVC ratio. Diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide may be
significantly impaired in chronic cases.
Precipitating antibodies: In the serum against offending agent indicates
the evidence of exposure, but not disease.
Bronchoscopy with bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL): Although not a
specific, BAL shows increased T-lymphocytes and granulocytes. Most
often, CD4:CD8 ratio <1 (normal is about 0.9–2.5). In sarcoidosis, it is
usually above 3.5.Lung biopsy: May show chronic inflammatory cells, ill-defined non-
caseating granulomas and fibrosis in late stages.
Provocation test: If about 4–10 hours after exposure to the inhaled
antigen, there is respiratory or systemic findings (e.g. fever, leukocytosis);
reduced diffusing capacity, diminished VC (vital capacity), or both;
increased radiographic abnormalities; worsening alveolar-arterial oxygen
pressure suggests a positive response.
TreatmentPrevention: It should be the aim and can be achieved by identification and avoidance of the
offending antigen.
Corticosteroids:  Because acute form is usually a self- limited disease treatment is not necessary.
However, corticosteroid has some role in subacute and chronic forms. Prednisolone in large doses
(1 mg/kg/day) orally for 1–2 weeks, followed by gradual tapering over the next 4–6 weeks. It may
achieve regression during the early stages but not those with established fibrosis.Oxygen therapy in severely hypoxemic individuals. Symptomatic bronchodilator therapy.
Drug-induced Asthma
Drugs Implicated

Most common due to aspirin (aspirin-induced asthma, AIA) followed
by ibuprofen, indomethacin, naproxen, phenylbutazone, mefenamic
acid. About 10% of asthma patients are aspirin-sensitive
Drugs that can cause bronchospasm: Adenosine, prostaglandin
analogues, BBs (beta-blockers), cholinergic drugs, streptomycin,
pentazocine, penicillin.Non-pharmaceutical agents: Tartrazine (coloring agent), sulfating agents
(preservatives in food/medicines)
Mechanism: Decreased production of prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) and enhanced
production of leukotriene B4 (LTB4).
Associations: Nasal polyps, vasomotor rhinitis, hyperplastic rhinosinusitis
(Samter’s triad).
Aspirin-induced Asthma (AIA): Two distinct forms:
Cutaneous form: Associated with urticaria and angioedema
Respiratory form: Resulting in rhinoconjunctivitis and bronchospasm.
Diagnosis: Bronchial Challenge with aspirin.
Drug treatment of AIA:  Treat the underlying asthma and the strict avoidance of aspirin and cross-
reacting NSAIDs. Acetaminophen and selective COX2 inhibitors are safe.
CHRONIC OBSTRUCTIVE PULMONARY
DISEASE (COPD)
Q. Write short essay/note on COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease), COLD (chronic obstructive lung disease) or COAD
(chronic obstructive airway disease).
Introduction
COPD is also known as chronic obstructive lung disease (COLD), chronic
obstructive airway disease (COAD), chronic airflow limitation (CAL) and
chronic obstructive respiratory disease (CORD).
Definition
COPD is a preventable and treatable pulmonary disease associated with some significant
extrapulmonary effects that may contribute to the severity in individual patients.

Pulmonary disease is characterized by airflow limitation  which is not fully reversible.
The airflow limitation is usually progressive and associated with an abnormal inflammatory
response of the lung to various noxious particles or gases.
Conditions included under COPD: Disease is considered COPD, only if
chronic airflow obstruction occurs.
Emphysema: An anatomically defined condition characterized by
abnormal and permanent enlargement of the airspaces distal to the
terminal bronchioles. It is accompanied by destruction of the airspace
walls, without obvious fibrosis (i.e. there is no fibrosis visible to the naked
eye).Chronic bronchitis: It is defined as a chronic productive cough for three
months in each of two successive years in a patient in whom other causes
of chronic cough (e.g.bronchiectasis) have been excluded.Small airways disease: A condition in which small bronchioles are
narrowed.
Pathogenesis
Major physiologic change in the COPD is airflow limitation. It can
develop due to both small airway obstruction and emphysema. The small
airways may become narrowed by cells (hyperplasia and accumulation),
mucus, and fibrosis.Activation of transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β) contributes to airway
fibrosis, whereas absence of TGF-β may produce parenchymal
inflammation and emphysema. The mechanism involved in emphysema is
better understood than small airway obstruction.
Chronic Bronchitis
Q. Define chronic bronchitis. Describe the etiology, pathology, clinical
features, investigations, course, prognosis, treatment and
complications of chronic bronchitis.
Q. Discuss the etiology, pathology, clinical features, investigations,
course, prognosis, treatment and complications of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.
Incidence
Age and gender: Occurs during middle and late adult life. It is more

common in males than in females.
More common in smokers than in non-smokers. Also more often
develops in urban than in rural dwellers.
Types of Chronic Bronchitis: (1) Simple chronic bronchitis; (2) chronic
mucopurulent bronchitis; (3) chronic asthmatic bronchitis; and (4) chronic
obstructive bronchitis.
Table 6.24: Risk factor for COPD.
Environmental
Tobacco smoke
Indoor air pollution. Cooking with biomass fuels
Toxic industrial inhalants: Occupational dust exposure (e.g. coal dust, silica and cadmium)
Respiratory infections: Recurrent infection; HIV infection (associated with emphysema), previous
tuberculosis
Low birth weight and bronchopulmonary dysplasia
Lung growth: Childhood infections or maternal smoking may affect growth of lung during
childhood
Low socioeconomic status, antioxidant deficiency
Cannabis smoking
Host factors
Genetic factors: α1-antiproteinase deficiency TGF Beta 1 polymorphism, Serpine 2 gene
expression.
Airway hyper-reactivity
Etiology
Risk Factors (Table 6.24)
Q. Write short note on risk factors of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease.
Smoking and COPD
Cigarette smoking:  It is the most important risk factor for the development of COPD. The risk of
developing COPD relates to both the amount and the duration of smoking. However, only about
15–20% of smokers develop clinically significant COPD. This suggests that genetic predisposition
and environmental factors play a role in the pathogenesis.Second-hand smoke: Environmental tobacco smoke that is inhaled involuntarily or passively by
someone who is not smoking.
Environmental tobacco smoke is generated from the side stream  (the burning end) of a cigarette,
pipe or cigar or from the exhaled mainstream  (the smoke puffed out by smokers) of cigarettes,
pipes, and cigars.

Abnormalities due to smoking:  Cigarette smoking is associated with a variety of abnormalities of
the respiratory system that predispose to the development of chronic bronchitis. These include:
–   Sluggishness of movement of cilia.
–   Bronchoconstriction brought through constriction of smooth muscle
–   Hypertrophy and hyperplasia of mucus secreting glands. The ratio of the thickness of the
mucous gland layer to the thickness of the bronchial wall  between the base of the surface
epithelium and the inner limit of the cartilage plates is called Reid index. It is useful for
detecting the increase in the size and number of the mucus glands. Reid index (normally 0.44 ±
0.094) is increased in chronic bronchitis (>0.51). There is a direct correlation between the value
of Reid Index and the volume of daily sputum production by the patient.
–   Release of proteolytic enzymes from polymorphonuclear leucocytes and release of
inflammatory mediators in lungs.
–   Inhibits the function of alveolar macrophages.
–   Adverse effect on surfactant and favors overdistension of the lungs.
Flowchart 6.2:  Pathogenesis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Pathogenesis (Flowchart 6.2)
Major physiologic change in COPD is airflow limitation. It can result from
both small airway obstruction and emphysema.
Irritants cause inflammation → infiltration by CD8 + T-lymphocytes,

macrophages and neutrophils.
Hypersecretion of mucus
–   Hyperplasia/hypertrophy of the submucosal glands in l arge
airways (trachea and bronchi ): Develops as response to inhaled
environmental irritants and proteases released from neutrophils
(e.g. elastase and cathepsin). This leads to hypersecretion of mucus.
–   Marked increase of goblet cells in small airways (small bronchi
and bronchioles): They produce excessive mucus → mucus
plugging of bronchial lumen → inflammation and fibrosis of bronchial
wall → leads to airway obstruction .
Clinical Features
History: Most common three symptoms in COPD are impressive history of
cough, sputum production, and exertional dyspnea (breathlessness).
Cough: Initially, the cough is present only in the winter seasons (often
referred as ‘winter cough’ or ‘smoker’s cough)’, especially in the
mornings (‘morning cough’). Later, cough increases in frequency, severity
and duration.Sputum: Usually scanty, mucoid and more in the mornings. It may be
occasionally blood-stained (hemoptysis) or frankly purulent
(‘mucopurulent relapse’).
Breathlessness: It is relatively insidious in onset and is due to airflow
obstruction. It is aggravated by infection; excessive smoking and adverse
atmospheric conditions. Breathlessness severity can be assessed by the
modified MRC dyspnea scale (Table 6.25).
Table 6.25: Modified Medical Research Council (mMRC) scale for
dyspnea.
Grade Features
0 No breathless except on strenuous exercise
1 Breathless when hurrying on the level or walking
up a slight hill
2 Walks slower than people of same age on the
level ground because of breathlessness or has to
stop for breath while walking at his own pace on
the level ground
3 Stops for breath after walking 100 meters or after

a few minutes on the level ground
4 Too breathless to leave the house or gets
breathless while dressing or undressing
Other symptoms: Fever during mucopurulent relapses, wheezing and
tightness in the chest.
Physical signs
Patient is usually overweight.
In the early stages, patients are entirely normal on physical examination.
At rest, there is no respiratory distress, respiratory rate is normal and
accessory muscles of respiration are not acting.Auscultation: (i) Vesicular breath sounds with prolonged expiration; (ii)
inspiratory and expiratory rhonchi; and (iii) crepitations that either
disappear or change in location and intensity after coughing; (iv) forced
expiratory time >4 sec.
Associated comorbidities in COPD (Table 6.26): Although COPD affects
the lungs, it is associated with comorbidities probably a part of a generalized
systemic inflammatory process.
Table 6.26: Common comorbidities in COPD.
Cardiovascular disordersPulmonary hypertension
Right heart failure, cor pulmonale
Vascular disease:  Coronary artery disease, cerebrovascular disease, peripheral vascular disease
Systemic hypertension
Nutritional disorders:  Cachexia
Musculoskeletal disorders
Muscle dysfunction
Osteoporosis
Cancer:  Lung cancer
Other: Sleep disorders, sexual dysfunction, diabetes, depression, anxiety, anemia, osteoporosis,
peptic ulcer, glaucoma.
Investigations
Q. Write short note on pulmonary function tests in chronic obstructive
airway disease.

Table 6.27: Pulmonary function tests findings in COPD.
Reduced FEV 1, FEV 1/FVC (less than 0.7),
FVC, PEFIncreased RV, FRC, TLC
Gas transfer may be normal or mildly
reduced
Radiological examination
–   Chest X-ray:  May assist in the classification of the type of COPD.
There is no reliable radiographic signs that indicate the severity of
airflow limitation
♦   Features of emphysema: Presence of bullae, paucity of
parenchymal markings, or hyperlucency
♦   Features of hyperinflation: Increased lung volumes and flattening
of the diaphragm.
♦   Chronic bronchitis: No characteristic abnormality.
♦   Essential to identify complications such as cardiac failure, other
complications of smoking (e.g. lung cancer).
–   High-resolution CT scans (HRCT): Useful in detection,
characterization and quantification of emphysema.
Pulmonary function tests (Table 6.27): Patients with diffuse obstructive
disorders, pulmonary function tests show decreased maximal airflow rates
during forced expiration, usually expressed as the forced expiratory
volume at 1 second (FEV1) over the forced ventilatory capacity (FVC).Arterial blood gases (ABG) study: Demonstrate resting or exertional
hypoxemia. It is an important in the evaluation of patients with symptoms
of an exacerbation.Measurement of lung volumes: It assesses hyperinflation and is usually
performed by using the helium dilution technique.
Exercise testing: Six-minute walk test used to assess exercise tolerance,
response to bronchodilator therapy, disability and effectiveness of
pulmonary rehabilitation.Blood:
–   Hemoglobin  level and PCV may be elevated due to persistent
hypoxemia (secondary polycythemia). In patients with normal kidney
function, an elevated serum bicarbonate may indirectly identify

chronic hypercapnia.
–   α1-antiproteinase: It should be assayed in younger patients with
predominantly basal emphysema,
Electrocardiography: Often normal. In advanced cases, it may show
features of right atrial and ventricular hypertrophy (tall P waves-P-
Pulmonary; right bundle branch block; RSR pattern in V1).
BODE index
–   A multidimensional prognostic index.> Takes into account several indicators of COPD
prognosis (body mass index [BMI], obstructive ventilatory defect severity, dyspnea
severity, and exercise capacity) .
–   The components are derived from measures of the body mass index (weight in kg/height m+),
FEV 1 percent predicted, the modified Medical Research Council dyspnea and 6 minute walk
test.
–   A BODE score greater than 7 is associated with a 30% 2-year mortality;
–   A score of 5 to 6 is associated with 15% 2-year mortality.
–   If score is less than 5, the 2-year mortality is less than 10%.
Complications of COPD
Q. Write short note on complications of chronic bronchitis/emphysema.
Mucopurulent relapses: It may develop due to secondary bacterial
infection by Strep. penumoniae, H. influenzae or M. catarrhalis. Presents
with fever and increased production of purulent sputum.
Carbon dioxide narcosis: Persistent retention of CO2 (hypercarbia: high
PaCO2) manifests as clouding of consciousness, altered behavior,
drowsiness, headache and papilledema.
Respiratory failure:
–   Type 1 respiratory failure (low PaO2 normal PaCO2): In mild-to-
moderate COPD.
–   Type II respiratory failure: Acute or chronic in severe COPD.
Secondary polycythemia:  Due to hypoxemia which stimulates
erythropoiesis.
Pulmonary hypertension and right ventricular failure (cor pulmonale)
Pneumonia
Tuberculosis

Lung cancer
Pneumothorax (emphysema)
Deep vein thrombosis
Pulmonary embolism
Pathogenesis of Complications (Flowchart 6.3)
Management
General measures
Regular exercises and management of nutritional status.
Weight loss, if the patient is obese.
Reducing exposure to noxious particles and gases that cause bronchial irritation
Smoking cessation: Stop smoking completely and this may be aided by bupropion (a
noradrenergic antidepressant) nicotine replacement therapy (by gum, transdermal patch lozenge
inhaler or nasal spray) or varenicline [partial agonist of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor
(nAChR) subtype alpha4beta2].Reduce smoke:  Reducing the risk from indoor and outdoor air pollution. Reduce exposure to
smoke from biomass fuel, particularly among women and children.
Avoid: Dusty and smoke-laden atmospheres.
Drug therapy (Table 6.28)
Used both for the short-term management of exacerbations and for the long-term relief of symptoms.
However, none of the medications for COPD reduce the rate of decline of lung functions.
Bronchodilators:  They are central to the management of breathlessness.
–   β2-Adrenergic agonists:  The inhaled route is preferred.
♦   Mild disease: Short-acting agents namely salbutamol 200 µg or terbutaline 500 µg 6 hourly.
♦   Moderate-to-severe disease:  Long-acting agents such as salmeterol 50 μg twice daily or
formoterol (12 μg powder inhaled twice daily) or indacaterol (150–300 μg daily) achieve
bronchodilation and also reduce the incidence of infective exacerbations. LABAs include
salmeterol, formoterol, arformoterol, indacaterol, vilanterol, and olodaterol; all are beta-2
selective.
–   Antimuscarinic (anticholinergic) drugs: More prolonged and greater bronchodilatation is
achieved by adding ipratropium bromide (40–80 µg 6 hourly) or tiotropium bromide (18 µg
once a day) or oxitropium (200 μg twice daily) in severe disease.
–   Oral long-acting theophylline or doxophylline may be beneficial in selected cases.
Umeclidinium, aclidinium, glycopyrronium are newer long acting anticholinergic drugs
available.Phosphodiesterase type 4 inhibitors: Roflumilast is an inhibitor with anti-inflammatory
properties. It may be used as an adjunct to bronchodilators. Weight loss is a significant side effect.
Flowchart 6.3:  Pathogenesis of complications of chronic bronchitis

Table 6.28: Drug therapy in chronic bronchitis.
Beta 2-agonists Methylxanthines
–    Short-acting beta 2-agonists (SABA) Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS)
–    Long-acting beta 2-agonists (LABA) Combination long-acting beta 2-agonists +
corticosteroids in one inhaler
Anticholinergics/muscarinic antagonists Systemic corticosteroids
–    Short-acting anticholinergics (SAMA) Phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitors
–    Long-acting anticholinergics (LAMA)
Combination short-acting beta 2-agonists +
anticholinergic in one inhalerAcebrophylline:  An airway mucoregulator
and anti-inflammatory agent.
Corticosteroids
–   Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) reduce the frequency and severity of exacerbations, and are used
in moderately severe COPD. These include beclomethasone, budesonide, fluticasone,
ciclesonide, flunisolide, beclametasone
–   Oral corticosteroids are useful during exacerbations and should be avoided as a maintenance
therapy because it may lead to osteoporosis and impaired skeletal muscle function.
Respiratory infections
Treatment of infection:  Bacterial infection precipitates exacerbations. Azithromycin (has both

anti-inflammatory and antimicrobial properties) administered daily to subjects with a history of
exacerbation in the past 6 months may reduce the exacerbation. If patient develops purulent
(yellow or green) sputum oral tetracycline or ampicillin 250 mg 6 hourly or cotrimoxazole 960 mg
12 hourly for 10 days should be given. If there is no response, sputum culture and sensitivity is
done and the antibiotic is changed accordingly.Prevention of infection:  Patients with COPD should receive vaccination with polyvalent
pneumococcal and influenza vaccines.
Symptomatic measures
Antimucolytic agents:  They reduce viscosity of sputum and can reduce the number of acute
exacerbations and total number of days of disability. Mucolytic agents include bromhexine, N-
acetylcysteine carbocysteine, ambroxol and erdosteine can be tried.
Antitussives:  Regular use of antitussives to control cough in stable COPD is not recommended.
Chest physiotherapy.
Pulmonary rehabilitation
It is an individually designed treatment program consisting of education and cardiovascular
conditioning (reverse muscular and cardiovascular dysfunction).
Program includes breathing technique, chest physiotherapy, postural drainage, activities of daily
living (work simplification, energy conservation) and exercise conditioning (upper and lower
extremity).
Oxygen therapy
Q. Write short note on oxygen therapy in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Long-term domiciliary oxygen therapy (LTOT)
Aim of therapy:  To increase the PaO2 to at least 8 kPa (60 mm Hg) or SaO2 to at least 90%. It
is administered through nasal cannulae for at least 15 hours per day at a low-dose (2 L/minute)
Indications:  in COPD patient with exertional hypoxemia or nocturnal hypoxemia
Daytime PaO 2 ≤55 mm Hg at rest or oxygen saturation < 88% with or without hypercapnia
during a period of clinical stability OR
Daytime PaO 2 between 56 and 59 mm Hg or oxygen saturation > 88% in the presence of
secondary polycythemia, nocturnal hypoxemia, peripheral edema or evidence of pulmonary
hypertension
Benefits:  LTOT has significant benefits and reduces mortality rates in selected patients. It
decreases pulmonary hypertension and prolongs life in hypoxemic COPD patients with right
heart failure. It also reduces polycythemia, pulmonary artery pressures, dyspnea, and hypoxemia
during sleep and reduced nocturnal arrhythmias.
Treatment of pulmonary hypertension:  by long-term oxygen therapy, sildenafil, bosentan
synthetic prostacyclin (epoprostenol).
Pharmacologic therapy in COPD depending on severity is presented in Figure 6.9.
Surgical treatments
Lung volume reduction surgery (LVRS ) is more efficacious than medical therapy among patients
with upper-lobe predominant emphysema and low exercise capacity.
In appropriately selected patients with very severe COPD, lung transplantation has been shown
to improve quality of life and functional capacity.

Fig. 6.9:  Pharmacotherapy based on severity of COPD.
Acute Exacerbations of COPD
Definition: ‘An event in the natural course of the COPD characterized by
a change in the patient’s baseline dyspnea, cough, and/or sputum that is
beyond normal day-to-day variations. It is acute in onset, and may warrant
a change in regular medication in a patient with underlying COPD.’Causes of exacerbation: (1) Infection of the tracheobronchial tree, and
(2) air pollution. In about one-third of cases, no cause can be identified.
Trigging factors: Infections by bacteria, viruses or a change in air quality.
Q. Write short note/essay on management of a case of acute
exacerbation of chronic bronchitis.
Treatment of Severe Acute Exacerbations
Oxygen
Adequate oxygenation (i.e. to achieve an oxygen saturation of 88–92%) must be assured.
Method of administration:  By nasal catheter or through a facemask equipped to control the
inspired oxygen fraction. Venture masks are preferred because they permit a precise fraction of
inspired oxygen (FiO 2).
Bronchodilators
Nebulized short-acting β2-agonists (salbutamol 2.5 mg every 20 minutes for initial 1–2 hours) and/or

anticholinergic agent (ipratropium bromide 0.5 mg) should be given. Intravenous aminophylline may
be added, if the patient falls to respond to the above treatment.
Antibiotics
Indications:  Patients with: (1) increase in sputum purulence, sputum volume, or (2) breathlessness
(dyspnea), or (3) those requiring mechanical ventilation.
Most common organisms during exacerbations:  S. pneumoniae, H influenza and M.
catarrhalis. Risk factors for P. aeruginosa infection include recent hospitalization, frequent
antibiotics use and severe exacerbation.
Antibiotics used:
–   Outpatient:  Doxycycline, cotrimoxazole or amoxicillin–clavulanate can be given. Patients
older than 65 years given one of the newer fluoroquinolones (levofloxacin, gemifloxacin,
moxifloxacin).
–   Hospitalized patients: Intravenous antibiotics (azithromycin or fluroquinolone or a third-
generation cephalosporin-like ceftriaxone or cefotaxime).
–   Severe exacerbations: Third-generation cephalosporin plus a fluoroquinolone or an
aminoglycoside.
Corticosteroids
Intravenous or oral corticosteroids shorten the recovery time, improve lung functions (FEV 1) and
hypoxemia.
Diuretics
Given to patients with gross right ventricular failure.
Respiratory stimulants
May be used when there is no response to the conventional agents. Doxapram in the dose of 1.5–4
mg/minute as infusion is the most often used agent. Other respiratory stimulants are almitirine,
nikethamide, medroxy progesterone and acetazolamide.
Mechanical Ventilatory Support
Noninvasive positive airway pressure ventilation (NIPPV)
–   NIPPV is by using tight-fitting facemask to deliver BiPAP.
Invasive (conventional) ventilation
–   It is administered via an endotracheal tube.
Fig. 6.10: GOLD staging for severity of COPD and management.

Management of associated co-morbidities
It is necessary to manage co-morbidities because they are responsible for
mortality and hospitalization.
GOLD staging for severity of COPD and management (Fig. 6.10)
It is used for both chronic bronchitis and emphysema.
Emphysema
The word ‘emphysema’ literally means inflation or distension with air.
Emphysema can be classified depending the organ or structure involved as:
Pulmonary emphysema (refer below)
Compensatory emphysema/hyperinflation
–   It is characterized by dilation of alveoli without destruction of septal
walls. It develops as a compensatory response to loss of extensive lung
substance elsewhere (e.g. removal of a diseased lung or lobe).
Mediastinal emphysema (Fig. 6.11)
–   It occurs as a result of entry of air rapidly into the mediastinum
following rupture of over distended alveoli as in severe bronchial
asthma, rupture of emphysematous bulla (during coughing) and rupture
of esophagus.
–   Severe mediastinal emphysema can lead to cardiac tamponade.
–   Auscultation: It may reveal a crunching sound (mediastinal crunch).Subcutaneous emphysema (Fig. 6.11)
–   It is characterized by the entry of air into subcutaneous tissue.
–   Causes: Penetrating chest injuries, fracture of ribs of intercostals tube
introduction.
–   On palpation, it produces a characteristic crepitation or crackling
sensation.
–   Treatment: Not needed because the air will get absorbed slowly. In
severe cases, subcutaneous incisions may be necessary to relieve
pressure.

Fig. 6.11:  Chest X-ray shows subcutaneous (white arrows) and mediastinal emphysema (black arrows).
Q. Discuss the etiology, pathology, clinical features, investigations,
complications and management of pulmonary emphysema.
Q. Write short essay/note on definition and various types of
emphysema.
Definition: Emphysema (pulmonary) is a chronic lung disease  characterized
by abnormal irreversible  (permanent) dilatation of the airspaces distal to
the terminal bronchiole . This is associated with destruction of their walls
but without obvious fibrosis.
Types of Emphysema/Classification (Figs. 6.12A and B)
Emphysema is classified according to its anatomic distribution  (location of
the lesions) within the lobule into four major types: (1) Centriacinar, (2)
panacinar, (3) paraseptal, and (4) irregular.

Figs. 6.12A and B:  (A) Normal components of respiratory tree; (B) Types of emphysema.
1. Centriacinar (centrilobular) emphysema:
Dilatation involves the central or proximal parts of the acini  (formed by respiratory
bronchioles), whereas distal alveoli are spared.
Common and severe in the upper lobes , especially in the apical segments.
Association:  Occurs in heavy smokers  and in association with chronic bronchitis and
coalworkers’ pneumoconiosis.
2. Panacinar (panlobular) emphysema:
All the airspaces beyond terminal bronchiole are more or less uniformly/equally dilated.
Site: More common in the lower lobes, and is usually most severe at the bases.
Associated with α 1-antitrypsin ( α1-AT) deficiency .
3. Distal acinar (paraseptal) emphysema:
Dilatation affects the distal airspace at the periphery of the lobule and the proximal portion is
normal.
It is found near the pleura. Dilated spaces of more than 1 cm in size are known as bullae
which may rupture and cause spontaneous pneumothorax.
It occurs adjacent to areas of fibrosis, scarring, or atelectasis .
4. Irregular (scar or cicatricial) emphysema
Acinus is irregularly involved and may be asymptomatic.
Most common form of emphysema.
Occurs near the scar  and is commonly found around old healed inflammatory process
suchas tuberculous scars.
Etiology and Pathogenesis (Fig. 6.13)

Q. Write short essay/note on etiological factors for emphysema.
The major event in emphysema is destruction of alveolar wall .
Mechanism that checks the destruction of alveolar wall:  These include:
(1) Antielastases (e.g. α1-antitrypsin) and (2) antioxidants. If these two
mechanisms are defective → results in (1) protease-antiprotease
imbalance (e.g. α1-antitrypsin deficiency) and (2) imbalance between
oxidants and antioxidants.
–   Unchecked inflammation and proteolysis: Develops due to
deficiency of the above protective mechanism.
Genetic factors
Q. Write short note on α1-antitrypsin deficiency.
–   Deficiency of α1-antitrypsin: It is inherited as autosomal recessive ,
which exhibits polymorphism → tendency to develop emphysema. α1-
antitrypsin is a major inhibitor of proteases (particularly elastase). It
is normally present in serum, tissue fluids, and macrophages and a
balance is maintained between protease and antiproteases. During
inflammation, protease (proteolyic enzyme) is secreted by neutrophils
and digests the connective tissue of the lung.α1- antitrypsin is a
protease inhibitor (antiprotease), preventing this proteolytic digestion.
Hence, a deficiency or absence of α1-antitrypsin results in the
proteolyic destruction of lung. These patients develop severe panacinar
emphysema.

Fig. 6.13: Pathogenesis of emphysema. Exposure to environmental toxins (e.g. cigarette smoke) causes
inflammatory reaction, cell death and proteolysis of extracellular matrix (ECM). α 1-antitrypsin (α 1-AT)
deficiency also results in increased degradation of ECM.
(IL-8: interleukin 8; TNF: tumor necrosis factor)
Clinical Features
Manifestations appear late until at least one-third of the functioning
pulmonary parenchyma is damaged.
Dyspnea is the most striking feature that begins insidiously and steadily
progresses ultimately ending in breathlessness on trivial exertion and even
at rest.

Cough and expectoration  of scanty mucoid sputum.
Weight loss, weakness, anorexia and lethargy is common with advanced
disease.
Physical findings
General:  Body build is asthenic, short and thick neck, neck veins may appear
distend during expiration and collapse during inspiration. Patient leans
forwards, extending the arms to brace himself during sitting posture.
Respiratory
Inspection
–   Patient appears distressed  and tachypneic , hypertrophy of accessory
muscles of respiration (sternomastoid and scalene muscles), length of
the trachea above the suprasternal notch is reduced, apical impulse is
invisible or feeble
–   During inspiration: Tracheal descent exaggerated  (Campbell’s
sign), excavation of the suprasternal and supraclavicular fossae,
indrawing of the costal margins.
–   Expiration: Prolonged through pursed lips (purse-lip breathing) and
beginning of expiration with a grunting sound .
–   Chest: Cylindrical or barrel like (barrel-shaped chest),
anteroposterior diameter of the chest is markedly increased. Whole
chest is in a fixed state of full inspiration. Ribs are placed more
horizontally and widely. Chest expansion diminished symmetrically.
Thoracic kyphosis is exaggerated and the subcostal angle is widened.
–   Dahl Sign: Above the knee, patches of hyperpigmentation or bruising
caused by constant ‘tenting’ position of hands or elbows.
–   Hoover’s sign: Briefly, during inspiration a paradoxical medial
movement of the chest. The ‘subcostal angle’ is the angle between the
xiphoid process and the right or left costal margin. Normally, during
inhalation the chest expands laterally, increasing this angle. When the
diaphragms are flattened (as in COPD), inhalation paradoxically
causes the angle to decrease.
–   Harrison’s sulcus: A horizontal grove where the diaphragm attaches
to the ribs; associated with chronic asthma, COPD, and rickets.Percussion: Hyper-resonant percussion note over the lungs, reduced

cardiac dullness, and liver dullness is pushed down or absent. Tidal
percussion is negative.
Auscultation:  Diminished intensity of the breath sound, breath sounds are
vesicular with prolonged expiration. Scattered, faint, high-pitched, end-
expiratory rhonchi may be audible.
Fig. 6.14: Chest X-ray of emphysema. (PA view) showing low set, flat diaphragm, translucent lung
field, long and narrow heart (‘tubular heart’), loss of peripheral vascular markings, prominent
pulmonary artery shadows at the hilum.
Investigations
Chest X-ray (Fig. 6.14)
–   PA view: Features in include low set, flat diaphragm, translucent lung
field, long and narrow heart (‘tubular heart’), loss of peripheral
vascular markings, prominent pulmonary artery shadows at the hilum
and bullae.
–   Lateral view: Large retrosternal translucency.
Computed tomography: Can identify emphysema with certainty.
Pulmonary function tests (Table 6.29)

Arterial blood gas studies: Slightly reduced PaO2 and normal or mildly
elevated PaCO2.
Table 6.29: Pulmonary function test findings in emphysema.
Reduced: FEV 1, FVC, FEV 1 : FVC ratio, and
PEFIncreased:  TLC, RV, and RV : TLC
GAS transfer factor for carbon monoxide (diffusion) is reduced.
Complications
Emphysema progresses steadily and gradually.
Q. Write short note on pulmonary bullae.
1. Pulmonary bullae
–   They represent inflated thin-walled spaces produced due to the rupture
of alveolar walls.
–   May be single or multiple, small or large and resembles an amulet.
–   Usually located in the subpleural region along the anterior borders of
lungs.
–   Complications: A subpleural bulla may rupture producing spontaneous
pneumothorax. Large bullae can interfere with pulmonary ventilation.
2. Respiratory failure: Type 1 and type II respiratory failure can occur.
3. Pulmonary hypertension and right heart failure (cor pulmonale):
These are late complications and right ventricular failure in emphysema is
usually a terminal event.
4. Severe weight loss: Leading to emaciation can occur.
Treatment: Treatment similar as described for COPD (refer pages 271-3).
No specific treatment for established case of emphysema. Bronchodilators and steroids may be
helpful in few patients.
Prevention of progression: Cessation of smoking and avoidance of occupational exposure.
Treatment of aggravating factors and complications:  Treatment of infections, respiratory
failure and right heart failure.
Physiotherapy
Surgical therapy: Ablation of giant bullae,  lung volume reduction surgery reduced
hyperinflation of one or both lungs and/or laser resection.
Heart and lung transplantation:  In young patients with severe emphysema due to α 1-antitrypsin
deficiency.

Blue Bloaters (Fig. 6.15A)
Q. What are blue bloaters?
It is a distinctive clinical pattern seen in chronic bronchitis, the characteristics
of which are:
Marked/heavy cyanosis (‘blue’) and peripheral edema (‘bloated’) and
secondary polycythemia.
Current evidence demonstrates that most patients have elements of both
bronchitis and emphysema and by physical examination cannot reliably
differentiate ‘blue bloaters’ from ‘pink puffers’.
Figs. 6.15A and B:  (A) Blue bloater (in chronic bronchitis) versus; (B) Pink puffer (in emphysema).
Pink Puffers (Fig. 6.15B)
Q. What are pink puffers?
It is a distinctive clinical pattern seen in emphysema of lung.
Patients are thin and noncyanotic at rest (hence ‘pink’).
They have marked dyspnea (‘puffer’) and have prominent use of accessory
muscle. They develop steadily progressive dyspnea.
Differences between emphysema and chronic bronchitis (Table 6.30)

Q. What are the differentiating features of emphysema and chronic
bronchitis?
Table 6.30: Differences between emphysema and chronic bronchitis.
Feature Emphysema Chronic bronchitis
Clinical features
Dyspnea Severe Mild to moderate
Cough Develops after dyspnea
startsFrequent, develops before dyspnea
starts
Sputum—amount and nature Scanty, mucoid Copious, purulent
Frequency of mucopurulent
relapsesLess More
Cyanosis Absent Present
Pulmonary hypertension Late and mild Early and severe
Right ventricular failure and
respiratory failureLate and often terminal Repeated episodes
Mechanism of airway
obstructionLoss of elastic recoil Decreased airway lumen due to mucus
and inflammation
Investigations
Hematocrit (PCV) Normal Increased
PaO2 Normal to low ‘pink puffer’ Low ‘blue bloater’
PaCO 2 Normal mildly increased High (>40)
FEV₁ Decreased Decreased
Diffusing capacity Reduced Normal
Chest X-ray Features of hyperinflation,
bullae and tubular heartIncreased bronchovascular markings
and cardiomegaly
Elastic recoil Decreased Normal
Airway resistance Normal to slightly increased Increased
Cor pulmonale Late, mild Early, marked
Prognosis Good PoorDifferentiating features of asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (Table 6.31)
Q. What are the differentiating features of asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease?
Table 6.31: Differentiating features of asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD).
Characteristics Bronchial asthma COPD

Age of onset Usually children and young
adultsUsually older individuals
Risk factors Family history of allergy,
exposure to allergens,
occupational sensitizersSmoking, atmospheric pollution,
occupational exposure, α 1-
antitrypsin deficiency
Respiratory symptoms
Main symptoms Wheezing, cough, dyspnea Chronic dyspnea, productive
cough
Nature of symptoms Vary from time to time and
even over hours and daysUsually continuous symptoms
Triggers Exercise, dust or exposure to
allergensUnrelated to triggers
Recovery of symptoms Symptoms improve
spontaneously or with treatmentSlowly progressive despite
therapy
Comorbidities Generally absent Often present (cardiovascular
diseases, metabolic syndrome,
depression, osteoporosis, muscle
wasting)
Chest X-ray Normal Hyperinflation
Spirometry Reversibility of airway
obstruction and normal between
symptomsFEV 1/FVC<0.7 and persistent
airflow limitation
Cigarette SmokingQ. Write short note/essay on the various components of cigarette smoke
and list the diseases caused by smoking.
Cigarette smoke is a complex aerosol containing gaseous and particulate
compounds.
Components of cigarette smoke: It consists of mainstream smoke and side
stream smoke.
1. Main stream smoke: It is produced by inhalation of air through cigarette.
It is the primary source of smoke exposure in smokers.
2. Side stream smoke: It is produced from emitting of the smoke between
cigarette puffs and is the main source of environmental smoke or second
hand smoke.
Chemical constituents of cigarette smoke: It contains about 2000 to 4000
chemical substances and more than 60 carcinogens. About 95% of the weight
of the mainstream smoke is derived from 400 gaseous compounds and about
5% of the weight is made up of about 3500 particulate components.

Tobacco addiction is due to nicotine present in cigarette smoke and is the
total particulate matter responsible for carcinogenesis.
Carcinogens: Tar, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, benzo[a]pyrene,
nitrosamine
Others
–   Nicotine causes ganglionic stimulation and depression, tumor
promotion
–   Phenol causes tumor promotion, mucosal irritation
–   Carbon monoxide impaired oxygen transport and utilization
–   Formaldehyde produces toxicity to cilia; mucosal irritation
–   Nitrogen oxides produces toxicity to cilia; mucosal irritation.
Diseases caused by smoking are listed in Table 6.32.
Table 6.32: Diseases caused by smoking.
System Diseases produced
General Cancers of lung, oropharynx, esophagus,
stomach, pancreas, bladder, kidney, cervix, colon
and acute myeloid leukemia
Respiratory COPD, chronic cough and infections
Cardiovascular Coronary artery disease, cerebrovascular disease,
peripheral artery disease, abdominal aortic
aneurysm.
Reproductive Miscarriage, prematurity, low birth weight,
ectopic pregnancy, SIDS (sudden infant death
syndrome)
Gastrointestinal Gastro-esophageal acid reflux, peptic ulcer and
Crohn’s diseases
Others Poor oral and skin health, cataract, fire-related
injuries, osteoprosis, macular degeneration
Asthma COPD Overlap Syndrome (ACOS)
Major Criteria for ACOS:Characterized by persistent airflow limitation with several features usually associated with asthma
and several features usually associated with COPD.
History or evidence of atopy (e.g. hay fever, elevated total IgE).
Age 40 years or more
Smoking >10 pack-years, post-bronchodilator FEV 1 <80% predicted and FEV 1/FVC <70%.
A ≥15% increase in FEV 1 or ≥12% and ≥200 mL increase in FEV 1 post-bronchodilator treatment

with albuterol would be a minor criteria.
PULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS
MYCOBACTERIA
Classification
Q. Write short note on classification of mycobacteria and give an
account of disease produced by them.
Mycobacteria are classified into three groups:
1. Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex ( M. tuberculosis, M. bovis and M.
africanum).
2. Mycobacterium leprae.
3. Atypical mycobacteria or non-tuberculous mycobacteria (NTM) or
mycobacteria other than tuberculosis (MOTT).
Q. Write short note on mycobacteria other than tuberculosis
(MOTT)/non-tuberculous mycobacteria (NTM).
MOTT or NTM are ubiquitous in the environment. They occur in soil and
water and are not usually pathogenic due to their lack of virulence.
Therefore, their isolation from a site that is not normally sterile (e.g.
sputum, skin or urine) does not constitute proof of disease. Groups of
atypical Mycobacterium  are listed in Table 6.33.Patients with NTM lung disease  often have predisposing disease of the
lung (e.g. COPD, bronchiectasis, cystic fibrosis, pneumoconiosis, etc.).
Table 6.33: Groups of atypical Mycobacterium.
Slow growing
Group I Photochromogens (P): Pigment producers in the presence of light, e.g. Mycobacterium
kansasii, M marinum, Mycobacterium simiae
Group II Scotochromogens (S): Pigment producers in the absence of light, e.g. Mycobacterium
scrofulaceum, Mycobacterium szulgai, Mycobacterium gordonae
Group III  Non-photochromogens (N): Do not produce any pigment, e.g. Mycobacterium
malmoense, Mycobacterium xenopi, M. avium intracellulare)
Fast growing
Group IV Fast growers (3–5 days), e.g. Mycobacterium fortuitum, Mycobacterium chelonae , and

Mycobacterium abscessus.
Mycobacterium avium  intracellulare
–   Also known as MAC (Mycobacterium avium  complex).
–   Most common non-tuberculous mycobacterial infection associated with AIDS.
–   Symptoms include fever, swollen lymph nodes, diarrhea, fatigue, weight loss and shortness of
breath.
–   May develop into pulmonary MAC.
Mycobacterium marinum  causes infections of skin and swimming pool granuloma.
Mycobacterium ulcerans cause skin infections.
Mycobacterium kansasii  causes lung disease.
Therapeutic options in atypical mycobacterial infections (Table 6.34)
Table 6.34: Therapeutic options in atypical mycobacterial infections.
Atypical mycobacteria Therapeutic options
MAC (Mycobacterium avium complex) Clarithromycin or azithromycin + ethambutol +
rifampin
M. xenopi Rifampin + ethambutol + INH
M. kansasii Rifampin + ethambutol should be treated for at
least 18 months
M. malmoense Rifampin or ethambutol
M. marinum Rifampin or clarithromycin + ethambutol 2–3
months. Often resistant to isoniazid. Treatment
with other antibiotics should be for at least two
months
Rapid growers Doxycycline, amikacin, imipenem, quinolones,
sulfonamides, cefoxitin, clarithromycin
Mycobacterium chelonae Clarithromycin in combination with another
agent, sometimes surgical excision is the best
approach
TUBERCULOSIS
Tuberculosis (also called Koch’s disease) is a communicable, chronic
granulomatous disease caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
Tuberculosis (TB) is caused by four main mycobacterial species
collectively termed Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex (MTb): (1)Mycobacterium tuberculosis (reservoir human), (2) Mycobacterium bovis
(reservoir cattle), (3) Mycobacterium africanum and (4) Mycobacterium
microti. These are obligate aerobes and facultative intracellular pathogens

which usually infect mononuclear phagocytes.
Majority of tuberculosis are due to Mycobacterium tuberculosis
hominis (human strain). The source of infection is patients suffering from
active open case of tuberculosis.
Oropharyngeal and intestinal tuberculosis can be due to drinking of
milk contaminated by M. bovis  (bovine strain) from infected cows.
Routine pasteurization has almost eliminated this source of infection.
M. avium and intracellulare are non-pathogenic to normal individuals.
They cause infection in patients suffering from AIDS.
Characteristics of Mycobacteria
Q. Write short note on acid-fast bacilli.
It is an aerobic, slender, and rod-shaped bacteria. It measures 2 to 10 μm
in length.
It has a high lipid content in the cell wall which makes it difficult to stain,
but once stained resists decolorization by acids and alcohol. Hence, it is
termed as acid-fast bacilli (AFB), because once stained by carbol fuchsin
(present in Ziehl-Neelsen stain ), it is not decolorized by acid and alcohol.
Acid fast organisms and structures are listed in Table 6.35.
Table 6.35: Acid fast organisms and structures.
Acid fast organism Other acid fast structures Mycobacteria
Nocardia
Isospora
Cryptospora
Microsporidia
Rhodococcus
LegionellaHead of human sperm
Embryophore of T. saginata
Hooklets of E. granulosus
Keratin
Epidemiology
Tuberculosis is common in India. High incidence of tuberculosis is
observed with poverty, overcrowding, and chronic debilitating illness. As
per WHO 2016, there are an estimated 10.4 million new TB cases
worldwide, 10% of which were people living with HIV. TB statistics for
India for 2016 give an estimated incidence figure of 2.79 million cases of

TB for India. An estimated 1.7 million people died from TB, including
nearly 400,000 people who were co-infected with HIV.
Diseases associated with increased risk  of tuberculosis include diabetes
mellitus, Hodgkin lymphoma, malnutrition, immunosuppression,
alcoholism, chronic lung disease (e.g. silicosis), and chronic renal failure.
HIV is the most important risk factor.
Determinants of Virulence
Three genes: (1) 1 kagG-encodes catalase, (2) rpo V-signs factor (initiates
transcription of many enzymes) and (3) erp- encodes a protein required for
multiplication.NRAMP-1 gene: NRAMP1  is a transmembrane protein  (a product of
NRAMP1 gene) inhibits microbial growth  and it determines the
susceptibility to tuberculosis. In individuals with polymorphisms in the
NRAMP1 (n atural resistance-associated macrophage protein 1) gene,
tuberculosis may progress due to the absence of an effective immune
response.
Mode of Transmission
Inhalation: It is the most common mode of transmission. Source of
organisms is an active open case of tuberculosis to a susceptible
individual. Infection spread by the inhalation of respiratory droplet from
other infected patients.Ingestion: Tuberculosis may be transmitted by drinking nonpasteurized
milk from infected cows contaminated with M. bovis. It causes
oropharyngeal and intestinal tuberculosis. Nowadays, the ingestion mode
of transmission occurs when a patient with open case of tuberculosis
swallows the infected sputum results in tuberculosis of intestine.Inoculation: It is extremely rare and may develop during postmortem
examination, while cuts resulting from handling tuberculous infected
organs.
Primary Tuberculosis
Q. Discuss the pathogenesis, pathology, clinical manifestations and
diagnosis of primary pulmonary tuberculosis.
Q. Write short essay/note on primary complex of Ranke and Ghon’s

complex/features of primary tuberculosis.
Initial infection  that occurs on first exposure to the organism (Myobacterium
tuberculosis) in an unsensitized  (previously unexposed tuberculin-negative)
individual  is known as primary tuberculosis. First infection of the lung
caused by the tubercle bacillus is termed as primary pulmonary tuberculosis.
Primary infection usually occurs during childhood. Many patients give a
history of contact with a case of active pulmonary tuberculosis. About 5% of
newly infected people develop clinically significant disease. Source of the
organism is always exogenous.
Sites of Primary Tuberculosis
Lung, intestine, tonsil and skin (very rare).
Primary Tuberculosis of Lung
It is the commonest site of primary tuberculosis. Primary pulmonary
tuberculosis develop when the bacillus is inhaled and lodged in the alveoli of
the lung.
Ghon lesion/focus
Following inhalation, tubercle bacilli reach the distal airspaces.Site of deposit: Lower part of the upper lobe or upper part of the lower
lobe near the pleural surface (subpleural) are the usual sites of deposit.
Ghon focus: About 2 to 4 weeks after the infection, a circumscribed gray-
white area of about 1- to 1.5-cm develops in the lung known as the
Ghon focus → the center of which undergoes caseous necrosis.
Regional lymphadenitis: Tubercle bacilli (free or within macrophages)
are carried along the lymphatics to the regional draining nodes → which
often show caseous necrosis.
Ghon complex
It is the combination of subpleural parenchymal lung lesion (Ghon focus)
and regional lymph node  involvement.
Fate of Ghon complex
Healing: In majority (about 95%), cell-mediated immunity controls the
infection and primary tuberculosis heals.
–   The hallmark of healing is fibrosis. Ghon complex may undergo

progressive fibrosis and calcification. It is radiologically detected as a
small calcified nodule (Ranke complex)  in caseous material and very
rarely undergoes ossification.
–   In the majority of individuals infected by Mycobacterium, the immune
system contains the infection and the patient develops cell mediated
immune memory to the bacteria. This is termed latent tuberculosis.
Spread: Lymphatic and hematogenous spread to other organs or parts of
the body occurs during the first few weeks.
–   Progressive pulmonary tuberculosis: In a few patients, primary
lesion in the lung may progress from the beginning (progressive
pulmonary tuberculosis or progressive primary pulmonary
tuberculosis).
–   Bronchial spread: Tuberculous lymph node may rupture/ulcerate
through the bronchial wall and discharge caseous material into the
bronchial lumen. This causes spread of infection to the related lobe or
segment through bronchi.
–   Hematogenous spread: In some patients, the tubercle bacilli may
enter the blood and produces tuberculous lesions in different parts of
the body. The hematogenous spread can be of two types:
♦   Acute form: It is more likely to occur in infants or young children
and results in miliary tuberculosis or tuberculous meningitis.
♦   Chronic form: It is characterized by tuberculosis in the lungs,
bones, joints, liver and kidneys. These lesions may develop months
or even years after primary infection. The infection in these
secondary foci may remain dormant for years.
–   Lymphatic spread: In some cases, the infection may be carried by
lymphatics from mediastinal lymph nodes to pleura or pericardium
resulting in tuberculous pleurisy with effusion or tuberculous
pericarditis with effusion.
Other Sites of Primary TuberculosisIntestine: Primary focus always involve the small intestine (usually ileal
region) and associated with mesenteric lymphadenitis.
Tonsils: Primary focus in the pharynx and tonsil with cervical lymph node
enlargement.

Skin: Primary focus in the skin associated with regional
lymphadenopathy.
Bronchial Complications
Middle lobe syndrome: Enlarged mediastinal lymph nodes of primary
complex may compress a bronchus causing collapse of the lung.
Compression of middle lobe bronchus may lead to collapse-consolidation
and bronchiectatic changes. This may be present later as the ‘middle lobe
syndrome, Brock’s syndrome.An unusual phenomenon in primary tuberculosis is obstruction of
bronchus by lymph nodes referred to as epituberculosis resulting in some
clinical signs, e.g. localized wheeze or bronchial breathing.
Obstructive emphysema: Rarely, the compression of bronchus may
result in a valve action with air trapping. This leads to obstructive
emphysema.Broncholith: Calcification in a Ghon focus or regional lymph node may
be extruded into a bronchus leading to ‘broncholith’ or present as
hemoptysis.
Clinical Features: Pulmonary Disease
Primary pulmonary TB
Symptoms
Majority are asymptomatic.
A few patients may present with self-limiting febrile illness which may
lasts no more than 7–14 days. It occurs at the time of tuberculin
conversion.Clinical disease only occurs if there is progressive infection. If the
infection is severe or the host resistance is low, child may present with
reduced appetite and failure to gain weight. Slight dry cough may be
occasionally present.
Physical signsMajority of patients does not reveal any abnormal physical signs.
General features: If the lesion is severe or extensive, signs of general
debility may be present. Child is thin, pale, and fretful having less glossy

hair and less elastic skin.
Respiratory system: Usually no abnormal physical signs detected in the
chest. Sometimes, few crepitations may be heard over lung parenchyma
involved by the primary complex. More extensive physical signs in the
chest may be produced when there are complications. Rarely pleural
effusion can be seen.
Erythema nodosum: It may accompany primary pulmonary tuberculosis.
They are bluish-red, raised, tender, skin lesions commonly seen on the
shins and less commonly on the thighs. In few, it may be associated with
fever and polyarthralgia.
Diagnosis
History of contact: With a case of active tuberculosis.
Tuberculin test: It is very valuable in children. A positive test in a
previously non-sensitized/immunized child strongly indicates the disease.
A negative test makes the diagnosis of tuberculosis very unlikely.Chest radiograph: Primary complex may appear as a peripheral
parenchymal lung lesion and an enlarged hilar lymph node.
–   In children: Enlargement of (e.g. hilar) lymph node of the primary
complex is more prominent than the pulmonary component.
–   In adults: Pulmonary component (peripheral parenchymal lesion) of
the complex is more obvious than the lymph node component.
Bacteriological examination
–   Sputum examination—for AFB is preferable.
–   Alternatively, three laryngeal swabs or fasting gastric washings can be
examined.
–   Detection of the tubercle bacilli either in the direct smear or culture
confirms the diagnosis.
Post-Primary (Secondary) Tuberculosis
Q. Describe the etiology, pathogenesis, pathology, clinical features,
complications and diagnosis of post-primary tuberculosis/secondary
tuberculosis.
(Synonyms: Post-primary tuberculosis, reactivation tuberculosis)
Tuberculosis developing in a previously sensitized individual (by earlier

exposure) is known as secondary tuberculosis.
It may develop shortly or after many years following primary tuberculosis,
when resistance host is reduced.
Source of Infection
Endogenous: Most common source is reactivation of a latent infection.
–   Direct progression of a primary tuberculous lesion
–   Re-activation of a dormant primary lesion
–   Hematogenous spread to the lungs
Exogenous: Rarely exogenous new infection (re-infection)
Any location may be involved in secondary tuberculosis, but the lungs are by
far the most common site.
Morphology
Gross
Site: In the lungs, post-primary (secondary) tuberculosis usually involves
the apex of the upper lobes of one or both lungs, within 1 to 2 cm of the
apical pleura. It commonly involves apical and posterior segments of the
upper lobe or apical segment of the lower lobe. This predilection may be
due to good ventilation, decreased blood and lymphatic supply of these
regions in the erect posture, and the oxygen tension that favors survival of
the strictly aerobic tubercle bacilli.Appearance: Initially small focus (less than 2 cm in diameter) of
consolidation , sharply circumscribed, firm, and gray-white to yellow in
color. The central caseated liquefied material of a tuberculous primary
lesion may be discharged into a bronchus and forms a tuberculous cavity
in the lung.Regional lymph nodes involvement is not as prominent as that seen in
primary tuberculosis.
Fate of Secondary Tuberculosis (Fig. 6.16)
Healing: In immunocompetent individuals, localized, apical, focus may heal
with fibrosis and calcification  rarely ossification.
Progress: It may occur along several different pathways.

Progressive pulmonary tuberculosis: It occurs mainly in the elderly and
immunosuppressed. Apical lesion may expand into surrounding lung and
may erode into bronchi and vessels.
–   Erosion into bronchi: It leads to release of the central area of caseous
necrosis → resulting in a ragged, irregular apical cavity surrounded by
fibrous tissue. This produces an important source of infection ,
because when the patient coughs, sputum contains bacteria.
–   Erosion of blood vessels: It may results in hemoptysis.Spread of infection: If the treatment is inadequate or if host defenses are
impaired, the infection may spread via: 1) airways, 2) lymphatics or 3)
blood vessels.
–   Local/direct spread: Tuberculosis can directly spread to the
surrounding tissue. In the lung local spread to the pleura may result in
serous pleural effusions, tuberculous empyema, or obliterative
fibrous pleuritis.
–   Spread through bronchi/airways: It may produce tuberculous
pneumonia.
Fig. 6.16:  Progress and complications of secondary tuberculosis of lung.
–   Spread along mucosal lining: Spread through lymphatic channels or
along the mucosal lining from mycobacteria present in the

expectorated infectious material may lead to endobronchial ,
endotracheal , and laryngeal tuberculosis. In the past, intestinal
tuberculosis was due to drinking of contaminated unpasteurized milk.
However, this is rare following pasteurization of milk. Nowadays
caused by the swallowing of coughed-up infective material  in
patients with open case of advanced pulmonary tuberculosis. Mainly
develops in the ileum.
–   Lymphatic spread: Spread through lymphatic channels mainly reach
regional lymph nodes. It may also cause disseminated disease.
Miliary pulmonary disease: It is the disseminated form of
tuberculosis. If the dissemination only limited to the lungs, it is
termed miliary pulmonary disease.
Lymphadenitis: It is most frequent presentation of extrapulmonary
tuberculosis, and usually occurs in the cervical region (‘scrofula’).Spread via blood vessels
Systemic miliary tuberculosis occurs when tubercle bacilli disseminate
through the systemic arterial system. Miliary tuberculosis most commonly
involves liver, bone marrow, spleen, adrenals, meninges, kidneys,
fallopian tubes, and epididymis. Tuberculosis can involve any organ
except nail, hair and enamel .
Isolated-organ tuberculosis: Dissemination of tubercle bacilli through
blood may seed any organ or tissue → resulting in isolated organ
tuberculosis. Commonly involved organs are:
–   Meninges (tuberculous meningitis)
–   Kidneys (renal tuberculosis)
–   Adrenals
–   Bones (osteomyelitis): When it involves the vertebrae, the disease is
referred to as Pott’s disease. Paraspinal ‘cold’ abscesses may track
along tissue planes and present as an abdominal or pelvic mass.
–   Fallopian tubes (salpingitis)/orchitis.
Clinical FeaturesQ. Write short note on clinical features of fibrocavitary tuberculosis.
Symptoms of pulmonary tuberculosis

Localized secondary tuberculosis may remain asymptomatic.
Many patients are symptom free, and may be detected on routine
radiography.
Onset is usually insidious or gradual, with symptoms developing slowly
over weeks or months.
Nonspecific: Malaise, anorexia, loss of appetite and weight, tiredness.
Low-grade fever: It is remittent (appearing late each afternoon and then
subsiding—commonly known as evening rise of temperature ), and night
sweats.
Others: Amenorrhea.
Respiratory symptoms
Chronic cough: It is the most consistent symptom. If a patient has cough
of more than 3 weeks, he/she should be investigated for pulmonary
tuberculosis.Hemoptysis: It is a classical symptom. Hemoptysis is present in 50% of
cases of pulmonary tuberculosis.
Sputum: It may be mucoid, purulent or blood stained. Classical sputum is
described as ‘numular’.
Pain in the chest: Pain may be due to pleurisy, intercostals myalgia or
cough fracture.
Unresolved pneumonia: It may be another mode of presentation.
Breathlessness may be a feature observed in advanced and extensive
disease or due to pleural effusion.
Localized wheeze may be observed due to local ulceration and narrowing
of a major bronchus.
Recurrent cold may be also a presenting symptom.
Presentation due to complications: Very occasionally, it may present with
one of the complications (Table 6.36).
Physical signs
Fever, tachycardia and tachypnea.
Pallor and cachexia may be seen in advanced stages of the disease.
Clubbing of finger is unusual.
Chest

Often there are no abnormal signs detected.
Fine crepitations: Most common sign is fine crepitations in the upper part
(apices) of one or both lungs. They are better heard particularly on taking
a deep breath after coughing (post-tussive crepitations).
Classical physical signs of consolidation (dullness to percussion),
cavitation, fibrosis, bronchiectasis, pleural effusion or pneumothorax may
be present.Cavernous bronchial breathing with post-tussive suction  may be heard
if there is a superficial collapsible cavity.
There may be bronchial breathing in the upper part and localized wheeze
due to local tuberculous bronchitis or pressure by a lymph node on a
bronchus may be heard. In chronic tuberculosis when accompanied by
fibrosis may show evidence of volume loss and mediastinal shift.
Table 6.36: Complications of pulmonary tuberculosis.
Pulmonary Non-pulmonary
Exudative pleural effusion/empyema
Spontaneous pneumothorax
Massive hemoptysis pulmonary or bronchial
arteritis and thrombosis, bronchial artery
dilatation, and Rasmussen aneurysm)
Cor pulmonale
Persistence of cavities even after treatment
Pulmonary fibrosis/emphysema
Infection of cavities:Atypical mycobacterial infection
Aspergillus → aspergilloma
Lung/pleural calcification
Obstructive airways disease
Airway lesions: These include bronchiectasis,
tracheobronchial stenosis, and broncholithiasis
Bronchopleural fistula
Bronchogenic carcinomaEmpyema necessitans
Spread of tuberculosis to other organs (especially
Addison’s)
Laryngitis
Following swallowing of infected sputum:Enteritis
Anorectal disease
Amyloidosis
Poncet’s polyarthritis
Mediastinal lesions:  These include lymph node
calcification and extranodal extension,
esophagomediastinal or esophagobronchial
fistula, constrictive pericarditis, and fibrosing
mediastinitis
Venous thromboembolism
Extrapulmonary manifestations depend on the organ/system involved.
Conditions/diseases that favor reactivation/reinfection of tuberculosis are
presented in Table 6.37.
Table 6.37: Condition/diseases that favor reactivation/reinfection of
tuberculosis.

Immunosuppression: HIV, anti-tumor necrosis
factor (TNF) therapy, high-dose corticosteroids,
cytotoxic agents
Malnutrition
Diabetes mellitus
Hemophilia
Chronic kidney diseaseSilicosis
Malignancies (e.g. lymphoma and leukemia)
Gastrointestinal disease associated with
malnutrition (gastrectomy, jejunoileal bypass,
cancer of the pancreas, malabsorption)
Deficiency of vitamin D or A Investigations
Q. Write short note on diagnosis, investigations of pulmonary
tuberculosis.
Presence of an unexplained cough for more than 2–3 weeks, particularly in
regions where TB is prevalent, or typical chest X-ray changes, should prompt
for further investigation.
Blood examination
Anemia: Moderate degree
White cell count: Usually normal or below normal
ESR: Usually raised.
Other findings:
–   Serum electrolytes: Hyponatremia and hyperkalemia may be observed
in severe disease.
–   Liver function tests: Occasionally may be impaired.
Radiological examination
For practical purposes, a normal chest radiograph excludes the diagnosis
of pulmonary tuberculosis (Fig. 6.17).

Fig. 6.17: Chest X-ray of tuberculosis showing bilateral infiltrates and thin-walled cavities.
Radiological Features of Pulmonary Tuberculosis (Table 6.38)
Q. Write short note on the radiological features of pulmonary
tuberculosis.
For all practical purposes, a normal chest radiograph excludes the diagnosis
of pulmonary tuberculosis.
Radiological findings: It shows ill-defined opacification in one or both of
the upper lobes. As the disease progresses features of consolidation,
collapse and cavitation develop to varying degrees (Fig. 6.18). It is often
difficult to distinguish between active from quiescent form of tuberculosis
on radiological criteria alone, but the presence of a miliary pattern or
cavitation favors active disease.In extensive disease, collapse may cause significant displacement of the
trachea and mediastinum. Occasionally, a caseous lymph node may drain
into an adjoining bronchus, resulting in tuberculous pneumonia.CT chest: It may be useful in evaluating parenchymal and lymph node
lesions It may show tree in bud appearance  (Fig. 6.18).
18F-FDG PET scans and 11C-choline PET scans may be done in few

selected patients.
Table 6.38: Radiological features of tuberculosis of lung.
Radiological shadows that strongly suggest
tuberculosisRadiological shadows that may be due to
tuberculosis
Patchy or nodular shadows in the upper zone
(on one or both sides)
Cavitation (especially if more than one)
Calcified lesion
Pleural effusion/thickeningOval or round single shadow (tuberculoma)
Hilar and mediastinal shadows (due to
enlarged lymph nodes)
Diffuse small nodular shadows (miliary
tuberculosis)
Sputum examination
Direct microscopic examination of sputum: It remains the most important
first step investigation in pulmonary TB. Three specimens of sputum
should be examined and if two of these smears are positive, diagnosis of
TB is certain.
–   A first spot specimen: Obtained when the patient presents himself.
–   An early morning specimen: When the patient returns with an early
morning specimen.
–   A second spot specimen: When the patient returns with an early
morning specimen.Revised WHO definition of a new sputum smear-positive case o f
pulmonary tuberculosis: Presence of at least one acid fast bacillus in at
least one sputum sample in countries with a well-functioning external
quality-assurance system. Presently, WHO recommends that the number
of sputum specimens to be examined for screening of tuberculosis cases
can be reduced from three to two, in places (i) where a well-functioning
external quality-assurance system exists, (ii) where the workload is very
high and (iii) human resources are scarce.Stain: Rapid identification of the presence of tubercle bacilli by immediate
stains is essential and should be done within 24 hours. The most effective
stains are the Ziehl–Neelsen and rhodamine–auramine. Auramine-
rhodamine staining is more sensitive (though less specific) than Ziehl–
Neelsen.

Fig. 6.18:  Tree in bud appearance of tuberculosis on CT.
Culture of sputum
A positive sputum smear is sufficient for the presumptive diagnosis o f
TB but definitive diagnosis requires culture of tubercle bacillus. Smear-
negative sputum should also be cultured.
Culture medias: It may be
–   Liquid/broth culture (Middlebrook 7H12) or the non-radiometric
mycobacteria growth indicator tube (MGIT)): Faster growth (1–3
weeks) occurs in liquid media. The BACTEC radiometric growth
detection method detects mycobacterial growth by measuring the
liberation of 14CO2, following metabolism of 14C-labeled substrate
present in the medium. The growth can be detected in 4–8 days.
–   Solid media (Löwenstein–Jensen slopes): MTB grows slowly and may
take between 4 and 6 weeks.
Drug sensitivity testing: Should be done in selected cases. It is important
in patients with a previous history of TB, treatment failure or chronic
disease, and in those who are resident in or have visited an area of high

prevalence of resistance, or who are HIV-positive. Using liquid culture in
the presence of antimycobacterial drugs (usually first line therapy initially)
establishes the drug sensitivity for that strain and usually takes
approximately 3 weeks).Nucleic acid amplification (NAA) tests: The Amplified Mycobacterium
tuberculosis Direct (MTD) test and the Gene Xpert MTB/RIF test.
NAA is more sensitive than smear but less sensitive than culture; as few as
1 to 10 organisms/mL may give a positive result. Resistance to rifampin
can be detected by Xpert MTB/RIF or MTBDRplus, resistance to
isoniazid can be detected by MTBDRplus.
Other investigationsLaryngeal swab, early morning gastric lavage and bronchoalveolar lavage
samples can be used for detecting AFB.
Tuberculin test: It is used for diagnosis but is less valuable. However,
this test may be negative in patients with active tuberculosis associated
with malnutrition or other diseases. It may be positive in patients without
active tuberculosis. Strongly positive test favors tuberculosis, where as a
negative test does not exclude tuberculosis.Q. Write short note on newer methods of diagnosis of tuberculosis.
Interferon gamma release assays (IGRAs)
–   IGRAs are in vitro  tests of cellular immunity. These assays measure
cell-mediated immune response by quantifying interferon gamma
(IFNγ) released by T cells in response to stimulation by
Mycobacterium tuberculosis specific antigens. These specific antigens
include early secretory antigenic target-6 (ESAT-6) and culture filtrate
protein-10 (CFP10).
–   The test does not differentiate between active and latent infection. This
test requires high cost and trained personnel.Other methods of diagnosis
–   MGIT (Mycobacteria growth indicator tube) method: In this
method, growth is detected by a non-radioactive detection system
using fluorochromes for detection and drug screening.
–   Identification by mycolic acids using high-pressure liquid
chromatography.

–   ELISA testing for IgM and IgA: It is commonly used but has low
specificity.
–   Mycobacterial-specific phages (reporter phages) to detect luciferase
gene. It can be used to detect drug-resistant isolates.
Causes of Hemoptysis in Pulmonary Tuberculosis
Q. List the causes of hemoptysis in pulmonary tuberculosis.
Hemoptysis from a pulmonary cavity
–   Rasmussen’s aneurysm: Blood vessels traversing a tuberculous cavity can undergo changes
due to inflammatory and necrosis. Over a period of time these vessels may develop aneurysmal
dilatation (Rasmussen’s aneurysm). These aneurysms may rupture resulting in hemoptysis.
–   Allergic response of vessel:  Occasionally, intense allergic response to antigens of tubercle
bacilli can damage the walls of the blood vessels in and around the tuberculous cavities leading
to hemoptysis.
Hemoptysis from endobronchial tuberculosis
–   Tuberculosis of endobronchial region  may be surrounded by vessels with small aneurysmal
dilatation. Rupture of these aneurysms can produce hemoptysis.
–   Occasionally, sloughing of the part of the granuloma may result in hemoptysis.
Hemoptysis as a sequel of pulmonary tuberculosis
–   Open-healed cavities:  A tuberculous cavity may persist as a sequelae following chemotherapy
which are designated as ‘open-healed cavities’/INH cysts. The aneurysmal dilations of vessels
may also persist in these open-healed cavities which can rupture producing hemoptysis.
–   Post-tuberculous bronchiectasis:  The upper lobe bronchiectasis is common sequelae of
pulmonary tuberculosis. This may be characterized by repeated attacks of hemoptysis without
sputum production (bronchiectasis sicca or dry bronchiectasis).
–   Broncholith: Calcification in a primary/Gohn focus or lymph node may be extruded into a
bronchus as a ‘broncholith’ and can cause hemoptysis. Hemoptysis may also results from the
broncholith eroding through blood vessels.
–   Aspergilloma:  Treated and healed tuberculous cavities may sometimes remain open and can
be infected by the fungus Aspergillus fumigates. This may produce a fungal ball (aspergilloma)
in the cavity and can present as severe hemoptysis.Hemoptysis due to scar carcinoma.
Tuberculin Skin Test
Q. Write a short note on tuberculin test/Mantoux test?
First infection with mycobacteria leads to development of delayed
hypersensitivity to M. tuberculosis antigens (tuberculin) and this is detected
by the tuberculin skin test.
Tuberculins: There are two commonly used tuberculins in present use:
1. PPD-S has been adopted as the international standard for PPD of
mammalian tuberculin.

2. PPD-RT23 is widely used in epidemiological studies throughout the
world.
Mantoux test (Fig. 6.19): It is ideal to begin the test with 5 IU PPD-S or 1 or
2 IU PPD-RT23.
Fig. 6.19: Mantoux test.
Method
Select an area of skin at the junction of the mid and upper thirds of flexure
surface of the left forearm.
Skin is cleaned with soap and water and allowed to dry.
Using a tuberculin syringe and an intradermal needle, inject 0.1 mL of the
tuberculin solution strictly intradermally. It should result in papule in the
skin measuring 5–6 mm in diameter.
Reading and Interpreting the ResultThe test is read after 48–72 hours.
If a reaction has taken place, there will be an area of erythema (redness)
and an area of induration (thickening) of the skin. Measure the diameter of
induration across the transverse axis of the arm. The reaction is considered
positive if an area of induration of the skin of 10 mm diameter or more
at the site of injection of PPD. The amount of erythema (redness) present
is not important. Induration ≥5 mm is considered as positive in patients
with HIV infection (or risk factors for HIV infection, but unknown status),

recent close contact to person with known active TB, patients with chest
X-ray consistent with prior TB, patients with organ transplants and other
immunosuppressed patient.
Significance
Positive tuberculin test: Indicates T-cell–mediated immunity to
mycobacterial antigens. A strongly positive test is particularly valuable in
children, especially very young children and favors the diagnosis of
tuberculosis.False-negative reactions: If the diameter of induration is below 10 mm,
the test is considered negative. But a negative test does not exclude
tuberculosis. It is seen in certain viral infections, sarcoidosis, malnutrition,
Hodgkin lymphoma, immunosuppression, and overwhelming active
tuberculous disease, HIV infection, measles, chickenpox, glandular fever
(infectious mononucleosis), cancer, corticosteroids and similar drugs.False-positive reactions: It seen in infection by atypical mycobacteria
or prior vaccination with BCG  (Bacillus Calmette-Guerin ) or lymphoma.
Most infants immunized with BCG at birth have a negative tuberculin test
by 1–2 years. In infants immunized after 1 year, the tuberculin reaction
often remains positive for some years. It may also be positive in NTM
infections.
Latent Tuberculosis
Q. Describe latent tuberculosis infection (LTBI).
In the majority of individuals infected by Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the
immune system contains the infection and the patient develops cell
mediated immune memory to the bacteria. These individuals do not
currently have active tuberculosis disease. This is termed latent
tuberculosis.Individuals with latent tuberculosis are at risk of progression to active
tuberculosis. About 5–10% is the lifetime risk of progression. The
increased risk of progression from latent tuberculosis to active
tuberculosis is during the first two years after infection. Groups of
individuals at high-risk of tuberculosis infection are listed in Table 6.39.
Groups at increased risk of progression to active tuberculosis are listed in
Table 6.40.

Table 6.39: Groups of individuals at high-risk of tuberculosis infection.
Employees working at long-term care facilities, hospitals and medical laboratories
Individuals having close contact with patients with active tuberculosis
Residents and employees of congregate living facilities (e.g. prison and jails, nursing homes,
hospitals and homeless shelters)
Medically under served low income populations
Table 6.40: Groups at increased risk of progression to active tuberculosis.
Children younger than 5 years of age
History of tuberculous infection
–   Individuals infected with mycobacterium tuberculosis within the past two years
–   Past history of untreated or inadequately treated tuberculosis
Associated conditions
–   Individuals with HIV infection
–   Silicosis
–   I V drug users
–   Immunocompromised conditions
–   Long-term use of corticosteroids or other immunosuppressants (including anti-TNF-α)
–   Chronic renal failure
–   Diabetes mellitus
–   Malignancy
Screening for Latent TuberculosisTuberculin skin test
T-cell IGRAs.

Prophylaxis (to Prevent Development of Active Tuberculosis)
Refer tuberculosis prophylaxis on page 301.
ANTITUBERCULOUS DRUGS (ATDs)
Q. Write short note on the terms ‘bactericidal action’ and ‘sterilizing
action’ in relation to antituberculous drugs.
Bactericidal action: It is the capacity of antituberculous drugs to rapidly
kill large numbers of actively metabolizing bacilli. Most of the
antituberculous drugs (except thiacetazone and PAS) are bactericidal.
Isoniazid is the most potent bactericidal. Ethambutol is bacteriostatic at
low doses and bactericidal at high doses.Sterilizing action: It is the capacity of antituberculous drugs to kill
special populations of slowly or intermittently metabolizing semi-dormant
bacilli (so-called ‘persisters’), e.g. rifampicin and pyrazinamide.
Q. Write short essay/note on:
Management of pulmonary tuberculosis, antituberculous drugs
and their dosages in adults.
List the first and second line antituberculous drugs. Explain the
rationale for using a multidrug regime.
Bactericidal drugs used in the treatment of tuberculosis.
Classification of Antituberculous Drugs (Table 6.41)
First Line Antituberculous Drugs
Q. Write short note on:
First line antituberculous drugs.
Modes of action of first line drugs.
1. Isoniazid (INH)
It is primarily tuberculocidal drug.
Mechanism of action: Inhibition of mycolic acid cell wall synthesis via
O2 dependent pathways (e.g. catalase-peroxidase reaction). Bactericidal
against rapidly multiplying and bacteriostatic against resting bacilli.

Active against both extracellular and intracellular organisms.
Resistance occurs spontaneously in 1 in 105 bacilli.
Pharmacokinetics:
Excreted in urine: Decrease dose if creatinine clearance <30
mL/minute.
Slow vs. rapid acetylators (t 1/2)
Table 6.41: Classification of antitubercular drugs.
First line antituberculous drugs
Isoniazid (H)
Rifampin (R)
Pyrazinamide (Z)Ethambutol (E)
Streptomycin (S)
Second line antitubercular drugs
Thiacetazone (Tzn)
Paraaminosalicylic acid (PAS)
Ethionamide (Etm)
Cycloserine (Cys)
Kanamycin (Kmc)
Amikacin (Am)
Capreomycin (Cpr)Newer antitubercular drugs
Ciprofloxacin
Ofloxacin
Moxiflloxacin
Clarithromycin
Azithromycin
Rifabutin
Q. Write short note on toxic effects of INH.
      Adverse effects:
a. Peripheral neuropathy: Commoner is slow acetylators, diabetic,
alcoholics, malnourished patients
Prevention: Pyridoxine 10 mg/day.
INH neurotoxicity is treated by pyridoxine 100 mg/day.
Convulsions should be treated by IV pyridoxine 100 mg.
Other TB-related drugs that cause peripheral neuropathy:
Pyridoxine, ethambutol and cycloserine.
b. Hepatitis
Increased risk: Age >35 years, alcohol abuse, rapid acetylators, co-
administration of rifampin, pyrazinamide, HIV infection, chronic
hepatitis B, pregnant females, immediate postpartum (3 months).Dose related and is reversible on stopping the drug.

c. c.   Others: Idiosyncratic reactions, SLE, gynecomastia acne, rash,
anemia psychosis, memory impairment, optic neuritis (atrophy).
2.   Rifampicin
Semisynthetic derivative of rifamycin B obtained from Streptomyces
mediterranei .
Mechanism of action: Inhibition DNA-dependent RNA synthesis.
Bactericidal against both extracellular and intercellular organisms.
Adverse effects Patients have discolored (orange) body secretions,
hepatitis, thrombocytopenic purpura, respiratory syndrome, shock, renal
failure (azotemia). Minor effects are:
Cutaneous (red man) syndrome: Flushing, pruritis, rash (especially
face and scalp). Exfoliative dermatitis is more frequent in HIV-
positive TB patientsInfluenza-like (Flu) syndrome
Abdominal syndrome: Pseudomembranous colitis (especially
rifabutin).
Newer rifampicin-related antitubercular agents
Q. Write short essay/note on newer rifampicin-related antitubercular
agents.
Rifabutin
Actions:  It is related to rifampin. Active against rifampicin-resistant M.tuberculosis; more active
than rifampicin against M. avium intracellulare complex/NTM; longer t ½; extent of absorption
unchanged with food; recommended instead of rifampicin in patients on pulmonary infections.
Dose: It is recommended for tuberculosis in HIV-infected patients who are on protease inhibitors.
Dose is 150 mg/day.
Adverse effects: GI distress, rash, myalgias and insomnia, Flu-like syndrome, anterior uveitis,
leukopenia, skin discoloration and hepatitis. Patients also have discolored (orange) body
secretions.
RifapentineFeatures:  It is lipophilic and has longer duration of action. Mycobacteria resistant to rifampicin
are also resistance to this drug. May be used in the treatment of pulmonary tuberculosis in place of
rifampicin. Higher likelihood of relapse, but lower risk of adverse effects and less frequent
administration than with rifampicinDose: 600 mg once or twice a week
Side effects: Similar to rifampicin.
Q. Write short essay/note on uses of rifampin.

Uses of rifampin is listed in Box 6.6.
Box 6.6: Uses of rifampin.
Tuberculosis
Leprosy
Prophylaxis of meningococcal  and H. influenza meningitis and carrier state
Second or third choice of drug for MRSA, diptheroids and Legionella infections
Combination of doxycycline and rifampin as first line drugs in Brucellosis
3.   Pyrazinamide
Chemically similar to INH.
Mechanism of action: Inhibition of mycolic acid cell wall synthesis
and resembles INH. Bactericidal to slowly metabolizing bacilli in
phagosome/granuloma. Most effective in acidic pH (<6.0).
Adverse effects
–   Hepatotoxicity: Dose dependent
–   Arthralgias, polyarthralgias (especially shoulders) are common.
Arthralgias are not related to the serum uric acid level.
–   Hyperuricemia is common due to inhibition of uric acid secretion
by kidney. Development of new-onset gout is rare, but pre-existing
gout may be exacerbated.
4.   Ethambutol
Q. Write short essay/note on ethambutol.
Mechanism of action  (MOA): Inhibits arabinose (arabinosyl transferase) involved in
arabinogalactan synthesis. Bacteriostatic.
Excreted in urine (Dose reduction required for patients with creatinine clearance < 50 mL/min).
Adverse effects
a. Retrobulbar neuritis: Dose-dependent. Usually occurs after many
months of treatment. Manifests with reduced visual acuity, central
scotoma, disturbance of red-green discrimination (loss of ability to see
green). Permanent blindness may develop if not discontinued.
b. Others: Hyperuricemia, peripheral sensory neuropathy.
5.   StreptomycinIt is an aminoglycoside, bactericidal antibiotic derived from
Streptomyces griseus.

Adverse effects
a. Ototoxicity, cochlear and vestibular damage, deafness and
neuromuscular blockage: Dosage should be reduced if headache,
vomiting, vertigo and tinnitus occur. Avoid in young children.
b. Renal damage-nephrotoxicity (non oliguric renal failure): Dosage
must be reduced by half immediately if (1) urinary output falls, (2) if
albuminuria occurs or (3) if tubular casts are detected in the urine.
c. Others: Rare and include hemolytic anemia, aplastic anemia,
agranulocytosis, thrombocytopenia and lupoid reactions.Mode of Action of First-Line Antituberculous Drugs
In a tuberculous lesion (particularly in a cavitary lesion), mycobacteria exist
in several foci (Table 6.42).
Table 6.42: Tuberculous foci and the drugs acting on them.
Tuberculous foci Drugs acting on them
Extracellular, in alkaline medium Streptomycin
Rapidly metabolizing mycobacteria (in a cavity) Rifampicin
Less actively multiplying bacilli in acidic and
closed lesionsIsoniazid
Dormant bacilli (that cause a relapse) Pyrazinamide
Second Line Antituberculous Drugs
Q. Write short note on second line antituberculous drugs.
Ethionamide: Structurally related to INH and acts by inhibiting the
mycolic acid synthesis. It is effective against bacilli resistant to other
drugs and are effective in infections due to atypical mycobacteria. It is
effective against both intracellular and extracellular organisms.Cycloserine: Mainly bacteriostatic and acts by inhibiting the synthesis of
the bacterial cell wall. It is effective against bacilli resistant to INH or
streptomycin and against atypical mycobacteria. Antitubercular activity is
less than that of these two drugs.Fluroquinolones: Ciprofloxacin, ofloxacin, levofloxacin, moxifloxacin
and gatifloxacin are active against M. tuberculosis, even in cases resistant
to other drugs. Given orally or IV. Useful in treating infections resistant to

standard drugs and in relapse cases.
Capreomycin: It is bactericidal and its mechanism of action,
pharmacokinetics and adverse reactions are similar to those of
streptomycin. Administer with caution in presence of renal impairment.
Kanamycin and amikacin: Both are bactericidal and are active against
bacilli resistant to streptomycin, INH and cycloserine.
Macrolides: Newer macrolides azithromycin and clarithromycin also
have action against tubercular bacilli. They are used to treat typical
mycobacterial infection as well as in relapse cases.
Newer Antituberculous Drugs
β-lactams (imipenem, amoxicillin-clavulanic acid), linezolid, clofazimine,
clarithromycin, dapsone and metronidazole have been used rarely for the
treatment of multidrug resistant (MDR) tuberculosis. However, their roles
are not well established.Bedaquiline: It is a diarylquinoline class of antibiotics that selectively
targets the proton pump of ATP synthesis, leading to inadequate ATP
synthesis (necessary for bacterial metabolism). It is a new drug used for
MDR tuberculosis.Delamanid and pretomanid: These are nitroimidazole class of antibiotics
that inhibit the synthesis of mycolic acids (components of the cell
envelope of M. tuberculosis). It is still on clinical trials.Sutezolid: It is oxazolidinone class of antibiotics. It prevents the initiation
of protein synthesis by binding to 23s RNA in the 50s ribosomal subunit
of bacteria.SQ109, a 1,2-ethylenediamine: It is an analogue of ethambutol.
Benzothiazinones: They inhibit the synthesis of decaprenyl-phospho-
arabinose (the precursor of the arabinans) in the mycobacterial cell wall.
Side Effects of the Commonly Used Antituberculous Drugs
(Table 6.43)
Q. Write short notes on side effects of the commonly used
antituberculous drugs/rifampicin/INH/ethambutol/streptomycin.
Table 6.43: Side effects of the commonly used antituberculous drugs.

Drug (daily dosages) Adverse reactions
Major Less common (rare)
Isoniazid (H) ( 5–10 mg/kg) Hepatitis
Peripheral neuropathy
(preventable and treatable with
pyridoxine)
Cutaneous hypersensitivityGiddiness, seizures, optic
neuritis, mental symptoms,
hemolytic anemia, aplastic
anemia, agranulocytosis, lupoid
reactions, arthralgia,
gynecomastia
Rifampicin (R) (10 mg/kg) Febrile reactions (‘flu’
syndrome; more common with
intermittent therapy), hepatitis,
cutaneous reactions,
gastrointestinal disturbancesShortness of breath, shock,
hemolytic anemia, interstitial
nephritis, thrombocytopenia
Pyrazinamide (Z) (20 mg/kg) Anorexia, nausea, flushing,
hepatitis, gastrointestinal
disturbance, hyperuricemiaHepatitis (dose related),
vomiting, arthralgia, cutaneous
hypersensitivity, gout
Ethambutol (E) (15 mg/kg) Retrobulbar neuritis (dose
related), arthralgiaPeripheral neuropathy, rash
Streptomycin (S) and other
aminoglycosides (15–20
mg/kg)8th nerve damage, cutaneous
hypersensitivity, giddiness,
numbness, tinnitusVertigo, ataxia, deafness,
hypokalemia, renal damage,
aplastic anemia, agranulocytosis
Ethionamide (Etm) (10–20
mg/kg)Anorexia, vomiting Serious neurologic reactions,
hepatitis
Cycloserine (Cys) (10–20
mg/kg)Headache, somnolence Psychosis, seizures, peripheral
neuropathy
Quinolones (7.5–15 mg/kg) GI intolerance, skin rashes Phototoxicity (with
sparfloxacin), dizziness,
headache, insomnia
Thiacetazone (Tzn) (2.5 mg/kg) Gastrointestinal reactions,
cutaneous hypersensitivity,
vertigo, conjunctivitisHepatitis, erythema multiforme,
exfoliative dermatitis, hemolytic
anemia
Paraaminosalicylic acid (PAS)
(8–12 g/day)Gastrointestinal reactions,
hepatitis, cutaneous
hypersensitivity, hypokalemiaAcute renal failure, hemolytic
anemia, thrombocytopenia,
hypothyroidism
Antituberculous ChemotherapyQ. Write short essay/note on:
Short-course chemotherapy and its advantages.
Discuss regimen of antituberculous chemotherapy.
Global targets of detecting 70% of infectious cases and curing 85% of those
detected. Goals of antituberculous drug therapy is listed in Box 6.7.
Box 6.7: Goals of antituberculous therapy.

1. Kill the dividing bacilli
2. Kill the persisting bacilli
3. Prevent emergence of resistance
Short-Course Chemotherapy
Short-course chemotherapy (SCC) is regimens of 6 to 9 months duration
which are highly effective and widely accepted as the treatment of choice
for tuberculosis.
All the short course regimens have two phases: An initial intensive
(bactericidal) phase and a continuation (sterilizing) phase.
–   Initial phase: Lasts for 2 to 3 months and aimed to rapidly kill
majority of mycobacteria. The symptoms resolve, sputum becomes
negative and the patient becomes non-infectious.
–   Continuation phase: It lasts for 4 to 6 months during which the
remaining bacilli are eliminated so that relapse does not occur.
Advantages of short course of chemotherapy is mentioned in Box 6.8.
Box 6.8: Advantages of short course chemotherapy.
Easy to take and produces minimal upsets in the patients.
Patient will be better more quickly.
Sputum becomes negative more quickly. About 85% at 2 months.
Low relapse rate. Even if relapse occurs, the tubercle bacilli remain sensitive and the same
treatment can be given repeated.
WHO (2009) Definitions
New case:  A patient who has never had been treated for TB or not had anti-TB drugs for less than
one month. New case may have positive or negative bacteriology and may have tuberculosis at any
anatomical site.
Previously treated case:  It is defined as a newly registered episode of TB in a patient who has
received one month or more of anti-TB drugs in the past. A culture and drug sensitivity test should
be done before starting treatment. It is also referred to as ‘retreatment cases’ and forms a
heterogeneous group composed of several subcategories:
–   Relapse:  A patient who has been previously treated for TB and was declared cured and is now
been diagnosed bacteriologically positive tuberculous case (either a true relapse or a new
episode of TB caused by reinfection).Treatment after failure:  A patient who have been previously treated for TB and whose treatment
failed at the end of course of treatment. The sputum smear or culture is positive at 5 months or
later during treatment. This includes patients who have a multidrug-resistance strain at any point of
time during the treatment.Treatment after loss to follow-up  patients have previously been treated for TB and were declared

lost to follow-up at the end of their most recent course of treatment (previously known as treatment
after default patients) and now has bacteriologically positive tuberculosis.
Treatment after default:  A patient who returns to treatment with positive bacteriology, following
interruption of treatment for two months or more.
Other:  All cases which does not fit the above definitions. It includes patients who are sputum
smear-positive at the end of a re-treatment regimen (previously defined as chronic cases) and who
may be resistant to the first-line drugs.
Categories of Diagnosis and Treatment
Treatment regimen for tuberculosis is presented in Table 6.44.
Table 6.44: Treatment regimen for tuberculosis.
A. DOTS (Directly observed treatment, short
course)Regimen
1.  New (Category 1)
Earlier CATEGORY I
New smear-positive patients
New smear negative pulmonary TB with
extensive parenchymal invasion
Severe concomitant HIV disease; or
New cases of severe forms of extrapulmonary TB
Earlier CATEGORY III
New cases of smear negative pulmonary TB with
limited parenchymal involvement
Less severe forms of extrapulmonary TB2 months (HRZE) + 4 months (HRE)
Duration: 6 months
2.  Previously Treated (Category 2)
Earlier CATEGORY II includes previously
treated sputum smear-positive pulmonary TB:
Relapse
Treatment after interruption
Treatment failure2 months (HRZES) followed by 1 month
(HRZE), followed by 5 months (HRE)
Duration: 8 months
B.  DOTS PLUS
1. Earlier CATEGORY IV
Includes MDR and chronic TB cases (still
sputum-positive after supervised retreatment)6–9 months (KM LVX, ETO CS, Z, E) followed
by 18 months (LVX, ETO, CS, E)
Duration: 24–27 months
2. Earlier CATEGORY V
Extensively Drug Resistant TB (XDR TB)6–12 months intensive phase followed by 18
months continuation phase
(Capreomycin, PAS, Moxifloxacin, Clofazamine,
Linezolid, Amoxicillin/clavulnate,
Clarithromycin, Thiacetazone)
Duration: 24–30 months
C.  NON DOTS
Rare TB patients may need non-rifampicin and
non-pyrazinamide regimen2 SHE + 10 HE OR 12 HE

Note: Since 2017 the thrice weekly regimen has been changed daily regimen.
(H: isoniazid; R: rifampin; Z: pyrazinamide; E: ethambutol; S: streptomycin; KM: kanamycin; LVX:
levofloxacin; ETO: etionamide; CS: cyclosporine; PLHIV: people living with HIV)
Severe Tuberculosis
Miliary, disseminated TB is considered to be severe.
Forms of extrapulmonary tuberculosis (EPTB) classified as severe include: Meningeal,
pericardial, peritoneal, bilateral or extensive pleural effusive, spinal, intestinal, genitourinary.
Less severe:  Lymph node, pleural effusion (unilateral), bone (excluding spine), peripheral joint and
skin tuberculosis.
Directly Observed Treatment, Short Course
Q. Write short essay/note on directly observed treatment, short course
(DOTS) in tuberculosis.
Directly observed treatment, short course is an intermittent method  of
administering potent antituberculous regimens to a patient with
tuberculosis under direct supervision .
Daily chemotherapy is excellent. However, it is expensive and not
possible to supervise therapy and hence compliance rate is low and relapse
rate is high.DOTS is a five point program (WHO) which can effectively control TB.
1. Political and administrative support.
2. Diagnosis in patients attending health facilities is by microscopic
examination of sputum.
3. Good antituberculous drugs are given for short course.
4. Directly observed treatment which is easily accessible, acceptable and
accountable.
5. Systematic monitoring and accountability.
Monitoring the Treatment and Treatment Results
Q. Write short essay/note on monitoring the progress of treatment and
the assessment of treatment result.
Main method of monitoring is bacteriological examination. Other methods
include radiological assessment, ESR and body weight changes.
Bacteriological examination

Bacteriological assessment can be made by examining sputum smear and
sputum culture.
a. Serial sputum smearM examinations: Helps to assess the progress
and ultimate result.
–   Sputum smear microscopy should be performed at completion of the
intensive phase of treatment.
–   New patients:
♦   If sputum smear is positive at the end of the
intensive phase (2 months), repeat the sputum smear at the end
of the third month .
♦   If the smear is positive at the end of 3 months, perform sputum
culture and drug susceptibility testing (DST).
–   Previously treated patients:
♦   If the smear is positive at the end of the intensive phase (3 months),
perform sputum culture and DST.
–   Favorable response: If sputum bacillary count steadily decreases. In
most patients, sputum will be negative in 1 month and almost all in 2
months and all in 3 months. However, sputum culture may be positive
for another 1 or 2 months. Finally, both smears and cultures will be
negative.
–   Indications of treatment failure:
♦   Persistence of bacilli (no response)
♦   Fall and rise phenomenon: Initial decline followed by a steady
rise in sputum positivity
♦   Relapse: Initial decline and sputum negativity, followed much later
by sputum positivity.
b. Culture: Confirms the diagnosis and is indicated only in selected cases.Radiological assessment by chest radiographs: Serial radiographs can
assess progress and determine final result. Improvement in the serial
radiographs is a favorable response. However, radiological assessment
may be misleading many times and radiological improvement may be
associated with persistence of tubercle bacilli in the sputum.Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR): It is not a very satisfactory
method of assessing the progress or activity of disease. However, a
reduction in ESR can be a favorable response.

Body weight changes are also not very reliable. However, a body weight
gain may be a favorable response.
Drug-Resistant TB
Q. Write short essay/note on forms of drug resistances encountered
during antituberculous chemotherapy.
Definition: Drug-resistant TB  is defined by the presence of resistance to
any firstline antituberculous drug/agent.
Diagnosis is challenging (especially in developing countries) and although
cure may be possible, it needs prolonged treatment with less effective, more
toxic and more expensive drugs.
Primary drug resistance and initial drug resistance
–   Primary drug resistance
♦   It develops in patients who have not received any
antituberculous chemotherapy before or received it for less than
1 month .
♦   Cause: Infection by drug resistant organism  from another patient
with secondary resistance due to inadequate chemotherapy.
–   Initial drug resistance: When it is impossible to obtain a reliable
history of previous chemotherapy from a new drug resistant patient, it
is better to term it has initial drug resistance. This covers both true
primary and undisclosed acquired resistance.Secondary or acquired drug resistance: Resistance to one or more
antituberculous drugs, usually due to incorrect chemotherapy.
Natural drug resistance: Mycobacterial strains which have never been
exposed to any antibacterial drug are called ‘wild strains’. Thus, natural
drug resistant strain is a wild strain resistant to a particular drug without
ever having any contact with it. Thus, neither the patient with naturally
resistant bacilli nor his source of infection has had chemotherapy in the
past.Transient drug resistance: A positive culture of bacilli may be resistant
to one or more (rarely two) drugs of a regimen during the course of
successful chemotherapy. This may be due to resistant organisms for
unknown reasons outlived the sensitive part of the bacterial population.
Transient resistance does not need any change of treatment, since it does

not results in treatment failure.
Q. Write short essay on multidrug-resistant (MDR) tuberculosis, its
diagnosis and management.
Multiple drug resistance or multidrug resistant TB
–   Multidrug resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) is a form of TB that is resistance to at least both
of INH and rifampicin , with or without other drug resistance. Hence, a patient should not be
classified as multidrug resistant disease if the patient has an infection with a bacterium
susceptible to rifampicin but resistant to many other drugs.
–   MDR-TB can rarely be observed in new cases. It is more common in individuals in re-
treatment cases (prior history of TB, particularly if treatment has been inadequate, and those
with HIV infection). It is a man-made phenomenon
–   Chronic cases and MDR-TB cases are not synonymous. Chronic patients probably have MDR-
TB because they have previously received at least two full courses of treatment with essential
antituberculous drugs.Extensive drug resistance TB (XDR-TB)
–   Extensively drug resistance TB is a form of TB that is resistant to at least four of the core anti-
TB drugs. These drugs include most important (core) anti-TB drugs, (1) isoniazid and (2)
rifampicin and (3) injectable second-line aminoglycoside drugs (amikacin, capreomycin or
kanamycin) + (4) fluoroquinolone (such as ofloxacin or moxifloxacin).Totally drug resistant TB or (Extremely XXDR, TDR)
–   Totally drug resistant tuberculosis (TDR-TB) is a form of TB strains that shows in-
vitro resistance to all first and second line drugs tested (isoniazid, rifampicin, streptomycin,
ethambutol, pyrazinamide, ethionamide, para-aminosalicylic acid, cycloserine, ofloxacin,
amikacin, ciprofloxacin, capreomycin, kanamycin).
–   First reported in 2003 from Italy. In early January 2012, twelve cases had been diagnosed in
Mumbai and all cases the strain of TB was resistant to all first and second line antitubercular
drugs.
Factors contributing to the emergence of drug-resistant TB are listed in Table
6.45.
Table 6.45: Factors contributing to the emergence of drug-resistant TB.
Drug shortages
Use of poor-quality drugs
Inadequate treatment regimen
Inadequate supervision of therapy
Poor absorption of drugs
Development of adverse drug reactions
Inadequate duration of treatment
Infection due to organisms with primary
resistanceTransmission of drug-resistant strains
Prior antituberculosis treatment
Treatment failure (smear-positive at 5 months)
Lack of good laboratory facilities to monitor
drug susceptibility
Genetic factors

Q. Write short essay/note on common causes of drug resistance.
Suspicion of Drug Resistant TB
A close contact of drug resistant TB case
All retreatment cases
Extensive disease at start of treatment
Extrapulmonary TB not responding to standard ATT regime.
Treatment failures
No sputum conversion after initial 2 months of ATT
All HIV patients with TB
Drug Susceptibility Testing (DST)
Q. Write short essay/note on various methods for performing drug
susceptibility tests for M. tuberculosis.
WHO recommends DST for first-line and second-line anti-TB drugs to detect MDR-TB and XDR-TB
respectively. Various methods of DST are:
Lowenstein Jensen (L-J) culture:  For drug sensitivity testing, it takes 6–8 weeks time.
Radiometric methods (BACTEC radiometric method):  Results obtained within 10 days of
inoculation.
Mycobacteria growth indicator tube (MGIT) system:  Rapid, non-radioactive method.
Nitrate reduction assays:  Based on the capacity of M.tuberculosis to reduce nitrate to nitrite.
Ligase chain reaction (LCR):  Enzyme DNA ligase functions as a link two strands of DNA.
Luciferase reporter assay:  Useful for rapid determination of drug resistance.
PCR-based sequencing:  Detects mutations responsible for drug resistance.
Line probe assays:  Detects drug resistant (particularly rifampicin resistant) bacilli.
The Xpert MTB/RIF:  It is a cartridge-based, automated diagnostic test that identifies
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) DNA and resistance to rifampicin (RIF) by nucleic acid
amplification technique (NAAT). Result obtained within 2 hours.
Management of Multidrug Resistant Tuberculosis
Q. Write short essay/note on multidrug resistant (MDR) tuberculosis,
its diagnosis and its management (drugs used).
Principles for managing a patient with MDR tuberculosis (Table 6.46)
Q. Write short essay/note on management of multidrug-resistant
(MDR) tuberculosis.
Indications for Treatment with Steroids

Q. Write short essay/note on the indications of corticosteroids use in the
management of tuberculosis.
Severely ill patients, e.g. TB meningitis with decreased consciousness, neurological defects, or
spinal block or severe pulmonary TB.
Severe hypersensitivity reaction to anti-TB drugs.
To prevent exudation, its organization and stricture formation:
–   TB pericarditis with effusion or constriction.
–   Large TB pleural effusion with severe symptoms.
–   Meningeal tuberculosis.
–   Renal tract TB to prevent ureteric scarring.
–   TB laryngitis with life-threatening airway obstruction.Hypoadrenalism (Tuberculosis of adrenal glands).
Massive lymph node enlargement with pressure effects.
In AIDS patient with severe manifestations of tuberculosis.
Table 6.46: Principles for managing a patient with MDR tuberculosis.
DOTS-PLUS strategy is used.
Use at least 4 reliable drugs.
Do not use drugs with cross resistance.
Eliminate drugs that are not safe for the patient.
Include drugs from Groups 1–5 in a hierarchical order.
Monitor and manage adverse effects of drugs.
Never add a single drug to failing regime.
General treatment principles
Provide 18–24 months’ treatment, always with intensive phase of at least 6 months (current WHO
guidelines -8 months).
Provide DOT therapy.
Warn patients about possible side-effects.
Manage side-effects appropriately.
Perform cultures monthly.
EXTRAPULMONARY TUBERCULOSIS
Q. Write short essay/note on extrapulmonary tuberculosis.
The term extrapulmonary tuberculosis (EPTB) is used for occurrence of
tuberculosis at body sites other than the lung. However, when an
extrapulmonary focus is present in a patient with pulmonary tuberculosis,
such patients are categorized as pulmonary tuberculosis.

EPTB constitutes 15–20% of all cases of TB immunocompetent patients
and in HIV positive patients, EPTB accounts for more than 50% of all cases
of TB.
Sites of EPTB: In order of frequency include lymph nodes, (mediastinal
and/or hilar, cervical), pleura (effusions without radiographic abnormalities in
the lungs), genitourinary tract, bones and joints, meninges, peritoneum, and
pericardium. However, virtually all organ systems may be affected except
nail, hair and enamel.
Lymph Node TBMost common site for EPTB is lymph node. Extrathoracic nodes are more
commonly involved than intrathoracic or mediastinal. Usually, this
presents as a firm, painless (nontender) enlargement of a posterior cervical
or supraclavicular node (a condition historically referred to as scrofula).
Lymph nodes are usually discrete in early disease but develop into a
matted nontender mass over time. The portal of entry is through the
tonsils.The overlying skin is frequently indurated or there can be sinus tract
formation with draining caseous material but characteristically there is no
erythema (cold abscess formation). The diagnosis is established by fine-
needle aspiration biopsy. TB lymphadenitis is seen in nearly 35% of
extrapulmonary TB cases.Antituberculous drugs are highly effective for lymph node tuberculosis.
Scrofuloderma is a mycobacterial infection of the skin caused by direct
extension of tuberculosis into the skin from underlying structures or by
contact exposure to tuberculosis.
Tuberculous Osteomyelitis
Tuberculous osteomyelitis is usually solitary but in patients with acquired
immunodeficiency syndrome, it is frequently multifocal. It tends to be more
destructive and resistant to control  than pyogenic osteomyelitis. Age: Usually adolescents or young adults in developing countries.
Source of infection: Pulmonary or extrapulmonary tuberculosis.
Predisposing factors: Diabetes, elderly, immune compromised states and
general debility.
Route of infection:

–   Blood-borne: Usually blood-borne infection, which is from a focus of
active pulmonary or extrapulmonary disease.
–   Direct extension: From lung into a rib and tracheobronchial nodes into
adjacent vertebrae.
Sites:
–   Spine (thoracic and lumbar vertebrae) commonly known as Pott’s
disease. The infection breaks through intervertebral discs to
involve multiple vertebrae and extends down into the soft tissues
forming abscesses (cold abscess-psoas abscess).
–   Knees and hips.
Clinical course:
–   Low-grade fever with evening rise of temperature
–   Pain on motion, localized tenderness
–   Weight loss.
Complications:
–   Spine:
♦   Destruction of vertebrae: Causes severe scoliosis or kyphosis and
neurologic deficits due to spinal cord and nerve compression.
♦   Psoas abscess: Infection from spine may rupture into the soft tissue
anteriorly and pus and necrotic debris may drain along the spinal
ligaments and form a cold abscess, i.e. an abscess lacking acute
inflammation. P soas abscess is the condition in which infection
from lower lumbar vertebrae dissects along the pelvis, and appears
as a draining sinus of the skin in the inguinal region. It may be the
first manifestation of tuberculous spondylitis.
–   Tuberculous arthritis
–   Sinus tract formation
–   Amyloidosis.
Tuberculous Meningitis (refer pages 980-2)
Gastrointestinal TuberculosisTB can affect any part of the bowel.
Upper gastrointestinal tract involvement is rare.

Intestinal Tuberculosis
Discussed on pages 759-62.
Extrapulmonary sites of tuberculosis and their presentation are summarized
in Table 6.47 and Figure 6.20.
Table 6.47: Extrapulmonary sites of tuberculosis and their presentation.
Extrapulmonary site Presentation
Pleural Pleural effusion, pleuritis
Lymph nodes Tuberculous lymphadenopathy (including mediastinal) nonhealing
sinuses
Skeletal system Tuberculous osteomyelitis, cold abscess, vertebral tuberculosis,
pyarthrosis
Nervous system Tuberculous meningitis tuberculous arteritis, cerebral tuberculoma
Gastrointestinal Ulcerations of the tongue, intestinal tuberculosis, tuberculous
peritonitis
Pericardium Pericardial effusion and tamponade, constrictive pericarditis
Genitourinary Renal tuberculosis, salpingitis, tubal abscess, tuberculous epididymitis
Miscellaneous Addison’s disease (tuberculous adrenalitis), skin tuberculosis
(Scrofuloderma, Lupus vulgaris, tuberculids), phlyctenualr
keratoconjunctivitis, choroiditis, iritis, erythema nodosum
Fig. 6.20: Various extrapulmonary sites of tuberculosis.
Miliary or Disseminated TB
Q. Discuss the pathogenesis, types, clinical features, diagnosis and

management of miliary tuberculosis in adults.
Miliary TB is the disseminated form of tuberculosis. The lesions are usually
yellowish granulomas 1–2 mm in diameter. These lesions resemble millet
seeds (hence termed miliary).
Route of Spread
Miliary tuberculosis results from widespread hematogenous dissemination of
tubercle bacilli. The tubercle bacilli may enter the bloodstream either
hematogenous or lymphatic route.
Types
Q. Write short essay/note on miliary tuberculosis/non-reactive miliary
tuberculosis/ disseminated non-reactive tuberculosis.
Clinically, the miliary TB patients may be divided into three different types:
(1) Classical (acute) miliary tuberculosis,(2) cryptic (obscure) miliary
tuberculosis and (3) non-reactive miliary tuberculosis.
1. Classical (acute) miliary tuberculosis
Age: Can occur at any age, but more commonly affects children and
young adults.
Onset: Sudden or gradual. Usually present with insidious onset of
fever, malaise and weight loss over weeks.
Other symptoms:
–   Systemic symptoms include high-grade fever, drenching night
sweats and progressive pallor.
–   Cough and breathlessness are occasionally present.
Signs:
–   There may not be any abnormal physical signs in the lungs.
Widespread crepitations may be heard late in the disease.
–   Hepatosplenomegaly may be seen.
–   Choroidal tubercles on ophthalmoscopy—diagnostic.
2. Cryptic (obscure) miliary tuberculosis
Q. Write short essay/note on cryptic miliary tuberculosis.
Age: Usually in the elderly.

Symptoms:
–   Prolonged low-grade pyrexia common presenting manifestation
–   Lassitude, weight loss and general debility.
Signs:
–   Hepatosplenomegaly may occur.
–   Chest is usually normal
–   Choroidal tubercles are rare.3. Non-reactive miliary tuberculosis
Rare usually develops in elderly with disease re-activation
Acute severe form of tuberculous septicemia, resulting in necrotic
lesions without granulomatous reaction containing numerous bacilli.
Patients are extremely ill and die rapidly.
Diagnosis
Chest radiograph (Fig. 6.21): If it shows the characteristic miliary
shadows (miliary mottling), it is virtually diagnostic. Miliary mottling
appears as diffuse small shadows of 1–2 mm diameter and evenly
distributed throughout both lung fields. Upper zones are always involved.
The early lesions may be difficult to appreciate. These lesions are better
visualized by (1) an over penetrated (dark) radiograph and a bright light
behind the outer rib spaces, (2) lateral chest film, (3) underpenetrated
anteroposterior radiograph or (4) high resolution CT of chest.Positron emission tomography CT (PET-CT): Using radiopharma-
ceutical 18F labeled 2-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG) may show ‘hot’ spots. It
can determine the activity of lesion, guide biopsy and detect occult foci.
Sputum smear is usually negative but bronchoalveolar lavage and
bronchial biopsy are likely to be positive.
Culture: Confirmation of diagnosis should be done by culture of sputum,
urine or bone marrow.
Hematological abnormalities: These include anemia, leukopenia,
neutrophilic leukocytosis and leukemoid reaction. Rarely DIC can
develop.Elevation of alkaline phosphatase and other liver enzymes may be
observed in patient with severe liver involvement.

Hyponatremia may develop in about 50% cases.
Bone marrow biopsy: May show miliary tubercles/bacilli on histology.
Part of the specimen should be sent for culture for tubercle bacilli.
Liver biopsy: May show miliary tubercles.
Tuberculin test: Only of limited value in miliary tuberculosis.
Fig. 6.21:  Chest X-ray showing miliary mottling.
Q. Write short essay/note on management of miliary tuberculosis.
Management
Acute and cryptic miliary tuberculosis:  Standard antituberculous chemotherapy. In severely ill
patients prednisolone is given along with chemotherapy. It reduces the life-threatening toxicity and
gives the time for antituberculous drugs to act.
If the diagnosis is not proved  (e.g. cryptic miliary tuberculosis): Therapeutic trial of
antituberculous chemotherapy.
Tuberculous Pleural Effusion
Q. Discuss the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features, investigations,
complications and management of tuberculous pleural effusion.

Q. Write short note on tuberculous pleural effusion and its laboratory
diagnosis.
Age group: Tuberculous pleural effusion usually occurs in younger
individuals.
Underlying pulmonary tuberculosis: Only one-third  of patients show
simultaneous pulmonary tuberculosis and in the majority remaining it is
not found.
Pathogenesis
Involvement of pleura by M.tuberculosis may occur by various routes namely
via lymphatics, blood-stream or by direct extension.
Isolated pleural effusion usually due to recent primary infection . The
collection of fluid in the pleural space represents a hypersensitivity
response to mycobacterial antigens.
Pleural disease may also develop from contiguous parenchymal spread
form post-primary/secondary tuberculosis of lung.
Rupture of subpleural caseous focus into the pleural cavity. This
produces delayed hypersensitivity reaction to tuberculous protein. It
causes increased permeability of pleural capillaries, mild lymphatic block
by fibrosis. Cultures of the pleural fluid from most these patients with
tuberculous pleural effusions are negative (because it is a hypersensitivity
response).Sequelae: Left untreated, the pleura may become thick and fibrotic
(pleural fibrosis) and pleural adhesions may develop. Pleural adhesion
causes restrictive ventilator dysfunction. Early treatment is necessary to
prevent these sequelae.
Clinical Features, Investigations and Management
Refer pages 313-4.Pleural fluid analysis
Q. Write a note on pleural fluid findings in tuberculous pleural effusion.
Color: Fluid is usually straw/amber colored, but sometimes hemorrhagic.
Exudative in nature: Characteristically fluid is an exudate, with a high
protein content (>3 g/dL) >50% of that in serum (usually 4–6 g/dL) a

normal to low glucose concentration, a pH of –7.3 (occasionally <7.2) and
raised white blood cells (usually 500–6000/µL).
Cells: Predominant lymphocytosis. Neutrophils may predominate in the
early stage (less than 2 weeks), but lymphocytosis is the typical finding
later. Mesothelial cells are usually rare or absent. If the pleural fluid shows
more than 10% eosinophils, diagnosis of tuberculous effusion is unlikely
unless the patient has a pneumothorax or had previously undergone
thoracocentesis.Smear for AFB: Smears prepared from the centrifuged deposit may rarely
show the tubercle bacilli (<10% of immunocompetent cases).
Culture for M tuberculosis: Positive in approximately 25–50% of
patients and are more common among postprimary/secondary cases.
Determination of the pleural concentration of adenosine deaminase
(ADA): It is a useful screening test, and TB can be excluded if the value is
very low.
Q. Write short note on adenosine deaminase.
–   It is a T-lymphocyte enzyme.
–   In majority of cases, the levels of ADA in the pleural fluid are elevated  (>40 IU/L) and is
probably due to increased activity of T lymphocytes (CD4+) in the pleural fluid.
–   Other causes with high ADA, e.g. rheumatoid arthritis, lymphoma, chronic lymphatic leukemia,
empyema, and mesothelioma. However, because the incidence of tuberculosis far exceeds than
any other cause of a lymphocytic pleural effusion (like in India), high ADA level has a predictive
value.
–   Specificity of raised levels of ADA in diagnosing tuberculous effusion is nearly 0.83 and the
reported sensitivity 77–100%. Specificity increased if combined with pleural fluid
lymphocytes/polymorph ratio greater than 3.
–   ADA not useful in HIV patients with TB.
–   There are two isoenzymes of ADA namely ADA1 and ADA2. ADA1 isoenzyme is found in all
cells and they are high in lymphocytes and monocytes. ADA2 isoenzyme is present only in
monocytes. In tuberculous pleural effusion, ADA2 isoenzyme  is mainly responsible for high
ADA concentration.
Interferon-gamma (INF-γ ): Produced by lymphocytes specifically
sensitized to PPD. Its level above 140 pg/mL is very suggestive of TB and
is elevated irrespective of immune status. More expensive than ADA.
Other tests on pleural fluid: Includes raised LDH, raised lysozymes,
marked elevation in the levels of soluble interleukin-2 (IL-2) receptors,
and PCR for DNA of M. tuberculosis. Nucleic acid amplification
technology has low sensitivity.

Pleural biopsy: Closed pleural biopsy shows non-caseating granulomas in
80% of patients. It should be stained with Z-N stain and cultured for
mycobacteria. Diagnostic yield increases to 90% with pleural biopsy and
biopsy cultures for AFB.
ManagementTherapeutic aspiration of pleural fluid:  May be required in patients with severe symptoms.
Antituberculous chemotherapy
Corticosteroid: May reduce the symptoms of toxemia. However, they do not reduce the incidence
of pleural fibrosis. Prednisolone is administered in the dose of 0.75 mg/kg/day for up to 4 weeks
with gradual reduction over an additional 2–4 weeks.
BCG Vaccination
Q. Write short essay/note on BCG vaccination (Bacillus Calmette-
Guerin vaccine).
BCG (Bacille Calmette-Guerin) is a freeze-dried, live attenuated (lost its
virulence) vaccine derived from M. bovis. In India, Danish strain 1331 is
being used for BCG vaccine production.
Procedure: 0.1 mL of the reconstituted vaccine is injected intradermally at
the junction of the upper and middle thirds of the left upper arm.
Contraindications: Generalized eczema and hypogammaglobulinemia, and
immunodeficiency resulting from treatment with antimetabolites, irradiation
or systemic corticosteroids.
Advantages: BCG vaccination reduces the risk of miliary/disseminated
tuberculosis and tuberculous meningitis in children. Its efficacy in adults is
very variable.
Complications: Secondary infection with local abscess formation,
enlargement of regional lymph nodes, cold abscess of draining lymph nodes,
local lupoid reactions (rare), erythema nodosum, urticaria and disseminated
BCG infection (rare).
Tuberculosis Chemoprophylaxis—Isoniazid Preventive
Therapy (IPT)Q. Write a short note on tuberculosis chemoprophylaxis.
Purpose: To prevent progression of latent tuberculous infection to
active disease.

Types:
–   Primary or infection prophylaxis: Drug is given to individuals who
have not been infected in order to prevent development of disease (e.g.
breastfed infants of sputum-positive mother).
–   Secondary or disease prophylaxis: Drug is given to prevent
development of disease in individuals already infected.
Drugs Used
Isoniazid  (H) at the dose of 5 mg/kg/day (not exceeding 300 mg/day) for
6 to 12 months is used for chemoprophylaxis
Alternate option:
–   Isoniazid plus rifampicin (10 mg/kg daily) for 3 months or
–   Isoniazid in the dose of 5 mg/kg (adults 900 mg) plus rifampicin at a
dose of 10 mg/kg twice weekly for 3 months.
Precaution: Exclude active tuberculosis by history, physical examination,
chest radiograph and, if necessary, by other tests before starting
chemoprophylaxis.
Indications
Close contacts of open case of tuberculosis who show recent Mantoux conversion.
Close contacts children aged 5 years or below with strongly positive Mantoux and a TB patient in
the family.
Breast-fed neonates/infants of sputum positive mothers.
Newly infected patients as shown by recent change in tuberculin test from negative to positive.
Patient with old inactive disease who are assessed to have received inadequate treatment.
Certain diseases in which tuberculosis is more likely to develop. These include HIV infection,
leukemia, Hodgkin’s disease, prolonged treatment with prednisolone, severe diabetes mellitus and
patients on anti-malignancy drugs. In India, if tuberculin test is ≥ 10 mm. (WHO recommends that
PLHIV who are unlikely to have active TB should receive at least 6 months of IPT as part of a
comprehensive package of HIV care.)
RisksIsoniazid resistance  can occur especially when preventive therapy with
isoniazid inadvertently given to individuals with subclinical or
unrecognized tuberculosis.
Hepatotoxicity.

SUPPURATIVE LUNG DISEASE
Bronchiectasis
Q. Define bronchiectasis. Describe the etiopathogenesis, classification,
clinical features, investigations, complications and management of
bronchiectasis.
Definition: Bronchiectasis is defined as an irreversible (permanent),
abnormal dilation of the cartilage-containing airways bronchi or
bronchioles.
Figs. 6.22A to C: Morphological types of bronchiectasis:(A) Cylindrical type; (B) Fusiform type; (C)
Saccular.
Classification
A. According to the shape of the bronchial dilation  (Figs. 6.22A to C)
based on the bronchographic appearance (Reid’s classification)
Tubular (cylindrical): Characterized by smooth dilation of the
bronchi. It is the most common form.
Varicose (bulbous): In which the bronchi are dilated with multiple
indentations.
Cystic (saccular/balloon appearance): In which dilated bronchi
terminate in blind ending sacs.

B. According to the extent of involvement
Diffuse (generalized) bronchiectasis: Characterized by widespread
bronchiectatic changes throughout the lung. It is usually bilateral  and
commonly affects the lower lobes. Left lobe is more commonly
involved than the right. It is most severe in the more distal bronchi
and bronchioles.
Focal (localized) bronchiectasis: Bronchiectatic change is restricted
to a localized area of the lung (single segment of the lung) and usually
occurs in association with obstruction of the airway (parenchymal
tumor or aspiration of foreign bodies).
C. According to the underlying disease/mechanism
Congenital/acquired
Cystic fibrosis (CF) associated and non CF bronchiectasis
Associated with post fibrosis: Traction bronchiectasis
Without much expectorant: Dry bronchiectasis.
Etiology
Q. Write short essay/note on causes of bronchiectasis.
The dilatation of bronchi and bronchioles is caused by destruction of the
muscle and elastic tissue of bronchial wall . It represents a secondary
disorder as the end stage of many unrelated disorders. It may be divided into
obstructive and nonobstructive (postinflammatory). It may also be divided
into congenital and acquired (Table 6.48).
Table 6.48: Causes of bronchiectasis.
CongenitalCystic fibrosis (CF)
Ciliary dysfunction syndromes
–   Primary ciliary dyskinesia (immotile cilia syndrome), Young’s syndrome
–   Kartagener’s syndrome (sinusitis and transposition of the viscera)
Primary hypogammaglobulinemia, alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency
Others: Bronchial cysts, cul-de-sacs, bronchomalacia, atopic bronchial asthma, pulmonary
sequestration, Mounier-Kuhn syndrome or tracheobronchomegaly, Williams-Campbell syndrome
(bronchomalacia)
Acquired: children
Pneumonia (complicating whooping cough or measles)

Primary tuberculosis
Inhaled foreign body
Acquired: adults
Pulmonary tuberculosis, M. avium complex (MAC)
Suppurative pneumonia
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis complicating asthma (ABPA)
Post-obstructive bronchiectasis: Partial or total obstruction of the bronchial lumen, e.g.
endobronchial tumors or foreign bodies, enlarged hilar lymph nodes or tumor masses and
bronchostenosis following endobronchial tuberculosis
Autoimmune diseases, e.g. rheumatoid arthritis, Sjögren’s syndrome, systemic lupus
erythematosus, inflammatory bowel disease.
Others: Repeated aspiration of gastric juice, inhalation of toxic gas (ammonia), HIV infection,
interstitial lung fibrosis (traction bronchiectasis), radiation fibrosis, sarcoidosis, chronic
hypersensitivity pneumonitis, bronchiolitis obliterans after lung transplantation.
Proximal bronchiectasis: In which dilatation involves larger airways:Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA)
Brock’s syndrome/middle lobe syndrome: Primary TB/foreign body/tumor compressing main
bronchus.
Lady Windermere syndrome:  These women have the habit of voluntarily suppressing cough. It
results in inability to clear the secretions from the right middle lobe and lingual leading to infection
and later bronchiectasis.
Congenital syndromes: Kartagener’s syndrome, yellow nails
syndrome, Chandra-Khetarpal syndrome (immuno-deficiency
associated with levocardia, bronchiectasis, and paranasal sinus anomalies),
Young’s syndrome, cystic fibrosis, Chédiak–Higashi syndrome.
Pathogenesis
Theories of bronchiectasisPressure of secretion theory (Obstruction): Secretions leads to
mechanical obstruction and obstruction impairs clearing mechanisms of
the lung → results in accumulation of secretions distal to the obstruction
→ leads to secondary infection → inflammation → weakens and dilates
airway.
Infection theory: Chronic persistent (recurrent) necrotizing infection
and inflammation in the bronchi or bronchioles → increased bronchial
secretion → obstruction  of airways by secretions → inflammation and
fibrosis of the airway walls → weakening and dilatation of airways.
Traction theory: Traction of the bronchi walls secondary to
fibrosis/scarring.

Atelectasis theory: Negative intrapleural pressure resulting in collapse
and bronchial dilatation.
Clinical Features
Q. Write short essay/note on clinical features of bronchiectasis.
Severe persistent (chronic) productive cough: It is the most common
symptom. Cough is chronic, daily, and persistent. Paroxysms of cough
develops when the patient rises in the morning (maximum during the
first 2 hours after waking). Because the postural changes drain the
collections of pus and secretions into the bronchi. Sputum production
varies with posture and in up.Sputum: It is foul-smelling (due to anaerobic infections), thick, copious,
tenacious, and continuously purulent sometimes bloody.
Hemoptysis: Streaks of blood is common with exacerbations of infection
and is commonly recurrent. Rarely massive hemoptysis occurs.
Hemoptysis occurs due to rupture of the thin walled blood vessels present
on the walls of dilated bronchi.Pleuritic (chest) pain: It may be caused due to infection of pleura, or due
to segmental collapse caused by retained secretions.
Infective exacerbation: Increased sputum volumes with fever, malaise,
anorexia are precipitated by upper respiratory tract infections.
General debility: In severe/widespread bronchiectasis, the patient present
with difficulty maintaining weight, anorexia, exertional
breathlessness/dyspnea, wheezing and orthopnea.Bronchiectasis sicca/dry bronchiectasis: Occasionally, the patient is
asymptomatic or has non-productive cough. It is termed bronchiectasis
sicca and commonly follows tuberculosis of upper lobe. Only
manifestation will be hemoptysisSitus inversus is found in 50% cases of ciliary dyskinesia.
Physical findings
General examination: It may reveal anemia, pandigital clubbing (7%
cases), fever, weight loss, night sweat, weakness, halitosis (may accompany
purulent sputum) and sinusitis. Signs and symptoms of lung infection, such as
fever may not be present.

Respiratory System
Nasal polyps and signs of chronic sinusitis may be present.
Signs may be unilateral, but are usually bilateral and basal. In dry
bronchiectasis, no abnormal physical signs may be found.
Auscultation: Reveals crackles and wheezing. Presence of large amounts
of secretion is responsible for the characteristic ‘bilateral, coarse,
leathery crepitations’ of bronchiectasis which may be palpable (tactile
fremitus).
Investigations
Blood: Anemia, raised ESR and leukocytosis indicating suppuration. ABG
studies may show respiratory alkalosis or hypoxemia.
Sputum examination:
–   If sputum is collected in a conical flask and allowed to stand, it forms
three layers (‘three-layered sputum’), top mucoid layer, middle
mucopurulent layer and purulent layer at the bottom.
–   Stain the sputum by Gram’s stain, Ziehl-Neelsen stain for acid fast
bacilli
–   Culture and sensitivity: Culture usually grows organism in the normal
nasopharyngeal flora or Pseudomonas.
Chest radiograph (Fig. 6.23): It lacks sensitivity. Signs on CXR include
the identification of parallel linear densities, tram-track opacities, or ring
shadows reflecting thickened and abnormally dilated bronchial walls.

Fig. 6.23:  Chest X-ray showing bilateral bronchiectasis with dextrocardia with situs inversus.
Chest computed tomography (CT): More specific sensitive, and is the
imaging modality of choice for confirmation for bronchiectasis. High-
resolution computed tomography. HRCT findings (Fig. 6.24)  are:
–   Specific criteria:
♦   Thickened, dilated airways (parallel ‘tram tracks’ or as the ‘signet-
ring sign’). Internal diameter of the bronchus is minimum 1.5 times
more than that of the nearby vessel.
♦   Absence of bronchial tapering in the periphery of the chest
(presence of tubular structures within 1 cm from the pleural surface)
–   Other findings: Inspissated secretions (e.g. the ‘tree-in-bud pattern) or
cysts arising from the bronchial wall (in cystic bronchiectasis).
–   May suggest the etiology of bronchiectasis (e.g. proximal bronchie-
ctasis suggests ABPA).Sinus X-rays: About 30% of patients have rhinosinusitis.
Bronchoscopy: Does not establish the diagnosis.

–   Indications: (i) to identify the source of secretions, (ii) to identify the
site of bleeding in patients with hemoptysis, (iii) therapeutically to
remove secretions, and (iv) localized bronchiectasis.
Fig. 6.24:  HRCT image of bronchiectasis.
Bronchography: Rarely indicated.
Pulmonary function tests: It may detect mild to moderate airflow
obstruction, but a restrictive pattern evolves with advanced disease.
Urine examination: In advanced and chronic cases proteinuria may
develop due to renal amyloidosis.
Electrocardiogram: Usually normal, but right ventricular hypertrophy may
be detected when corpulmonale develops.
Sweat electrolytes: Measurement of sodium and chloride concentrations
in sweat is useful in cystic fibrosis.
Serum immunoglobulins: Up to 10% of adults with bronchiectasis have
antibody class or subclass deficiency (mainly IgA). Its estimation is also
useful when primary hypogammaglobulinemia is suspected.Patients suspected of ciliary dysfunction syndrome: Assessment of
ciliary function may be done by several ways:
–   Mucociliary clearance (nasal clearance of saccharin): Measure the
time taken for a small pellet of saccharin placed in the anterior
chamber of the nose to reach the pharynx, where patient can taste it.
Normally, it should be <30 minutes. A prolongation of this time (>60

minutes) is found in patients with ciliary dysfunction.
–   Measurement of ciliary beat frequency: Assessed by using biopsies
taken from the nose.
–   Electron microscopy: It can detect structural abnormalities of cilia.
–   Study of the sperms.
Table 6.49: Complications of bronchiectasis.
1. Hemoptysis
2. Pneumonia
3. Lung abscess
4. Empyema
5. Corpulmonale
6. Septicemia
7. Meningitis
8. Osteomyelitis
9. Metastatic abscesses (e.g. brain abscess)10. Generalized edema (100 mL sputum/4–5 g protein) protein loosing pneumopathy
11. Generalized amyloidosis
12. Aspergilloma
13. Respiratory failure
14. Microbial resistance to antibiotics
Box 6.9: Goals of treatment in bronchiectasis.
Treatment of the underlying cause/disorder
Improvements in secretion clearance and bronchial hygiene
Antibiotics to control active infections
Anti-inflammatory therapy
Reversal of airflow obstruction
Surgery
Complications of Bronchiectasis (Table 6.49)
Q. Write short essay/note on complications of bronchiectasis.
Management
Goals of treatment of bronchiectasis is presented in Box 6.9.
Improvements in secretion clearance and bronchial hygiene
Bronchial hygiene so as to reduce the microbial load within the airways and minimize the risk of
repeated infections.

Many methods are used to increase secretion clearance in bronchiectasis. These include chest
physiotherapy (e.g. postural drainage), hydration and mucolytic administration, aerosolization of
bronchodilators and hyperosmolar agents (e.g. hypertonic saline).
Postural drainage:  Postural drainage is valuable and consists of adopting a position in which the
affected lobe(s) to be drained is uppermost. Patients must be trained by physiotherapists and
should be performed at least three times daily for 5–10 minutes. Lying over the side of the bed
with head and thorax down is effective in most patients. Gentle mechanical chest percussion
through hand clapping to the chest helps to dislodge the sputum.Bronchoscopic removal of inspissated secretions is rarely necessary.
Antibiotic therapy
Antibiotics for eradication of bacteria
For Pseudomonas:  Oral ciprofloxacin (500–750 mg twice daily) or ceftazidime by intravenous
injection or infusion (1–2 g three times daily) for 7–10 days
Suppressive antibioticsAfter resolution of an acute infection in patients with recurrences, the use of suppressive
antibiotics may minimize the microbial load and reduce the frequency of exacerbations.
Inhaled antibiotics are safe and effective, e.g. Tobramycin, gentamicin
Antibiotics for exacerbation
Choice of the antibiotic depends on the results of culture and sensitivity of sputum.
If no specific pathogen is identified and the patient is not seriously ill, an oral agents like
amoxicillin, ampicillin, cotrimoxazole, tetracycline, one of the fluoroquinolones or a fixed
combination of amoxicillin and calvulanic acid are recommended.More seriously ill patients with pneumonitis require parenteral antibiotics.
Duration of therapy: Varies and is usually a 7–10 day course is sufficient. Few patients may need
prolonged therapy for several weeks.
Anti-inflammatory therapy
Control of the inflammatory response may be of benefit in bronchiectasis.
Inhaled or oral steroids can reduce the rate of progression of bronchiectasis.
Macrolide antibiotic: They have immunomodulatory action.
Reversal of airflow obstruction
Bronchodilators (β-adrenoreceptor agonists, anticholinergics) improve obstruction and helps in
clearance of secretion. They are useful in patients with demonstrable airflow limitation.
Inhaled corticosteroids may be useful in some patients.
Surgical treatment
It can be considered only in refractory cases.
The procedure involved is excision of bronchiectatic areas. It is usually done in cases where the
bronchiectasis is restricted to a single lobe or segment on CT.
Indications of surgery:
–   Children or young adults with localized lesions, who fail to respond to medical treatment
–   Recurrent hemoptysis
–   Recurrent localized pneumonias
Lung transplantation is considered in patients with advanced disease and respiratory failure.
Treatment of the hemoptysis:  Bed rest and antibiotics. Blood transfusion is given if necessary.
Occasionally, fiberoptic bronchoscopy is needed to detect the source of bleeding. If the

hemoptysis continues, embolization of bronchial artery is the treatment of choice. Surgical
resection may be needed if embolization fails.
Other measures
General management: Graded exercise, routine deep breathing and maintenance of good nutrition
Vaccination
Promptly treat episodes of sinusitis.
Treat complicated ABPA with prednisolone and itraconazole.
Mucolytic dornase (DNase) is recommended in cystic fibrosis (CF)-related bronchiectasis. It
reduces viscosity of sputum by breaking down DNA released from neutrophils.
Management of bronchiectasis is summarized in Flowchart 6.4.
Pseudobronchiectasis
Q. Write short note on pseudobronchiectasis.
Pseudobronchiectasis (functional bronchiectasis)  is characterized by dilated
bronchi and is reversible. It is a common in patients with pneumonia of any
cause. But re-expansion of the collapsed lung in atelectasis and regeneration
of the mucosa in tracheobronchitis leads to reversal of the bronchographic
findings. This reversible dilatation of bronchi is termed as
pseudobronchiectasis.
Postobstructive Bronchiectasis
Q. Write short note on postobstructive bronchiectasis.
It is bronchiectasis that develops distal to a bronchial obstruction.
Causes: Partial or total obstruction of the bronchial lumen due to
endobronchial tumors and foreign body aspiration, mucus plugs, enlarged
hilar lymph nodes or tumor masses, and bronchostenosis (due to
endobronchial tuberculosis).
Bronchiectasis Sicca (Dry Bronchiectasis)
Q. Write short note on bronchiectasis sicca (dry bronchiectasis).
Usually bronchiectasis present with copious sputum.
Bronchiectasis sicca is a condition where bronchiectasis presents with
repeated episodes of hemoptysis without sputum production.
It usually occurs in bronchiectasis of upper lobe following tuberculosis.
Atelectasis

Q. Write short note on atelectasis and signs of lung collapse.
Atelectasis refers either to incomplete expansion of the lungs (neonatal
atelectasis) or to the complete collapse  of previously inflated lung
parenchyma.
It produces areas of relatively airless pulmonary parenchyma.
Flowchart 6.4: Management of bronchiectasis.
Classification
Main types are acquired atelectasis:
A. Obstructive atelectasis (absorption atelectasis)

Most common type
Mechanism: Complete obstruction (intrabronchial) of an airway causes
obstruction of communication between the alveoli and major airways.
This leads to absorption of air from the dependent alveoli → diminished
lung volume → shifting of the mediastinum towards the atelectatic
lung.Causes: Due to complete obstruction (intrabronchial) of an airway.
–   Exogenous, e.g. foreign body aspiration, or recurrent aspiration of
either gastric or oral contents due to a swallowing disorder
–   Endogenous, e.g. excessive secretions (e.g. mucus plugs) or
exudates within smaller bronchi, (e.g. in bronchial asthma, chronic
bronchitis, bronchiectasis, and postoperative states), bronchial
tumors.B. Nonobstructive atelectasis
Compression atelectasis:
–   Develops due to compression of lung.
–   Causes: It develops from any space-occupying lesion of the thorax
(e.g. tumors, cysts, enlarged lymph nodes, and cardiomegaly). It can
also occur with chest wall defects (e.g. scoliosis), neuromuscular
diseases and compression by emphysematous bulla.
–   In compression atelectasis, the mediastinum shifts away from the
affected lung.
Relaxation or passive atelectasis
–   Contact between visceral and parietal pleura is lost resulting in
passive atelectasis of lung.
–   Causes: Significant volumes of fluid (transudate, exudate or blood)
or air (pneumothorax) accumulation within the pleural cavity.
Fibrotic or cicatrisation or contraction atelectasis: It occurs when
focal or generalized pulmonary or pleural fibrosis prevents full
expansion of lung.C. Atelectasis due to surfactant deficiency or dysfunction
Surfactant deficiency or dysfunction causes increased alveolar surface
tension and failure to maintain small airway patency.
Causes: ARDS (particularly in preterm neonates and meconium

aspiration), and pneumonia in elderly.
Clinical Features
Depends on the underlying cause, the degree of volume loss within the
lung, and rate of volume loss.
No symptoms may develop when atelectasis develops slowly.
Chronic atelectasis may be a nidus of chronic purulent infection. This may
damage bronchial wall leading to bronchiectasis.
Physical examination:
–   Reduced chest movement during breathing on the involved region.
–   Deviation of trachea and apex beat toward affected side.
–   Dullness over the involved region
–   Absence of breath sounds over involved region. No added sounds.
Investigations
Chest radiograph (Fig. 6.25) and CT chest findings
–   Homogenous opacification of the atelectatic region
–   Displacement of fissure
–   Loss of volume and shift of trachea and mediastinumBronchoscopy to identify obstructive lesions and is also useful in
removing the mucus plug.
Arterial blood gas may reveal hypoxemia. Hypocapnia may develop due
to tachypnea.
Treatment of Collapse
Emergency bronchoscopy and removal of mucus plug, foriegn body.
Treatment of underlying cause.

Fig. 6.25:  Chest X-ray shows collapse of the right lung.
Middle Lobe Bronchiectasis (Middle Lobe Syndrome or
Brock’s Syndrome)
Q. Write short note on middle lobe bronchiectasis (middle lobe
syndrome or Brock’s syndrome).
It is usually develops as a sequel of primary pulmonary tuberculosis of
lung. It can be also seen with lymphoma and other causes of mediastinal
lymphadenopathy.
It is a type of postobstructive bronchiectasis usually due to obstruction of
the middle lobe bronchus by tuberculous lymph nodes.
This syndrome is characterized by recurrent atelectasis of the right middle
lobe in the absence of any endobronchial lesion. Recurrent episodes of
atelectasis result in bronchiectasis and fibrosis of right middle lobe.
Ciliary Dysfunction Syndromes or Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia
Q. Enumerate the clinical features, diagnosis and treatment of ciliary

dysfunction syndromes (ciliary dyskinesia syndromes).
Q. Write short note on primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD)/Kartagener’s
syndrome and Young’s syndrome.
These are a group of genetic disorders characterized by dysfunction of
cilia of the respiratory tract epithelium, sperms and other cells.
Dysfunction of cilia causes impairment of mucociliary clearance, left-right
body asymmetry, and impaired sperm motility.Majority are transmitted as an autosomal recessive disorder.
Kartagener or immotile cilia syndrome: It is an autosomal recessive
syndrome. It is one of the ciliary dysfunction syndromes with lack of
ciliary function  (due to absence of inner or outer dynein arms of cilia)
and causes retention of secretions and recurrent infections. It comprises of
recurrent sinusitis, bronchiectasis, dextrocardia (with or without situs
inversus) and male infertility (sperm dysmotility).
Young’s syndrome: Patients develop bronchiectasis, sinusitis, and
obstructive azoospermia. The cause is not known.
Clinical Features of Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia (Table 6.50)
Table 6.50: Clinical features of primary ciliary dyskinesia.
System involved Clinical features
Lung Respiratory distress (in neonates), recurrent infections and bronchiectasis
Nasal sinus Chronic sinusitis
Ear Otitis media, cholesteatoma, hearing loss
Genital tract Male infertility
Organ laterality Situs inversus totalis, polysplenia or asplenia
Cardiovascular system Complex congenital heart disease, vascular anomalies
Central nervous system Hydrocephalus (rare)
Diagnosis
Screening tests
–   Exhaled nasal nitric oxide: Low
–   Mucociliary clearance (nasal clearance of saccharin):  Tests for
ciliary function described on page 281 of Chapter 6.
Electron microscopy: It can detect structural abnormalities of respiratory
cilia in samples of nasal or airway mucosa. It is characterized by defects in

the outer or inner dynein arms of the cilia.
Genetic study: Shows mutation in PCD genes.
Treatment
No definite treatment.
Treat bronchiectasis.
Avoid cough suppressants because cough is the only intact mechanism for mucociliary clearance
in these patients.
Suppurative Pneumonias
Q. Write short essay on suppurative pneumonias and necrotizing
pneumonias.
Suppurative pneumonia, aspiration pneumonia and pulmonary abscess are
conditions which have overlap in their etiology and clinical features.
Suppurative pneumonia is a type of pneumonic consolidation characterized
by destruction of the lung parenchyma by the inflammatory process. Though
histologically there is formation of micro-abscess, the term ‘lung/pulmonary
abscess’ is usually used for lesions having a large localized collection of pus,
or a cavity lined by chronic inflammatory tissue. The etiological factors are
same for both suppurative pneumonia and lung/pulmonary abscess.
Lung AbscessQ. Define lung abscess. Describe the etiology, clinical features,
investigations, diagnosis, complications and management of lung
abscess.
Definition: Lung (pulmonary) abscess is defined as a severe, local
suppurative process within the lung associated with cavity formation. It is
characterized by necrotic area of lung parenchyma containing pus
accompanied by the destruction of lung tissue.
Necrotizing pneumonia: Often used to describe similar pathologic process
with multiple small (<2 cm) cavities in contiguous are as of the lung.
Classification
Duration of symptoms prior to diagnosis: acute < 1 month, and chronic >
1 month
Primary or secondary.

Table 6.51: Causes of lung abscess.
A. INFECTIOUS CAUSES
1. Bacteria
Usual:  Mouth flora anaerobes, most frequently isolated anaerobes: Peptostreptococcus,
Fusobacterium nucleatum, Prevotella melaninogenica
Less common:  Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pyogenes, Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
Klebsiella pneumoniae, Streptococcus pneumoniae, gram-negative bacilli, such as E. coli,
Hemophilus influenzae type B, Legionella, Nocardia asteroides. Mixed infections occur
when lung abscess develops due inhalation of foreign material
Mycobacteria:  M. tuberculosis, M. avium complex, M. kansasii, other mycobacteria
2. Fungi:  Aspergillus spp., Histoplasma capsulatum, Pneumocystis Jirovecii, Coccidioides
immitis, Blastocystis hominis, Cryptococcus
3. Parasites:  Entamoeba histolytica, Paragonimus westermani, Strongyloides stercoralis
(postobstructive)
B. NONINFECTIOUS CAUSES
1. Neoplasms:  Primary lung cancer, metastatic carcinoma, lymphoma
2. Pulmonary infarction:  Due to bland embolus (may be secondarily infected in <5%)
3. Septic embolism:  Tricuspid endocarditis due to S. aureus  and others (typically with positive
blood cultures), jugular venous septic phlebitis due to Fusobacterium necrophorum
(Lemierre syndrome)
4. Vasculitis: Wegener’s granulomatosis, rheumatoid lung nodule
5. Developmental:  Pulmonary sequestration
6. Airway disease: Bullae, blebs, or cystic bronchiectasis (usually thin-walled)
7. Other: Sarcoidosis, transdiaphragmatic bowel herniation giving appearance of cavity with air
fluid level
Etiology (Table 6.51)
Infectious causes: Any pathogen can produce lung abscess
Noninfectious causes.
Pathogenesis
Lung abscess may be primary or secondary.
A. Secondary lung abscess: Develops as a complication of several
conditions.
Complication of necrotizing pneumonia: The microbes usually
associated are: S. aureus, K. pneumoniae , and the serotype type 3
Pneumococcus.
Pulmonary tuberculosis: Important cause of lung abscess
Septic embolism: The source of embolus may be from

thrombophlebitis in any part of the systemic venous circulation or from
the vegetations of infective bacterial endocarditis on the right side of
the heart. The embolus may be trapped in the lung causing multiple
pyemic abscesses.Bronchial obstruction: By a bronchial cancer (primary or secondary)
or foreign body (postobstructive pneumonia) → secondary infection.
Miscellaneous:
–   Direct penetrating trauma to the lungs
–   Spread of infections from a neighboring organs (e.g. suppuration in
the esophagus, spine, subphrenic space, or pleural cavity
–   Spread from an amebic liver abscess
–   Secondary infection of cavitary malignancy, pulmonary infarct.
B. Primary cryptogenic lung abscesses
This type of lung abscess has no apparent cause and most of them develop
as consequence of aspiration of infected material . About 80% of lung
abscess is primary (50% of these associated with putrid sputum). Bacteria
responsible are usually the mixed anaerobes found in the oropharynx or
nasopharynx (aspiration abscess). Predominant organisms found in
aspiration abscess include anerobic organisms, streptococci and H.
influenzae. Pre-existing sources of infection for aspiration are sinusitis,
dental sepsis, gingivitis, periodontal infection, etc.Aspiration of infective material: Depression of cough reflex favors
aspiration from infected nasal sinuses or tonsils or periodontitis
gingivitis. It may occur during alcoholic stupor, general anesthesia,
sleep, epilepsy, coma, head injury or neurological disease causing loss
of consciousness.Aspiration of gastric contents: Occurs in achalasia cardia, carcinoma
of esophagus, hiatus hernia and gastroesophageal reflux disease
(chemical pneumonitis—Mendelson’s syndrome).
Features of aspiration abscess:Site and number: Abscess due to aspiration is more common on the
right lung (because of the more vertical right main bronchus) and are
most often single.
Segment involved: Aspiration abscess cavities occur in those
bronchopulmonary segments that are most dependent at the time of

aspiration.
–   Aspiration in supine position → produces abscess in posterior
segment of the upper lobes or superior segments of the lower lobes.
–   Aspiration in the upright position → produces abscess in the basilar
segments (bilateral).
About 1/3 of patients develop empyema due to direct extension.
Amebic lung abscess typically occurs in right lower lobe due to direct
extension of liver abscess through the diaphragm.
Clinical Features
Q. Write short essay on diagnosis of acute lung abscess.
Lung abscess may present either as an acute (symptoms less than 1 month) or
chronic (symptoms more than 1 month).
Acute:
–   Majority present acutely with dry cough, high-grade fever, chills,
rigors, and pleuritic chest pain.
–   After a few days, when the abscess ruptures into a patent bronchus, the
patient suddenly starts expectorating large quantities large amounts of
foul-smelling purulent or sanguineous sputum. The sputum may
often blood-tinged and expectoration varies with posture
Chronic: Lung abscess secondary to aspiration often presents as chronic,
insidious in onset with low-grade fever, malaise, weight loss, anorexia and
a deep-seated chest pain/ discomfort.
Physical findings
General examination: Anemia, fever, clubbing of the fingers and toes
(may develop rapidly), halitosis and oronasal sepsis.
Respiratory system examination
Early stages: May be normal
Later:
–   Signs of consolidation: Dullness of percussion, increased vocal
fremitus and vocal resonance, bronchial breathing, crepitations and
pleural rub.
–   Signs of cavitation: Once the abscess opens into a bronchus, signs of

cavitation like cavernous or amphoric bronchial breathing and coarse
post-tussive crepitations are heard on auscultation.
Investigations
Blood: Normocytic anemia and/or raised inflammatory markers
(ESR/CRP), leukocytosis and raised ESR.
Sputum:
–   Gram’s stain, Ziehl-Neelsen staining for acid-fast bacilli
–   Culture and sensitivity: For aerobic and anaerobic
–   Cytological examination: For malignant cells.
Chest radiograph (Fig. 6.26): Reveals radiolucency in an opaque area of
consolidation. The wall of the abscess cavity completely surrounds the
radiolucent area. An air-fluid level may be seen in the abscess cavity.
CT scan of thorax: Shows lung abscess
Bronchoscopy: Indicated (i) to exclude malignancy, (ii) to obtain
specimens for studies and (iii) for removal of secretions.
Fig. 6.26:  Chest X-ray shows lung abscess in right lower zone.

Complications (Table 6.52)
Q. Write short essay on management of acute lung abscess/
management of lung abscess.
Table 6.52: Complications of lung abscess.
Extension of the infection into the pleural cavity: Leading to
empyema/pneumothorax/pyopneumothorax/bronchopleural fistula/pleural
effusion/pleurocutaneous fistula
Hemorrhage into the abscess cavity
Hemoptysis
Septic emboli may cause metastatic brain abscesses or meningitis
Secondary amyloidosis (type AA)
Aspergilloma
Residual fibrosis and bronchiectasis
Treatment
Postural drainage  (refer bronchiectasis) and chest physiotherapy.
Antibiotic therapy: Choice of drug depends on culture and sensitivity result. Broad guidelines
include:
–   Aspiration abscess: Antibiotic therapy is similar to that of aspiration pneumonia.
–   Oral treatment:  Majority respond to oral treatment with ampicillin 500 mg four times daily or
cotrimoxazole 960 mg twice daily or clindamycin 300 mg thrice daily.
–   Anaerobic bacterial infection , e.g. patients with foul smelling sputum, oral metronidazole
400 mg 8 hourly should be combined with the above oral treatment. It should not be used
alone.
–   Parenteral antibiotic therapy:  Required in seriously ill patients and consists of Beta-
lactamase inhibitor (e.g. ampicillin-sulbactam 3 g intravenously [IV] every six hours) or a
carbapenem (e.g. imipenem, meropenem) with clindamycin and metronidazole.Duration of antibiotic therapy:  Usually given for 4–6 weeks. Antibiotic treatment should be
continued until the chest radiograph has shown either the resolution of lung abscess or the
presence of a small stable lesion. There is a risk of relapse with shorter antibiotic regimen.
Large lung abscess:  Aspiration and placement of pigtail catheters may be useful.
Resectional surgery:  Indicated in few in cases. These include:
–   Massive hemoptysis.
–   Lung abscess associated with symptomatic bronchiectasis.
–   Lung abscess associated with localized malignancy.
–   Persistent lung abscess cavity.
The surgical procedure is either lobectomy or pneumonectomy. Consider
lobectomy/pneumonectomy with large cavities (> 8 cm), resistant organisms like Pseudomonas,
obstructing neoplasm or massive hemorrhage.
Cystic Fibrosis

Q. Write short note on complications of cystic fibrosis.
Cystic fibrosis is a fatal multisystem genetic disorder because of abnormal
ion transport function causing inability to adequately hydrate mucus.
Genetics and Pathogenesis
It is transmitted as an autosomal recessive disorder and characterized by
mutation in a gene on the long arm of chromosome 7. This gene codes for a
chloride channel known as cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance
regulator (CFTR ). This influences salt and water movement across epithelial
cell membranes.
CFTR protein:Normally present in epithelia and functions as cAMP regulated chloride
ion channel and as inhibitor of Na+ channels.
Mutation in CFTR gene causes intracellular degradation of CFTR. Thus,
epithelial membranes are unable to secrete chloride ion in response to
cAMP mediated signals.
Types of epithelia affected:
Volume absorbing epithelia: Airways and distal intestinal epithelium.
–   In cystic fibrosis, Na+ absorption increased and chloride ion
secretion is decreased. This leads to reduced volume of periciliary
fluid (with relative dehydration of the airway epithelium), thickening
of mucus, adhesion and failure to clear mucus from the airway lumen.
Mucus stasis and mucus hypoxia predispose to chronic bacterial
infection (favors Pseudomonas growth) and ciliary dysfunction. It can
lead to bronchiectasis.Salt absorbing epithelia: In the sweat duct epithelium, CF is associated
with increased sodium and chloride content in sweat. Aquagenic wrinkling
of the palms (wrinkling and nodules) that develop after several minutes of
immersion in water is quite characteristic.Volume secretary epithelia: Epithelium of proximal intestine and
pancreas
–   Pancreas: Failure of Cl-HCO3 exchanger to secrete Na+, HCO3 and
water → enzymes retained → steatorrhea, azotorrhea and pancreatic
destruction

–   Intestine: Reduced bicarbonate secretion → low pH in duodenum →
thick intestinal mucus → predisposition to obstruction.
–   Hepatobiliary system: Retention of biliary secretion, focal biliary
cirrhosis, bile duct proliferation, chronic cholecystitis, cholelithiasis.
Clinical Features
Most patients present in infancy. Earliest presentation is meconium ileus.
Pancreatic and intestinal manifestations occur early.
Pulmonary manifestations occur late. After the neonatal period, maximum
morbidity and mortality is due to pulmonary disease.
Respiratory tract
Upper respiratory tract: Chronic sinusitis, rhinorrhea and nasal polyps
Lower respiratory tract
–   Earliest functional abnormality is small airways disease and earliest
symptom is cough. Final expression is bronchiectasis. Earliest and
most severe changes in right upper lobe.
–   Persistent cough → viscous, purulent sputum. Intermittent
exacerbations → increased cough, increased sputum volume,
decrements in pulmonary function, weight loss. As exacerbations
become more frequent, lung function deteriorates → eventually,
respiratory failure.
–   Pathogens: In newly diagnosed patients include H. influenzae and S.
aureus and in established diseases Pseudomonas aeruginosa  (mucoid
form).
–   Chest X-ray: Earliest manifestation is hyperinflation later
bronchiectatic changes.
–   Pulmonary function tests: Obstructive pattern with partial
bronchodilator response.
–   Complications: Pneumothorax, hemoptysis, clubbing, respiratory
failure, corpulmonale.
Gastrointestinal tractMost common is exocrine pancreatic insufficiency: Steatorrhea,
azotorrhea → consequent malnutrition. Recognized only when secretion
of amylase and lipase falls below 90%.

Endocrine pancreatic insufficiency occurs in 10% much later.
Others: Intestinal obstruction, appendicitis, recurring acute or chronic
pancreatitis.
Increased incidence of GI malignancy.
Genitourinary tract
Late onset of puberty in both males and females.
95% azoospermic, 20% women infertile, 90% completed pregnancies
produce viable infants; breastfeeding normal.
Retardation of bone age, heat stroke.
Diagnosis
One or more characteristic clinical features + abnormal sweat chloride
ions or nasal bioelectrical response (nasal TEPD-trans-epithelial potential
difference). TEPD is the voltage across an epithelium, and is the sum of
the membrane potentials for the outer and inner cell membranes. This test
measures the salt (sodium and chloride) transport in and out of the cells in
the nose in response to different salt solutions. The way nasal cells
respond to the changing salt solutions can be used to make a diagnosis of
CF.Other disorders raised sweat chloride ions: Ectodermal dysplasia,
glycogen storage disorders, adrenal sufficiency, mucopolysaccharidoses,
acute respiratory disorders (group, epiglottitis, and viral pneumonias),
chronic respiratory disorders (Alfa 1 antitrypsin deficiency,
bronchopulmonary dysplasia).Pilocarpine iontophoresis
Sweat chloride ions >70 mEq/L distinguishing feature
Nasal TEPD: Increased and on amiloride application → loss of this
potential difference and with β-agonist → no response.
DNA testing (for mutation) not useful because >1000 mutations exist.
Treatment
Lung disease
–   Clear secretions: By breathing exercises, flutter valves, chest percussion, and recombinant
human DNAse.
–   Infection: Long courses of culture and sensitivity guided antibiotic therapy; higher doses
required; oral/IV/aerosolized.

–   Inhaled β-agonists/anticholinergics: Short-term benefit. O 2 and medical management are
temporary measures.
–   Long-term high dose NSAID (some patients).
–   The only effective therapy for respiratory failure in CF: Lung transplantation.
Gastrointestinal
–   Pancreatic enzyme replacement (microsphere formulation).
–   Replacement of fat-soluble vitamins.
–   Treatment of acute obstruction: Enema of hypertonic radio-contrast material
(megalodiatrizoate).Reproductive:  Assisted reproductive technology.
PLEURAL EFFUSION
Normal Composition of Pleural Fluid (Table 6.53)
Q. Discuss the causes/etiology, clinical features, investigations,
radiological findings, diagnosis, pleural fluid analysis, complications
and management/treatment of pleural effusion.
Definitions
Pleural effusion: Excessive accumulation of serous fluid within the
pleural cavity/space (between parietal pleura and visceral pleura). It can be
detected on X-ray when ≥300 mL of fluid is accumulated and clinically,
when a minimum of 500 mL is present.Empyema: Accumulation of purulent fluid (frank pus) within the pleural
cavity/space.
Hydrothorax: Passive transudation of fluid into the pleural cavity. It
occurs in congestive heart failure, nephrotic syndrome, cirrhosis of liver,
severe malnutrition, etc.Hemothorax: Accumulation of blood within the pleural cavity/space.
Chylothorax: Accumulation of chyle within the pleural cavity/space.
Table 6.53: Normal composition of pleural fluid.
Feature Normal value
Volume 0.1–0.2 mL/kg
Cells 1000–5000/mm³
Mesothelial cells 3–70%
Monocytes 30–70%

Lymphocytes 2–30%
Granulocytes ~ 10%
Eosinophils 0 %
Protein 1–2 gm/dL
Albumin 50–70%
Glucose ~plasma level
LDH <50% plasma level
Mechanism of Pleural Effusions
Increased hydrostatic pressure (e.g. left ventricular failure)
Decreased oncotic pressure in microcirculation (e.g. hypoalbuminemia)
Decrease in pleural pressure (e.g. atelectasis)
Increased permeability of microcirculation (e.g. pneumonia)
Impaired lymphatic drainage from pleural space (e.g. malignancy)
Movement of fluid from abdomen to pleural space (e.g. cirrhosis.)
Box 6.10: Causes of left-sided pleural effusion.
Pancreatitis
Pericardial inflammation
Rupture of esophagus
Left-sided subdiaphragmatic abscess
Thoracic duct involvement above D 3 level
Classification and Causes (Table 6.54)
Q. Write short essay/note on:
Causes of pleural effusion
Causes and diagnosis of exudative pleural effusion
Causes of transudative pleural effusion.
Q. Write short essay/note on causes of left-sided pleural effusion.
Causes of left-sided pleural effusion is listed in Box 6.10.
Table 6.54: Classification and causes of pleural effusion.
Types of effusion Causes
Transudative effusion Cardiac failure
Hypoproteinemia (e.g. nephrotic
syndrome, cirrhosis of liver, severeHypothyroidism
Meigs’ syndrome (benign
ovarian tumors with

malnutrition)
Constrictive pericarditisascites and pleural
effusion)
Peritoneal dialysis
Exudative effusion Tuberculosis
Bacterial pneumonia
Malignancy
Pulmonary infarction
Autoimmune diseases (e.g.
rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus
erythematosus)
Acute pancreatitis
Post-myocardial infarction
syndrome (Dressler’s syndrome)Drug-induced effusion
Benign asbestos-related
effusion
Intra-abdominal abscess
Meigs’ syndrome (can be
transudative as well)
Ruptured amebic liver
abscess, chylous pleural
effusionAcute rheumatic fever
Clinical Features
Symptoms (pain on inspiration and coughing) and signs of pleurisy (a
pleural rub): They often precede the development of a pleural effusion.
Breathlessness: It may be the only symptom and its severity depends on
the size and rate of accumulation of fluid.
Physical Findings in the Chest
Q. Write short essay/note on signs of pleural effusion.
Inspection: Tachypnea. Shift of trachea to opposite side.
Palpation:
–   Shift of trachea and mediastinum (shift of apex beat) to the opposite
side
–   Reduced chest movements on the affected side, bulging of the
intercostal spaces, fullness of the affected chest and markedly reduced
vocal fremitus.
–   Measurements: Diminished chest expansion, increase in the size of
the affected hemithorax and an increase in spinoscapular distance.Percussion:
–   Stony dullness over the fluid. Upper level of the dullness is highest
laterally in the axilla, and is lower anteriorly and posteriorly (Ellis-S-
Shaped curve).
–   Small effusions: When there is a small effusion, it may be detected as
follows:

♦   Left sided small pleural effusion may be detected only by the
obliteration of Traube’s space on percussion.
♦   Right sided small effusion may be detectable only by tidal
percussion.
–   Moderate to large effusions: Percussion reveals a triangular area of
dullness or impaired note over the back of chest on the contralateral
side or opposite side of the effusion. It may be due to shift of the
posterior mediastinum to the opposite side by effusion.
Causes of pleural effusion without tracheal mediastinal shift are listed in Box
6.11.Auscultation
–   Breath sounds: Intensity is markedly diminished or absent over the
fluid
–   Vocal resonance: Markedly diminished over the fluid
–   Bronchial breathing or crackles the level of a pleural effusion
–   Occasional findings: Egophony and enhanced breath sounds can often
be appreciated at the superior border of the effusion because of
underlying atelectatic lung tissue.
Box 6.11: Causes of pleural effusion without trachea/mediastinal shift.
Minimal effusion
Loculated effusion
Bilateral effusion
Effusion with underlying collapse /fibrosis
Effusion with fixed mediastinum (malignancy/ fibrosis)
Q. Write short note on Grocco’s sign.
–   Grocco’s sign (Grocco’s triangle; paravertebral triangle of
dullness): It is a triangular area of paravertebral dullness on the side
opposite a pleural effusion. Boundaries of Grocco’s triangle are:
♦   Medial boundary: Midspinal line from the upper level of effusion
down to the level of the tenth thoracic vertebra.
♦   Lower boundary: A horizontal line of about 3–7 cm extending
laterally from the tenth thoracic vertebra, along the lower limit of
lung resonance.

♦   Lateral boundary: A curved line connecting the above two lines.
Investigations
Q. Write short note on radiological findings/X-ray features in pleural
effusion.
Radiological investigations
–   75 mL of pleural fluid: Subpulmonic space without spillover can
obliterate the posterior costophrenic sulcus.
–   Upright chest radiograph
♦   175 mL is required to obscure the lateral costophrenic sulcus.
♦   500 mL of fluid will obscure the diaphragmatic contour.
♦   1000 mL of effusion reaches the level of the fourth anterior rib.
Decubitus radiographs and CT scans: Less than 10 mL (even as little as
2 mL) can be identified
–   Small effusions are thinner than 1.5 cm, moderate effusions are 1.5 to
4.5 cm thick, and large effusions exceed 4.5 cm.
–   Effusions thicker than 1 cm are usually large enough for sampling by
thoracentesis, since at least 200 mL of liquid are already present.
–   A significant pleural effusion is large enough to produce a pleural fluid
strip >10 mm wide on lateral decubitus radiographic views.
Radiological features of pleural effusion in an erect chest film (Fig. 6.27)
are as follows:
–   Shift of mediastinum to the opposite side.
–   Obliteration of costophrenic angle.
–   Opacity: Dense uniform opacity in the lower and lateral part on the
involved side. Upper border of the opacity is concave upwards and is
highest laterally.
–   Interlobar effusion: Wider than normal interlobar fissure.
–   Encysted interlobar effusion: Round opacity resembling solitary
pulmonary nodule (phantom tumor).
Ultrasonography
–   More accurate than plain chest X-ray for detection of pleural effusion
and it can detect as little as 5 mL of effusion.
–   Interpretation

♦   Transudate versus exudate: A clear hypoechoic space favors
transudate and the presence of moving floating densities suggests an
exudate.
♦   Presence of septation favors an evolving empyema or resolving
hemothorax.
♦   Useful in differentiating loculated pleural effusion from pleural
tumor or pleural thickening.
♦   Useful for locating an effusion prior to aspiration and biopsy.
♦   Detection of solid pleural abnormalities may suggest pleural
malignancy. However a CT scanning is indicated where malignancy
is suspected.
Pleural aspiration and fluid analysis.
Fig. 6.27:  Chest X-ray shows left sided massive pleural effusion.
Pleural Fluid Analysis
Q. How will you differentiate transudative pleural effusions from
exudative pleural effusions?
Q. Write short essay/note on criteria for distinguishing pleural
transudate from exudate.

Q. Write short essay/note on pleural fluid analysis in a typical pleural
effusion.
Differentiation of transudative from exudative effusion (Table 6.55).
Box 6.12:  Light’s criteria for distinguishing pleural transudate from exudate.
Pleural fluid protein/serum protein >0.5
Pleural fluid LDH/serum LDH >0.6
Pleural fluid LDH more than two-thirds the normal upper limit for serum LDH levels
Interpretation of Pleural Fluid Parameters (Table 6.56)
Light’s criteria
Q. Write short essay/note on Light’s criteria for distinguishing pleural
transudate from exudate.
Table 6.55: Differentiation of transudative from exudative effusion.
Characteristics Transudative effusion Exudative effusion
Cause and mechanism Non-inflammatory process.
Ultrafiltrate of plasma, due to
increased hydrostatic pressure or
decreased serum oncotic
pressure with normal vascular
permeabilityInflammation process and is rich in
proteins due to increased vascular
permeability
Appearance Clear, serous Cloudy/purulent/hemorrhagic/chylous
Color Straw yellow Yellow to red
Specific gravity <1.018 >1.018
ProteinAbsolute value Low, <2 g/dL, mainly albumin High, >2 g/dL
Pleural fluid: serum
ratio<0.5 >0.5
Clot Absent Clots spontaneously because of high
fibrinogen
LeukocytesTotal leukocytes <1000/mm3>1000/mm3
Type of cells
Differential leukocytes>50% lymphocytes or
mononuclear cells and
mesothelial cells>50% lymphocytes (tuberculosis,
malignancy)
>50% polymorphs (acute
inflammation)Erythrocytes <500/mm3 Variable
Bacteria Absent Usually present

Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)
Absolute value <200 IU/L 200 IU/L
Pleural fluid LDH:
serum LDH ratio<0.6 >0.6
Glucose >60 mg/dL (usually same as in
blood)<60 mg/dL (variable)
Table 6.56: Interpretation of pleural fluid parameters.
Parameter Interpretation
Appearance of pleural fluid Putrid odor (anaerobic empyema), food particles
(esophageal rupture), bile stained
(chylothorax/biliary fistula), milky
(chylothorax/pseudo-chylothorax), anchovy
sauce-like fluid (ruptured amebic abscess)
Pleural fluid glucose concentrationLow glucose concentration (<60 mg/dL) Suggests empyema, malignancy or tuberculosis.
Very low glucose concentration (<15 mg/dL) Empyema, rheumatoid effusions
Pleural fluid eosinophilia (>10% of all cells) May be observed in resolving infections,
pneumothorax, hydropneumothorax, hemothorax
and asbestos-related pleural effusion, dantrolene,
bromocriptine, nitrofurantoin, paragonimiasis or
Churg-Strauss syndrome
Pleural fluid erythrocyte counts >100,000/mm3 Most often in malignancy or pulmonary
infarction/embolism, but may result from a
traumatic tap
Low pH of pleural fluid <7.2 Complicated parapneumonic effusion,
esophageal rupture, rheumatoid pleuritis,
tuberculous pleuritis, malignant pleural disease,
hemothorax, systemic acidosis, paragonimiasis,
lupus pleuritis, urinothorax
Raised pleural fluid amylase Pancreatic diseases and esophageal rupture.
However, routine amylase estimation is not
recommended unless the clinical features suggest
either of the two diseases
Pleural fluid antinuclear antibody titers or
rheumatoid factorNo diagnostic significance and is not indicated in
most cases
Mesothelial cells Absent: Tuberculosis
Markedly increased: Pulmonary embolismLight’s criteria (Box 6.12) are used to differentiate exudative from
transudative pleural effusion by measuring the lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH) and protein levels in the pleural fluid. Exudative pleural effusions

must meet at least one of the following criteria, whereas transudative
pleural effusions meet none.
Precautions:
–   Low specificity: These criteria are highly sensitive for exudative
effusions but have lower specificity (i.e. few transudative effusions
will be classified as exudative using these criteria).
In general Light’s criteria occasionally misidentify a transudative effusion
as an exudative effusion as in cardiac failure with diuretic therapy
Clinically if a patient should have a transudative effusion, but meets Light’s criteria for an
exudative effusion, measure serum-pleural fluid albumin gradient, or measure the serum-pleural
protein gradient (Roth’s criteria)
–   Serum-effusion albumin gradient of >1.2 g/dL-transudative
–   Serum-effusion protein gradient >3.1 g/dL-transudative.
Causes of Lymphocytic Pleural Effusion (Table 6.57)
Pleural biopsy is indicated in undiagnosed cases
Other investigations in pleural effusion
–   Pleural fluid tumor markers: Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA),
cancer antigen 125 (CA-125), cancer antigen15–3 (CA 15–3) and
cytokeratin 19 fragments (CYFRA). They are not used in routine
investigations of pleural effusion.
–   Blood examination: Total and differential leukocyte counts, ESR,
proteins, sugar, LDH, amylase, rheumatoid factor and antinuclear
factor.
–   Sputum examination: For tubercle bacilli and malignant cells.
–   Mantoux test
–   Repeat radiograph: When effusion is massive, a repeat radiograph
after removal of a large volume of fluid may reveal an underlying
parenchymal lesion.
–   Biopsy or fine-needle aspiration of scalene lymph nodes
–   Bronchoscopy and biopsy
–   Thoracoscopy and biopsy.
Table 6.57: Causes of lymphocytic pleural effusion.
Malignancy Long standing congestive cardiac failure

Primary lung cancers
Secondaries
Tuberculosis
LymphomaEffusion associated with rheumatoid arthritis
Chylothorax
Uremic pleuritis
Management of pleural effusionTreat the underlying cause  (e.g. heart failure, pneumonia, pulmonary embolism or subphrenic
abscess).
Therapeutic aspiration:  It may be necessary to relieve breathlessness/dyspnea. At one sitting not
>1 L should be removed because it is associated with a small risk of re-expansion pulmonary
edema. If there is rapid re-accumulation of fluid insertion of chest tube is necessary.
Drainage: If the fluid is purulent (empyema).
Pleurodesis:  For malignant effusion.
Approach to the Diagnosis of Pleural Effusions (Flowchart 6.5)
Re-expansion Pulmonary Edema
Q. Write short essay/note on re-expansion pulmonary edema.
It occurs in small number of patients when the lung undergo rapid
inflation of lung (e.g. evacuation of >1 L of air/fluid) after a prolonged
period of collapse (usually >3 days) from either pleural effusion or
pneumothorax.Edema usually involves the entire re-expanded lung. Occasionally, it may
involve a single lobe or the contralateral lung, or bilateral.
Mechanism:  Exact mechanism is not known. Following may be implicated
in its development.
Reactive oxygen species: Ventilation and reperfusion of a previously
collapsed lung may cause an inflammatory response, with generation of
reactive oxygen species and superoxide radicals, which leads to increased
capillary permeability.Increase pulmonary hydrostatic pressure: It may be due to increased
venous return.
Pressure-induced mechanical disruption  of alveolar capillaries.
Reduced levels of functional surfactant.
Increased pressure across the capillary-alveolar membrane due to
bronchial obstruction.
Alteration of lymphatic clearance.

Clinical Features
Onset: Symptoms usually develop within 24 hours (majority within 1–2
hours after lung re-expansion).
Symptoms: Chest discomfort, persistent severe cough, dyspnea and frothy
sputum.
Signs: Tachypnea, tachycardia and crackles on the affected side of the
lung.
Chest radiograph: Features of pulmonary edema.
Mortality rate is about 20%.
Treatment
Supportive treatment:  Most patients recover completely within 5–7 days with supportive
treatment (includes oxygen administration in mild cases to mechanical ventilation in severe cases).
Patient is advised to lie on unaffected side.
Others: Use of diuretics, bronchodilators, prostaglandin analogues (e.g. misoprostol), ibuprofen
and steroids is controversial.
Prevention of Reexpansion Pulmonary Edema
Restricting the drainage of pleural fluid to < 1 L.
Use of low negative pressure (< –20 cm H2O) during tube thoracostomy.
Large-volumes of fluid can be drained safely if pleural pressures are
monitored. If the patient complains of vague chest pressure during
thoracentesis, it suggests a sudden drop in intrapleural pressure, and the
thoracentesis should be stopped.
Flowchart 6.5:  Approach to the diagnosis of pleural effusions.

Subpulmonic Effusion
Q. Write short essay/note on subpulmonic effusion. How will you
diagnose it?
It is a small pleural effusion which is seen underneath the lung. Its
detection is extremely difficult.
–   Left-sided subpulmonic effusion may be show obliteration of Traube’s
semilunar space of tympany.
–   Right-sided subpulmonic effusion may be suspected with an abnormal
tidal percussion.
Chest radiograph
–   Posteroanterior view in the erect posture
♦   Mild elevation of hemidiaphragm.
♦   Lateral displacement and slight flattering of the dome of the
diaphragm.
♦   Wide density between the gastric air shadow and upper border of
the diaphragm in left-sided subpulmonic effusion.
–   Lateral decubitus view with the affected side down: Pleural fluid
layering out along the lateral chest wall.
Ultrasonography: Reveals subpulmonic effusion with more certainty.
Hemorrhagic Pleural Effusion
Q. Write short note on common causes of hemorrhagic pleural effusion.
Causes of hemorrhagic pleural effusion (Table 6.58)
Table 6.58: Causes of hemorrhagic pleural effusion.
Malignancy
Pulmonary infarction
Asbestos-related pleural effusionTuberculosis (very rare)
Post-cardiac injury effusion
Q. Write short note on hemothorax.
Causes of hemothorax
Trauma
Rupture of a blood vessel

Rupture of a tumor
Differentiation between hemorrhagic-effusion and hemothorax
Differentiation of hemothorax from hemorrhagic pleural effusions can be
done by performing a hematocrit on the pleural fluid.
If the pleural fluid hematocrit is >50% of the patient’s peripheral blood
hematocrit, it is considered to be diagnostic of a hemothorax.
Malignant Pleural Effusion
Q. Write short note on malignant pleural effusion.
Effusions secondary to metastatic disease is called malignant pleural effusion.
Causes
Malignant pleural effusions may be either due to a primary malignancy of
pleura (e.g. mesothelioma) or secondary invasion of pleura by primary
malignancy elsewhere in the body (more common). Most common
malignancy-associated effusions occur with cancer of lung (35%), breast
cancers (25%) and lymphomas (10%).Mechanism:
Local effects: Malignant effusion develops usually due to the local
effects of the tumor, e.g. lymphatic obstruction, bronchial obstruction
with pneumonia or atelectasis.Systemic effects of tumor can also produce effusion.
Causes of dyspnea in patients with malignancy (Table 6.59)
Characteristic features of malignant pleural effusion:
Effusion is usually unilateral, massive and often symptomatic.
Rapid re-accumulation of fluid after aspiration.
Pleural fluid
–   Often hemorrhagic, with a high erythrocyte count (>100,000/mm3).
–   Shows the characteristics of an exudates such as high protein content
(>3.0 g/dL), high LDH levels (>200 IU/L), low glucose levels (<60
mg/dL) and a total leukocyte count exceeding 1000/mm3.
–   Predominant cells are lymphocytes (>50%).
–   Cytological examination may show malignant cells.

Closed pleural biopsy: It may reveal malignant tumor (in about 40% of
cases).
Treatment
Asymptomatic effusions: Do not require any treatment.
Mildly symptomatic effusions: Treated by repeated aspirations.
Severely symptomatic and recurrent effusions: Treated by pleurodesis. This consists of instillation
of tetracycline hydrochloride or talcum powder (more effective) or inactivated Corynebacterium
parvum into the pleural cavity. It produces a severe inflammatory reaction in the pleura, followed
by extensive pleural adhesions. Other treatment modalities include thoracotomy with pleurectomy
or pleural abrasion.
Table 6.59: Causes of dyspnea in patients with malignancy.
Pleural effusion
Direct effects of a tumor on the lung
Airway obstruction
Chest wall invasion
Pericardial diseaseUnderlying lung disease
Pulmonary vascular disease (e.g. pulmonary
emboli)
Lymphangitis carcinomatosis
Radiation pneumonitis
Cardiac compromise
Parapneumonic Effusion (Synpneumonic Effusion and
Postpneumonic Effusion)
Q. Write short note on parapneumonic effusion (synpneumonic effusion
and postpneumonic effusion).
Parapneumonic effusion is a pleural effusion developing as complicating
pneumonia or lung abscess or bronchiectasis. Empyema refers to a grossly
purulent pleural effusion.
More frequently associated with bacterial pneumonias (especially gram-
negative and pneumococcal). Effusion in these cases is large and consists
of predominant polymorphonuclear leukocytes.Less frequent with viral pneumonias and this effusion is small and
predominant shows lymphocytes.
Clinical Presentation
Acute illness: Aerobic bacterial pneumonia with pleural effusion present
with an acute illness with fever, chest pain. sputum, and leukocytosis.
Subacute illness: Anaerobic infections present with a subacute illness

with weight loss, leukocytosis, mild anemia, and predisposing factor that
has resulted in aspiration pneumonia.
Categories of Parapneumonic Effusion (Table 6.60)
Investigations
Presence of pleural fluid can be demonstrated with a lateral decubitus
radiograph, computed tomography (CT) of the chest, or ultrasound.
Table 6.60: Parapneumonic pleural effusion and empyema: Light’s
classification and corresponding treatment.
Category Type Characteristics Treatment
1. Nonsignificant <1 cm thick on an ipsilateral
decubitus view.
Thoracocentesis not
requiredAntibiotic
2. Typical
parapneumonic>1 cm thick, glucose >40
mg/dL.
pH >7.20, negative Gram
stain and cultureAntibiotic + consider therapeutic
thoracentesis
3. Borderline
complicatedpH, 7–7.20 or LDH > 1000
Negative Gram stain and
cultureAntibiotic + pleural drainage
tube + consider fibrinolytics
4. Simple complicated pH < 7.0, positive Gram
stain or culture.
Not loculated, no pusAntibiotic + pleural drainage
tube + fibrinolytics
5. Complex complicated pH <7.0, positive Gram
stain or culture.
MultiloculatedAntibiotics + pleural drainage
tube + fibrinolytics + consider
VAT
6. Simple empyema Frank pus.
Single loculation or free
flowing fluidAntibiotics + pleural drainage
tube + fibrinolytics + consider
VAT
7. Complex empyema Frank pus. Multiple
loculations.
Often requires decorticationAntibiotics + pleural drainage
tube + fibrinolytics + VAT, +
other surgical procedures if VAT
fails
(LDH: lactate dehydrogenase; VAT: video-assisted thoracoscopy).
TreatmentWhen there is mild  parapneumonic effusion, patient may be observed  and a repeat tap is done if it
persists or increases.
If the free fluid separates the lung from the chest wall by >1 cm, a therapeutic thoracentesis
should be done.

Indications for more invasive procedure, i.e. intercostal tube drainage are as following:
–   Loculated pleural fluid
–   Pleural fluid pH <7.20
–   Pleural fluid glucose <3.3 mmol/L (<60 mg/dL)
–   Positive Gram stain or culture of the pleural fluid
–   Presence of gross pus in the pleural space.If there is recurrence after the initial therapeutic thoracentesis and if any of above factors is
present, a repeat thoracentesis should be done.
If the fluid cannot be completely removed with the therapeutic thoracentesis, insert a chest tube
and instill a fibrinolytic agent (e.g. tissue plasminogen activator 10 mg) and deoxyribonuclease (5
mg) or performing a thoracoscopy and release the adhesions.Intrapleural thrombolytic agents:  Most effective in the early fibrinolytic stage (e.g.
streptokinase, streptodornase, urokinase, and tPA).
–   Indications: ( 1) Occluded small-bore catheter, (2) multiloculated pleural space and (3) as a
trial before committing the patient to surgery.
Decortication  is performed when the above measures are not effective.
Treatment of underlying cause.
Chylous Pleural Effusion (Chylothorax)
Q. Write short note on chylous pleural effusion (chylothorax)/causes of
milky pleural fluid.
Definition: It is the accumulation of chyle in the pleural cavity.
Mechanism:  A chylothorax results from leakage of chyle from the
thoracic duct into the pleural space.
Causes: Most common cause is trauma (most frequently during thoracic
surgery). It may also result from lymphomas, lung cancer with mediastinal
spread, mediastinal fibrosis and tumors.
Presentation: Dyspnea and a large pleural effusion on chest X-ray.
Pleural fluid findings:
–   Appears milky and shows the characteristics of exudates (Fig. 6.28).
–   Total triglyceride level is >110 mg/dL. The cholesterol level is very
low. Sudan III staining shows fat globules.
–   Occasionally empyema can be so turbid to be confused with chyle.
Centrifugation of fluid leaves a clear supernatant fluid in empyema
compared to persistence of milky appearance in chylous effusion. In
starved patients chyle may not be milky in appearance.
If the trauma is not the cause of chylothorax, a contrast-enhanced CT scan
of mediastinal and a lymphangiogram should be performed.

Fig. 6.28: Gross appearance of pleural aspirate in chylorthorax.
Treatment
Treatment of choice is insertion of a chest tube and use of octreotide. Long-term tube drainage may
result in malnutrition and immune deficiency. Therefore, if patient does not respond, a pleura-
peritoneal shunt may be tried. Alternatively, ligation of the thoracic duct and percutaneous
transabdominal thoracic duct blockage may be useful.
Pseudochylous Pleural Effusion (Pseudochylothorax)
Q. Write short essay/note on pseudochylous pleural effusion
(pseudochylothorax).
Rare condition in which the pleural fluid appearance is similar to that of
chylous effusion (milky).
Causes: Long standing benign pleural effusion (e.g. tuberculous effusion,
rheumatoid effusion, etc.).
Pleural fluid: Appears milky. Cholesterol level of the fluid is very high
(>200 mg/dL) which is responsible for the milky appearance of fluid.
Cholesterol crystals can be demonstrated and Sudan III staining does not
show fat globules.Differences between pseudochylous thorax and chylothorax (Table
6.61).
Pleural Effusions in HIV Infection
A pleural effusion is seen in 7–27% of patients with HIV

Leading causes are: Kaposi sarcoma, parapneumonic effusion,
tuberculosis, lymphoma, Pneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia.
Table 6.61: Differences between pseudochylous thorax and chylothorax.
Feature Pseudochylothorax Chylothorax
Triglycerides <0.56 mol/L (50 mg/dL) >1.24 mmol/L (110 mg/dL)
Cholesterol >5.18 mmol/L (200 mg/dL) <5.18 mmol/L (200 mg/dL)
Cholesterol crystals Often present Absent
Chylomicrons Absent Present
Etiology Tuberculosis, rheumatoid
arthritis, poorly treated
empyemaNeoplasm (lymphoma, metastatic
carcinoma), trauma (operative,
penetrating injuries), miscellaneous
(tuberculosis, sarcoidosis, cirrhosis,
lymphangioleiomyomatosis,
obstruction of central veins,
amyloidosis)
Tuberculous pleural effusion (refer pages 299-300)
Empyema ThoracisQ. Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations, complications
and management of empyema thoracis.
Definition
Empyema thoracis is defined as collection of pus in the pleural
space/cavity. It may be as thin as serous fluid or so thick that it is
impossible to aspirate, even with a wide-bore needle. Microscopically, it
shows numerous neutrophil leukocytes.It usually involves whole pleural space/cavity and unilateral. If only a part
of the pleural space is involved, it is termed encysted or loculated
empyema.
Etiology
Spread of infection from neighboring structures:  For example,
bacterial pneumonias, bronchiectasis, lung abscess, rupture of subphrenic
abscess through the diaphragm, esophageal perforation, and infection of
hemothorax following trauma or surgery.From distant source: For example, bacteremia.

Direct infection from external source: For example, penetrating chest
injury, chest tube placement, thoracic surgery.
Common organisms:  Pneumococcus, Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, Pseudomonas, M.
tuberculosis, H. influenzae  and anaerobes.
Clinical Features (Table 6.62)
Q. Write short answer on:
Clinical features of empyema
Physical sign of right-sided empyema.
Investigations
Blood: Polymorphonuclear leukocytosis, high CRP (C reactive protein).
Chest X-ray:  Findings may be similar to those of pleural effusion.
However, pleural adhesions may produce a ‘D’-shaped shadow against the
inside of the chest wall (Fig. 6.29). If air is present along with pus
(pyopneumothorax), a horizontal ‘fluid level’ mark is detected at the
air/liquid interface.Ultrasound: It shows the position of the fluid, the extent of pleural
thickening and whether fluid is collected as a single locule or
multiloculated.CT: It gives information regarding the pleura, underlying lung
parenchyma and patency of the major bronchi. Ultrasound or CT is used to
detect the optimal site for aspiration.Aspiration of empyema (Table 6.63)
Table 6.62: Clinical features of empyema.
Systemic features
High-grade, remittent fever
Chills, rigors, sweating, malaise and weight loss
Respiratory symptoms
Pleuritic chest pain, breathlessness and dry cough. Copious, purulent sputum develops when the
empyema ruptures into a bronchus (bronchopleural fistula)
Physical examination
Clinical signs of pleural effusion PLUS intercostals tenderness, digital clubbing and edema of the
chest wall

Fig. 6.29:  Chest X-ray of loculated effusion—D sign.
Table 6.63: Characteristic features of aspirated pus from empyema.
Consistency Vary from very thin to very thick
Microscopy Numerous polymorphonuclear leukocytes
Gram stain May show positive organism
Culture and sensitivity To identify the causative organism
Tubercle bacilli May be found, if it is due to M. tuberculosis
Complications (Table 6.64):
Table 6.64: Complications of empyema.
Empyema necessitans  is the formation of a
subcutaneous abscess or sinus that develops
when the pus track through the chest wallPleural fibrosis
Secondary amyloidosis
Metastatic brain abscess.
Bronchopleural fistula and
pyopneumothorax due to rupture of pus into
a bronchus

Q. Write short essay/note on the management on non-tuberculous
empyema.
Management of Empyema Thoracis
A. Non-tuberculous empyema
Acute
Antibiotics: It should be given depending on the culture and sensitivity report.
Drainage of pus:  The pus in the pleural cavity should be drained.
–   Aspiration:  In early and small empyema with thin fluid, daily aspiration of the fluid with a
wide-bore needle is attempted.
–   Tube-drainage is necessary in most cases.
–   Limited thoracotomy:  If tube drainage fails or pus is thick or loculated limited thoracotomy is
performed. It involves resection of a small segment of the rib, clearing the empyema cavity
break down any adhesions and introducing a wide-bore tube (for prolonged drainage).
–   Intrapleural administration of fibrinolytic agents (e.g. streptokinase) is of no benefit.
Chronic
Surgery:
–   Surgical ‘decortication’ of the lung may be necessary when there is gross thickening of the
visceral pleura which preventing re-expansion of the lung in a chronic empyema. It involves
stripping of the whole of the grossly thickened visceral pleura in order to allow the lung to re-
expand.
–   Surgery is also required if a bronchopleural fistula develops.
B. Tuberculous empyema
–   Antituberculous chemotherapy
–   Repeated aspiration:  Through a wide-bore needle or tube-drainage.
–   Rarely, surgical treatment may be required.
PNEUMOTHORAX
Q. Describe the types, etiology, clinical features, investigations and
management of pneumothorax.
Q. Describe etiology, clinical features, investigations and treatment of
tension pneumothorax.
Definition: Presence of air/gas in the pleural cavity/space is known as
pneumothorax.
Pneumothorax may be localized (if there is a prior disease causing
adhesion of visceral pleura to parietal pleura), or generalized (if there are
no pleural adhesions).
Flowchart 6.6: Classification of pneumothorax.

Classification  (Flowchart 6.6)
Etiology
Spontaneous pneumothorax
Primary (simple) spontaneous pneumothorax:  Occurs in the absence
(no evidence) of overt lung disease.
–   Occurs in individual without any underlying lung disease or any
trauma.
–   Age: Commonly occurs between the age group of 20–40 years.
–   Risk factors: Smoking, tall stature and the presence of apical
subpleural blebs, familial.
–   About 50% of patients will have a recurrence. Both lungs are affected
with equal frequency
Secondary spontaneous pneumothorax occurs in the presence of an
underlying lung disease.
–   Causes: Most common causes are COPD (chronic bronchitis and
emphysema) and cavitary active pulmonary tuberculosis. It occurs
due to rupture of emphysematous bullae and subpleural tuberculosis
focus. Other causes include bronchial asthma, suppurative diseases of
lung and pleura, cystic fibrosis, Pneumocystis jirovecii  pneumonia.
Traumatic pneumothorax results from penetrating or non-penetrating
injuries to the chestIatrogenic: Following diagnostic or therapeutic interventions. These
include transthoracic and transbronchial needle aspiration/biopsy (24%),
subclavian vessel puncture (22%), thoracocentesis (22%), pleural biopsy

(8%) and mechanical ventilation (7%).
Non-iatrogenic: Blunt and penetrating injuries to the chest wall, bronchi,
lung or esophagus.
Clinical Features
Q. Write a short note on clinical features of acute pneumothorax.
A small pneumothorax may be asymptomatic without any abnormal
physical signs in the chest.
Most common symptoms are sudden onset unilateral pleuritic chest
pain and breathlessness (dyspnea).
Severity depends on: (1) extent of lung collapse and (2) amount of pre-
existing lung disease.
Tension pneumothorax: Distressed with rapid labored respiration,
cyanosis, marked tachycardia and profuse diaphoresis.
Physical Signs
General examination: Patient will be cyanosed, tachypneic, peripheral
pulses may be feeble and hypotension may be present.
Respiratory system
Inspection and palpation
–   Accessory muscles of respiration in action , trachea and mediastinal
(apex beat) shift to the opposite side.
–   On the affected side: Fullness of the chest, diminished chest
movements, increase in the size and diminished expansion of the
hemithorax, increased spinoscapular distance and markedly diminished
vocal fremitus. Subcutaneous emphysema may be present.Percussion: Hyper-resonant note over the affected hemithorax.
Auscultation
–   On the affected side:  Markedly diminished/absent of breath sounds
and vocal resonance, absence of adventitious sounds. Open
pneumothorax with a bronchopleural fistula, there may be amphoric
bronchial breathing.
Investigations
Radiological findings on chest radiograph (Fig. 6.30): Standard erect chest

X-ray in inspiration is recommended for the initial diagnosis of
pneumothorax rather than expiratory films. Following features are observed:
Sharply defined edge of the deflated lung.
Complete translucency and absence of bronchovascular markings (no lung
markings) in the area between the edge of the lung and chest wall. A clear
visceral pleural line/collapsed lung margin  can be seen.
Mediastinal shift/displacement to the opposite side.
It may also reveal the presence or absence of pleural fluid, complicating
empyema or underlying lung lesion. CT is used in difficult cases.
CT scanning is done if accurate size estimates are required.
Recommended only in difficult cases such as patients in whom the lungs
are obscured by overlying surgical emphysema.
To differentiate a pneumothorax from suspected bulla in complex cystic
lung disease.
USG signs of pneumothorax: (1) loss of lung sliding, (2) loss of comet
tails, (3) loss of seashore sign (M mode) and (4) stratosphere sign or bar code
sign (M mode).


Fig. 6.30:  Chest X-ray shows right sided pneumothorax.
Types of Spontaneous Pneumothorax (Figs. 6.31A to C)
There are three types namely: (1) closed spontaneous pneumothorax, (2) open
spontaneous pneumothorax and (3) tension (valvular) pneumothorax.
Differences between closed, open and tension pneumothorax are listed in
Table 6.65.
Closed Spontaneous Pneumothorax
Pneumothorax where the communication between pleura space and the lung
seals off and does not re-open. The mean pleural pressure remains negative
and air can neither enter nor leave the pleural cavity/space. The trapped air is
slowly and spontaneously re-absorbed and the lung re-expands completely in
2–4 weeks. Infection of the pleural cavity is uncommon.
Clinical features: Trivial breathlessness that gradually abates over a few
days.
Open Spontaneous PneumothoraxPneumothorax where the communication between bronchus and pleura
does not seal off and remains patent and air continues to pass freely
between the bronchial tree and pleural space. It results in a bronchopleural
fistula.Free flow of air through the bronchopleural fistula results in intrapleural
pressure (normally negative) same as that of atmospheric pressure
throughout the respiratory cycle. This prevents the re-expansion of the
collapsed lung. Development of bronchopleural fistula facilitates the
spread of infection into the pleural space causing empyema.Open pneumothorax usually develops secondary to rupture of an
emphysematous bulla, a small pleural bleb, a tuberculous cavity or a lung
abscess into the pleural cavity/space.
Clinical features: Present with breathlessness that does not improve. If
there is infection of pleural space, fever and systemic features are
observed. The physical signs are those of hydropneumothorax (air and
fluid in the pleural space).
Table 6.65: Differences between closed, open and tension pneumothorax.

Closed pneumothorax Open pneumothorax Tension pneumothorax
The pleural tear is sealed The pleural tear is open The pleural tear act as a ball and valve
mechanism
The pleural cavity pressure
is < the atmospheric pressureThe pleural cavity pressure
is = the atmospheric
pressureThe pleural cavity pressure is more
than the atmospheric pressure
Figs. 6.31A to C: Types of spontaneous pneumothorax. (A) Closed type; (B) Open type; (C) Tension
(valvular) type.
Tension (Valvular) Pneumothorax
Q. Write short essay/note on clinical features and signs of tension
pneumothorax.
In tension pneumothorax, the pressure in the pleural space is positive
throughout the respiratory cycle.
Pneumothorax where communication between pleura and lung persists.
This is due to formation of a valvular mechanism (one way valve through)
in which air is sucked into the pleural space during inspiration (coughing,
sneezing and straining) but not expelled during expiration. Large quantity
of air gets ‘trapped’ in the pleural space/cavity and raises the intrapleural
pressure much higher than the atmospheric pressure.The high intrapleural pressure causes compression of the underlying lung,
shifts the mediastinum to the opposite side with consequent compression
of the opposite lung also. It also decreases venous return to the heart by
compressing the vena cava resulting in reduced cardiac output.
Clinical features: Rapidly progressive breathlessness, central cyanosis,
rapid thread pulse and signs of peripheral circulatory failure. Signs of
pneumothorax are present.
Treatment

Tension pneumothorax should be treated as an acute medical emergency.
Emergency treatment: Insertion of a large-bore needle into the pleural space through the
second anterior intercostal space. The diagnosis is confirmed, if large amounts of air escape
through the inserted needle. The needle should be left in place till a thoracostomy tube can be
inserted. Cover the open end of the needle with a glove finger. Other methods:
–   Insertion of wide-bore plastic cannula. The opposite end is attached to long rubber tubing, the
end of which is placed underwater in a bottle.
–   Introduction of an intercostals catheter connected to a water-seal drainage system.
–   If above methods cannot be performed, simple stab on chest wall to release pressure.
Recurrent Spontaneous Pneumothorax
After primary spontaneous pneumothorax, recurrence occurs within a year
in about 25% of patients.
Recurrent pneumothorax is common with emphysematous bullae. The
recurrence usually occurs on the same side. It can also occur with LAM
(lymphangioleiomyomatosis).
TreatmentObliteration of the pleural space by artificial pleurodesis. This can be accomplished by intrapleural
instillation of an irritant like tetracycline hydrochloride of talc powder.
Pleurodesis is recommended for all patients following a second pneumothorax. Pleurodesis is
achieved by pleural abrasion or parietal pleurectomy at thoracotomy or thoracoscopy.
Catamenial Pneumothorax
Q. Write a short note on catamenial pneumothorax.
Rare condition occurring in females above the age of 25–30 years.
Presents with repeated attacks of spontaneous pneumothorax usually on
the right side, in association with menstruation. Attacks usually occur
within 2 days before or after the onset of menstruation. Hemoptysis may
also develop. Most frequently associated with endometriosis of thorax.
Treatment: Ovulation-suppressing drugs, surgical exploration and pleurodesis.
Clicking Pneumothorax
Q. Write a short note clicking pneumothorax.
In clicking pneumothorax, a small left-sided pneumothorax get localized
in front of the pericardium. This produces alteration of the heart sounds so
that the sound becomes loud and resonant (‘clicking’).

Complications of Pneumothorax
Q. Write a short note on causes of pyopneumothorax.
Pyopneumothorax: Caused by aspiration or intercostal chest tube
insertion (iatrogenic). It may also results from necrotic pneumonia, lung
abscess, or caseous pneumonia. Its causes are listed in Box 6.13.
Hydropneumothorax
Hemopneumothorax: Bleeding in pleural space and commonly caused
due to rupture of vessels in adhesions. When lung re-expands, bleeding
will stop. If bleeding persists, surgical ligation may be required.Mediastinal and subcutaneous emphysema
Box 6.13: Causes of pyopneumothorax.
Complication of pneumothorax
Thoracocentesis
Trauma to thorax
Bronchopleural fistula
Esophagopleural fistula
Q. Write a short note on management of acute pneumothorax.
Treatment of Pneumothorax
Goals:  (1) To promote lung expansion, (2) to eliminate the pathogenesis and (3) to decrease
recurrence of pneumothorax.
Treatment options according to (1) Classification of pneumothorax, (2) pathogenesis, (3)
pneumothorax frequency, (4) the extension of lung collapse, (5) severity of disease, and (6)
complication and concomitant underlying diseases.
1. Primary spontaneous pneumothorax (PSP): Observation:  Small, closed mildly symptomatic
spontaneous pneumothoraces do not require hospital admission. Patient is asked to return directly
to hospital in the event of developing breathlessness.
2. Secondary spontaneous pneumothorax (SSP):Hospitalization and observation:  Small SSP of < 1 cm depth or isolated apical
pneumothoraces in asymptomatic patients, supplemental high flow (10 L/min) oxygen
inhalation of high concentration of oxygen may reduce the total pressure of gases in pleural
capillaries by reducing the partial pressure of nitrogen. This should increase the pressure
gradient between the pleural capillaries and the pleural cavity. Thereby increasing absorption of
air from the pleural cavity. The rate of resolution/reabsorption of spontaneous pneumothoraces
is 1.25–1.8% of volume of hemithorax/24 hours.
Active intervention:  All other cases will require active intervention (aspiration or chest drain
insertion).Simple aspiration
–   Recommended as first line treatment for all PSP requiring intervention.

–   Less likely to succeed in secondary pneumothoraces and in such cases, it is only
recommended as an initial treatment in small (<2 cm) pneumothoraces in minimally
breathless patients under the age of 50 years.
Repeated and catheter aspiration: It is reasonable for primary pneumothorax when the first
aspiration has been unsuccessful. A volume of <2.5 L has been aspirated on the first attempt.
Intercostal tube and under water seal drainage:  Suction to an intercostal tube should not be
applied directly after tube insertion. But can be added after 48 hours for persistent air leak or
failure of a pneumothorax to re-expand. High volume, low pressure (–10 to –20 cm H 2O)
suction systems are recommended.
Chemical pleurodesis
Q. Write a short note on indications for pleurodesis.
–  Goals: (1) to prevent pneumothorax recurrence and (2) to produce inflammation of pleura and
adhesions.
–  Indications:  Persist air leak and repeated pneumothorax, bilateral pneumothoraces, those
complicated with bullae, occupations where pneumothorax should not occur (e.g. drivers,
pilots).
–  Sclerosing agents: Tetracycline, minocycline, doxycycline, talc, erythromycin.
–  The instillation of sclerosing agents into the pleural space should lead to an aseptic
inflammation with dense adhesions.
Other types pleurodesis:
–   Biological pleurodesis using Corynebacterium parvum.
–   Physical pleurodesis mechanical abrasions.
Surgical treatment
Indication: No response to medical treatment, persistence of air leak, hemopneumothorax,
bilateral pneumothoraces, recurrent pneumothorax, tension pneumothorax failed to drain,
thicken pleura makes lung unable to re-expansion, and multiple blebs or bullae.
Open thoracotomy and pleurectomy remains the procedure with the lowest recurrence rate for
difficult or recurrent pneumothorax.
Minimally invasive procedures, thoracoscopy (VATS), pleural abrasion, and surgical talc
pleurodesis are all effective alternative strategies.
Physical Signs of Hydropneumothorax
Q. Write short note on the physical signs of hydropneumothorax.
Similar findings as pneumothorax (refer physical signs of pneumothorax on page 322) except the
following findings:
Percussion note is hyper-resonant over the upper air-containing part  and stony dull over the
lower fluid-containing part.
Straight line dullness. Shifting dullness can be elicited.
Amphoric bronchial breathing in case of bronchopleural fistula.
Coin-test  is positive over the upper air-containing part.
Succussion splash can be elicited on the affected side.

PNEUMONIA
Q. Describe the etiology, classification, investigations, complications,
indications of hospitalization and treatment of pneumonia.
Definition: Pneumonia is as an acute respiratory illness, defined as
inflammation with exudative solidification of the lung parenchyma. It causes
the alveoli to be filled with inflammatory exudates and usually results in
consolidation (solidification) of lung.Pathological definition: Infection of the alveoli, distal airway,
interstitium of the lung. Characterized by increased weight, replacement of
the normal sponginess by the consolidation. Alveoli filled by the WBC,
RBC and fibrin.Clinical definition: Constellation of symptoms and signs (fever, chills,
cough, pleural chest pain, sputum, bronchial breathing, egophony,
crackles, wheeze, pleural friction rub) with at least one opacity on chest X-
ray PA view.
Classification of Pneumonia
Pneumonias can be classified in a different ways (Table 6.66).
Table 6.66: Classification of pneumonia.
1. Classification depending on the anatomic distribution Lobar pneumonia
Bronchopneumonia
Interstitial pneumonia
2. Etiological classification
Primary
Secondary
Suppurative
3. Clinical setting in which the infection occurs (if no pathogen can be isolated)
Community-acquired acute pneumonia
Community-acquired atypical pneumonia
Nosocomial pneumonia or hospital-acquired pneumonia
Pneumonia in immunocompromised host
Health-care associated pneumonia

1. Classification depending on the anatomic distribution
a. Lobar pneumonias (alveolar or air space pneumonia): The organism
causes inflammatory exudates involving many contiguous alveoli (e.g.
pneumococcal pneumonia).This radiologically appear as non-segmental
consolidation.
b. Bronchopneumonia: Inflammation is involves conducting airways,
especially terminal and respiratory bronchioles, and the surrounding
alveoli (e.g. staphylococcal pneu-monia).
c. Interstitial pneumonia: The inflammation is confined to interalveolar
septa. X-ray chest gives a reticular pattern (e.g. Mycoplasma
pneumoniae, Pneumocystis jirovecii  and viruses).2. Etiological classification
a. Primary pneumonia: It is caused by a specific pathogenic organism
and there is no pre-existing abnormality of the respiratory system. The
causative organisms are listed in Table 6.67.
Q. Write short essay on list the bacteria causing pneumonia.
b. Secondary pneumonia (including aspiration pneumonia): (discussed
earlier)
c. Suppurative pneumonia (necrotizing pneumonia): (discussed earlier)
3. Clinical setting in which the infection occurs (if no pathogen can be
isolated):
Pneumonia is classified by the setting in which the person has contracted
their infection.
a. Community setting or community acquired pneumonia (CAP)
–   It is defined as an acute pulmonary infection in a patient who is not
hospitalized or living in a long-term care facility 14 days or more
before presentation and does not meet the criteria for health care
associated pneumonia (HCAP). This category includes both
immunocompetent and immunocompromised patients as causative
agents are almost similar in both the conditions.
b. Nosocomial pneumonia or hospital acquired pneumonia
–   Definition: Hospital-acquired pneumonias are pulmonary infections
acquired in the course of a hospital stay (development of pneumonia
after more than 48 hours of hospitalization).

–   Most of this pneumonia occurs outside intensive care units.
However, the highest risk is observed in patients on mechanical
ventilation [ventilator associated pneumonia (VAP)]
–   Etiology: Predisposing factors include severe underlying disease,
immunosuppression, prolonged antibiotic therapy, patients on
mechanical ventilation or invasive access devices such as
intravascular catheters. The hospital-acquired pneumonias are
serious and may be life-threatening. The various causative organism
causing hospital-acquired pneumonia are shown in Table 6.68.
c. Pneumonia in immunocompromised host: This is a type of
pneumonia found in a patient whose immune system is compromised,
through either genetic defect, immunosuppressive medication, or
acquired immunodeficiency such as HIV infection and malignancies.
–   It may be caused by classical organisms, atypical organisms,
Mycobacterium tuberculosis or Pneumocystis jirovecii .
–   Usually symptoms are more than the signs.
d. Health care associated pneumonia (HCAP)
–   Definition: Hospital-acquired pneumonias are pulmonary infections
acquired in the course of a hospital stay. It occurs
♦   Within 90 days of a 2 day or longer hospitalization. In a nursing
home or long-term care residence.
♦   Within 30 days of receiving intravenous antibacterial therapy,
chemotherapy, or wound care or after a hospital or hemodialysis
clinic visit; or in any patient in contact with a multidrug resistant
pathogen.
–   Features of HCAP more closely resemble nosocomial pneumonia
and may require treatment accordingly.
Table 6.67: List of organism causing primary pneumonia.
Common Less commonStreptococcus pneumoniae (most common)
Haemophilus influenzae
Moraxella catarrhalis
Staphylococcus aureus
Legionella pneumophila
Mycoplasma pneumoniaEnterobacteriaceae (Klebsiella pneumoniae)
and Pseudomonas spp.
Streptococcus pyogenes
Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Coxiella burnetii  (Q-fever)
Chlamydia spp. (C. pneumoniae, C. psittaci,

C. trachomatis)
Viruses: Respiratory syncytial virus, H1N1
influenza virus, seasonal influenza virus,
parainfluenza virus and human
metapneumovirus (children); influenza A and
B (adults); adenovirus (miliary recruits);
corona virus producing severe acute
respiratory syndrome (SARS)Actionomyces Israelii
Table 6.68: Various etiological agents causing hospital- acquired
pneumonia.
Gram-negative rods, Enterobacteriaceae ( Klebsiella spp., Serratiamarcescens, Escherichia coli ) and
Pseudomonas species.
Staphylococcus aureus (penicillin and usually methicillin-resistant
Noninfective Pneumonias
Lipid/Lipoid pneumonia:
–   Aspiration of fatty/oily material into lungs.
–   Decreasing order of severity of manifestations: Mineral oil > animal oil > vegetable oil
(because vegetable oil to some extent, animal oils can be hydrolyzed in the body).
–   Liquid paraffin causes the most cases of lipoid pneumonia
–   Chronic persistence of the oil in the lung can produce fibrosis/paraffinomas (paraffin
granulomas).Radiation pneumonitis
–   Dose >25 Gy. Risk depends on radiation dose and volume of lung irradiated.
–   Early phase: Cough, fever, chest X-ray infiltrate.
–   Late phase (3–6 weeks): Dyspnea
–   Lung fibrosis: With excessive dose/large lung volume irradiation.
–   Treatment: Glucocorticoids improve symptoms, but have no ultimate effect on the development
of fibrosis.
–   Recall pneumonitis: Pneumonitis due to chemotherapy, within the distribution of a previous
radiotherapy field (the radiation sensitizes the lung tissue to the toxic effects of chemotherapy).Chemical pneumonitis
–   If aspirated fluid: pH <2.5 and volume >0.3 mL/kg results in chemical pneumonia (Mendelson
syndrome)—ARDS/secondary bacterial infection.
–   If gastric pH alkaline: Colonization of gastric mucosa by enteric gram-negative bacilli-
pneumonitis.
–   Poor orodental hygiene with gross aspiration and lung abscess.
–   Pathogenesis: Most common mechanism by which pathogenic organisms reach the lower
respiratory tract through microaspiration.
–   Others: Hematogenous/inhalation (droplet nuclei/aerosols)/contiguous spread.

Community-Acquired Pneumonia (CAP)
Q. Write essay on community-acquired pneumonia (CAP)—its
definition, etiology/causative organisms, clinical features,
investigations, diagnosis, complications and treatment/ management.
Q. Write essay on streptococcal pneumonia—its etiopathogenesis,
clinical features, complications and management.
Q. Write short essay on etiology/organisms causing community
acquired pneumonia.
Community-acquired pneumonia affects all ages, but is commoner at the
extremes of age.
Most cases are spread by droplet infection.
CAP may occur in previously healthy individuals. However, several
factors may impair the effectiveness of local defenses and predispose to
CAP (Table 6.69).Pneumonia can be classified either according to the organism responsible
for infection or anatomical distribution of infection.
Streptococcus pneumoniae (Pneumococcus) is the most common cause.
Viral infections are important causes of CAP in children.
Depending upon the anatomical distribution of infection, it may be
classified as lobar pneumonia (localized with the whole of one or more
lobes affected) or bronchopneumonia (diffuse in which lobules of the lung
are mainly affected, often due to infection centered on the bronchi and
bronchioles.Potential causative agents in CAP: Bacteria, fungi, viruses, and protozoa.
Causative agent and salient feature of community-acquired acute
pneumonia are presented in Table 6.70.
Table 6.69: Predisposing conditions for community-acquired pneumonia.
Extremes of age
Upper respiratory tract infections
Comorbidities: For example, congestive heart failure, diabetes, chronic kidney disease, recent
influenza infection and malnutrition
Cigarette smoking
Alcohol

Corticosteroid therapy
Congenital or acquired immune deficiencies, e.g. HIV
Decreased or absent splenic function, e.g. sickle cell disease or post-splenectomy (risk for
infection with encapsulated bacteria).
Other respiratory conditions: Cystic fibrosis, bronchiectasis, COPD, obstructing lesion
(endoluminal cancer, inhaled foreign body)
Indoor air pollution
Table 6.70: Causative agent and salient feature of community-acquired
acute pneumonia.
Microorganism Features
Streptococcus pneumonia or Pneumococcus Most common cause
Haemophilus influenzae Most common bacterial cause in COPD
Moraxella catarrhalis Elderly
Staphylococcus aureus Secondary bacterial pneumonia following viral
respiratory illnesses
Enterobacteriaceae (Klebsiella pneumoniae) In debilitated and malnourished people
Pseudomonas aeruginosa Common in patients with neutropenia
Legionella pneumophila Organ transplant recipients
Table 6.71: Types of presentations of community-acquired pneumonia
(CAP).
Classical Atypical
Sudden onset of CAP
High fever, shaking chills
Pleuritic chest pain, sudden onset of
breathlessness
Productive cough
Rusty sputum, blood tinge
Poor general condition
High mortality up to 20% in patients with
bacteremia
Cause: S. pneumoniaeGradual and insidious onset
Low grade fever
Dry cough, no blood tinge
Low mortality 1–2%; except in cases of
legionellosis
Cause: Mycoplasma, Chlamydiae, Legionella,
rickettsiae, viruses
Systemic manifestations present
Q. Write short essay on etiology/organisms causing community
acquired pneumonia.
Types of Presentations of Community-Acquired Pneumonia
(CAP)
Two types of presentations of CAP is presented in Table 6.71.

Clinical Features of CAP
The clinical features vary according to the immune status of the patient
and the infecting agent.
Systemic features: Pneumonia (especially lobar pneumonia), usually
presents as an acute illness. Sudden onset of fever, rigors, shivering and
malaise are predominant symptoms and delirium may be present. The
appetite is lost and there may be headache. Fever can be as high as 39.5–
40°C. Swinging fevers often indicates empyema.
Pulmonary symptoms
–   Cough: First, it is characteristically short, painful and dry. Later, it is
productive with expectoration of mucopurulent sputum.
Characteristically rusty sputum may be seen in patients with Strep.
pneumoniae (pneumococcal pneumonia) and the occasional
hemoptysis can occur.
–   Chest pain: It is commonly pleuritic chest pain and may be a
presenting feature. It is due to inflammation of the pleura. A pleural
rub may be heard. Occasionally pain may be referred to the shoulder or
anterior abdominal wall. Upper abdominal tenderness is sometimes
apparent in patients.
–   Breathlessness: The alveoli become filled inflammatory exudate
impairs gas exchange producing breathlessness.
–   Other features: CAP can present with confusion or nonspecific
symptoms in the elderly. When symptoms have been present for
several weeks or have failed to respond to standard antibiotics, the
possibility of tuberculosis should always be considered.Extrapulmonary features (Table 6.72): They are more common in
certain infections and sometimes give a clinical clue to the etiology.
Examination
Fever: About 80% are febrile, although this finding is frequently absent in
older patients. This is a helpful diagnostic clue if present.
Respiratory and pulse rate may be raised and the blood pressure low and
this may be the most sensitive sign in the elderly.
Tachycardia is common. However, relative bradycardia is a characteristic
feature of Legionnaire’s pneumonia. There may be delirium.

Oxygen saturation on air may be low, and the patient cyanosed and
distressed.
Chest examination:
–   Chest signs vary, depending on the phase of the inflammatory
response.
–   During consolidation phase: Lung is typically dull to percussion and,
as conduction of sound is enhanced, auscultation reveals tubular
bronchial breath sounds over areas of consolidated lung bronchophony
and whispering pectoriloquy. Coarse crackles are heard throughout on
auscultation, due to consolidation of the lung parenchyma.
Table 6.72: Extrapulmonary features of community- acquired pneumonia.
Extrapulmonary symptoms Infectious agent
Myalgia, arthralgia and malaise Legionella and Mycoplasma
Myocarditis and pericarditis Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Headache, abdominal pain, diarrhea and vomiting Legionella pneumoniae
Labial herpes simplex reactivation Pneumococcal pneumonia
Skin rashes: Erythema multiforme and erythema
nodosumMycoplasma pneumoniae
Investigations in CAP (Table 6.73)
Q. Write short essay on radiological findings in pneumonias.
Complications of Pneumonia
Q. Write short essay on complications of pneumonia.
General complications (Box 6.14)
Local complications
Box 6.14: General complications of pneumonia.
Respiratory failure ARDS
Bacteremic dissemination  (bacteremia): It can cause:
–   Endocarditis (heart valves)
–   Pericarditis (pericardium)
–   Meningitis (meninges)
–   Suppurative arthritis (joint)
–   Metastatic abscesses in kidneys or spleen

–   Sepsis—multisystem failure.
Lung abscess
Organization: Delayed and incomplete resolution can cause ingrowth of
granulation tissue into the alveolar exudate. The intra-alveolar plugs of
granulation tissue are known as organizing pneumonia. Gradually,
increased alveolar fibrosis leads to a shrunken and firm lobe and is
called as cornification .Spread of infection to the pleural cavity: It may result in:
–   Pleuritis
–   Parapneumonic pleural effusion.
–   Pyothorax: Which may lead to fibrothorax
–   Pneumothorax, especially in Staphylococcus pneumoniae due to
pneumatocele rupture.
Management Guidelines for CAPRational use of microbiology laboratory.
Pathogen directed antimicrobial therapy whenever possible.
Prompt initiation of antibiotic therapy.
Decision to hospitalize based on prognostic criteria CURB 65
Severity:  The need to hospitalize (severity) a patient is commonly assessed by CURB 65 or the CRB
65 score (Table 6.74). The CRB 65 score is used in the community where the serum urea level is not
usually available. Other severity score available is Pneumonia Severity Index (PSI), which combines
several clinical, and laboratory features and co-morbid conditions.
General Management (Treatment) of Pneumonia
Check the airway, breathing and circulation. The most important aspects are: oxygenation, fluid
balance and antibiotic therapy.
Oxygen:  Oxygen is indicated in all patients with tachypnea, hypoxemia, hypotension or acidosis.
The aim is to maintain saturations between 94% and 98%. In patients with known COPD, high
concentrations (35% or more), preferably humidified oxygen should be used to maintain a
saturation between 88% and 92%. If hypoxia continues or patient develops increasing
hypercapnia, ventilate the patient mechanically.Intravenous fluids:  These are required in patients with severe illness, older patients and those
who are vomiting. Treat shock (hypotensive showing any evidence of volume depletion) with
intravenous fluids initially. Otherwise, an adequate oral intake of fluid is enough.
New Treatment Paradigm
Hit Hard Early With Antibiotics → De-Escalate.
1. Antibiotics:  Administer antibiotics as soon the diagnosis of CAP is established preferably within 4
hours of presentation in hospital and treatment should not be delayed while investigations are
awaited. Prompt administration of antibiotics improves the outcome.
Empiric regimens (Table 6.75)
Duration of therapy: Minimum of 5 days (usually 7–10 days). Afebrile for at least 48–72 hours.

Duration is 10–14 days for patients with Mycoplasma and Chlamydia pneumonia. Patients initially
treated with intravenous antibiotics can be switched to oral agents when they become febrile.
Longer duration of therapy is needed if initial therapy was not active against the identified
pathogen or complicated by extrapulmonary infection.
2. Mild analgesics for pleuritic pain : Pleural pain may prevent the patient from breathing normally
and coughing efficiently resulting in sputum retention, atelectasis or secondary infection. Hence, it
is relieved by simple analgesia such as paracetamol, codeine or NSAIDs
Table 6.73: Investigations in community-acquired pneumonia (CAP).
Investigation Significance
Complete blood countVery high (>20 × 10 9/L) or low (<4 × 10 9/L)
WBC countMarker of severity. In viral and atypical
pneumonias, total leukocyte count is often less
than 5000/mm3
Neutrophilic leukocytosis >15 × 10 9/L Suggests bacterial pneumonia
Hemolytic anemia Occasionally complicates Mycoplasma
Urea and electrolytes
Urea >7 mmol/L (~20 mg/dL) Marker of severity
Hyponatremia Marker of severity may occur in patients with
Legionnaire’s disease.
Liver function tests
Abnormal transaminitis, raised bilirubin When basal pneumonia inflames liver, or in
atypical pneumonia
Hypoalbuminemia Marker of severity
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate/C-reactive
proteinNon-specifically elevated
Blood culture Bacteremia is a marker of severity. Causative
organism may be grown (e.g. pneumococcal
pneumonia). However, blood cultures are
recommended only in hospitalized patients
Serological  and antigen detection tests Pneumococcal antigens can be detected in the
serum or urine in pneumococcal pneumonia
Acute and convalescent titers for Mycoplasma,
Chlamydia, Legionella and viral infections
Cold agglutinins Positive in 50% of patients with Mycoplasma
Arterial blood gases Measure when SaO 2 <93% or when severe
clinical features to assess ventilatory failure or
acidosis
HIV testing Since pneumonia is a common in previously
undiagnosed HIV infection, a test should be
offered to all patients with pneumonia
Sputum:  It can be distinguished from saliva by
microscopic examination. Sputum containGram stain, culture, antimicrobial sensitivity
testing and Ziehl-Neelsen staining

alveolar macrophages
Oropharynx swab PCR for Mycoplasma pneumoniae and other
atypical pathogens
Urine Pneumococcal and/or Legionella antigen.
Hematuria may occur in patients with
Legionnaire’s disease
Chest X-ray Essential for the confirmation of diagnoses,
follow-up and detection of complications like
parapneumonic effusion and empyema Lobar pneumonia Patchy opacification evolves into homogeneous
consolidation of affected lobe
Air bronchogram (air-filled bronchi appear lucent
against consolidated lung tissue) may be presentBronchopneumonia Patchy and segmental shadowing
Complications Para-pneumonic effusion, intrapulmonary
abscess or empyema
Staph. aureus Multilobar shadowing, cavitation, pneumatoceles
and abscesses
Mycoplasma Usually one lobe is involved but infection can be
bilateral and extensive.
Legionella There is lobar and then multilobar shadowing,
with the occasional small pleural effusion.
Cavitation is rare
Aspiration Percutaneous transtracheal aspiration of
secretions
Percutaneous transthoracic needle aspiration,
preferable under CT guidance
Fiberoptic bronchoscopy with BAL and
brushingsGram stain, AFB stain, culture and cytology
Biopsy A transbronchial biopsy of the lung tissue for
culture and histopathology may be done in
selected cases. Diagnostic open-lung biopsy,
which carries a high-risk, is reserved for selected
patients
Pleural fluid Aspirate and culture when present in more than
trivial amounts, preferably with ultrasound
guidance
Table 6.74:  CURB 65 Rule.
Confusion : New mental confusion
Urea > 7 mmol/L (mg/dL)
Respiratory rate > 30 breaths per minute
Blood pressure: Diastolic BP < 60 mm Hg or systolic blood pressure < 90 mm Hg
Age ≥ 65 years of age (1 point for each)
Group 1: 0 or 1 of the above—mortality low—1.5%. Likely suitable for treatment at home
Group 2: 2 of the above—mortality—9.2%. Hospitalization for treatment

Group 3: 3 or more of the above—mortality—22%. Likely requires admission to ICU.
Table 6.75: Empiric regimens for pneumonia.
Setting Therapeutic options
Ambulatory, not requiring hospitalization, age
under 60 yearsOral macrolide (erythromycin or azithromycin)
Ambulatory, not requiring hospitalization,
comorbidity or age over 60 yearsOral β-lactam/β-lactamase inhibitor + macrolide
or Oral antipneumococcal fluoroquinolone
Requiring hospitalization β-lactam (cefoperazone or ceftriaxone) +
macrolide or antipneumococcal fluoroquinolone
Aspiration pneumonia requiring hospitalization β-lactam/β-lactamase inhibitor alone
(ampicillin/sulbactam, piperacillin/tazobactam)
Table 6.76: Antibiotic treatment for community-acquired pneumonia
(CAP).
Antibiotic Dosage, Route, Frequency and Duration
Doxycycline 100–200 mg PO/IV BID for 7 to 10 days
Azithromycin 500 mg OD IV –3 days + 500 mg OD PO for 7–10 days
Clarithromycin 250–500 mg BID PO for 7–14 days
Telithromycin 800 mg PO OD for 7–10 days
Levofloxacin 750 mg PO/IV OD for 5 days
Gatifloxacin 400 mg PO or IV OD for 5 to 7 days
Moxifloxacin 400 mg PO or IV OD for 5 to 7 days
Gemifloxacin 320 mg PO OD for 5–7 days
Amoxyclav 2 g of Amoxicillin +125 mg of Clavulanic acid PO BID for 7 to 10
days
Ceftriaxone 2 g IV BID for 3 to 5 days + PO 3G CS
Ertapenum 1 g OD IV or IM for 7 to 14 days
(PO: per oral; IV: intravenous; IM: intramuscular; OD: once daily; BID: twice daily)
Antibiotic treatment for community-acquired pneumonia (Table 6.76)
Unresolved/Slow Resolving PneumoniaPatient is considered to have responded if: (1) fever declines within 72
hours, (2) temperature normalizes within 5 days, (3) respiratory signs
(tachypnea) return to normal. The expected time course for resolution is
controversial.
–   In 1975, Hendin defined slowly resolving as pulmonary consolidation
persisting more than 21 days.

–   In 1991, Kirtland and Winterbauer defined slowly resolving CAP in
immunocompetent patients based upon radiographic criteria. > 50%
clearing by 2 weeks or > complete clearing at 4 weeks.
Nonresolving pneumonia is defined as a clinical syndrome in which focal
infiltrates begin with some clinical association of acute pulmonary
infection and despite a minimum of 10 days of antibiotic therapy patients
either do not improve or worsen or radiographic opacities fail to resolve
within 12 weeks.Progressive pneumonia: Increase in radiographic abnormalities and
clinical deterioration during first 72 hours of treatment.
Causes of unresolved/slow resolving pneumonia (Table 6.77).
Table 6.77: Causes of unresolved/slow resolving pneumonia.
Incorrect microbiological diagnosis (e.g.
tuberculosis instead of classical organisms) or
incomplete antimicrobial treatmentUnderlying antibiotic resistance
Inadequate dose/duration
Nonadherence
Malabsorption
Complication of CAP (community-acquired
pneumonia)Parapneumonic pleural effusion (exudative),
empyema, lung abscess
Underlying neoplastic lesion or other lung
diseaseBronchial obstruction causing partial or
complete obstruction, bronchoalveolar cell
carcinoma, bronchiectasis
Alternative diagnosisPulmonary thromboembolic disease,
cryptogenic organizing pneumonia,
eosinophilic pneumonia, pulmonary
hemorrhage
Host factorsAge especially >50
Co-morbid illness: Diabetes, COPD (chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease)
Others, e.g. alcoholism,
immunosuppressive/cytotoxic therapy
Superinfection Fungi, Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Defects in defense For example, impaired cough (sedatives,
neuromuscular illness, stroke), impaired
mucociliary transport (chronic bronchitis),
immune deficiency states-primary and
secondary (B-cell and T-cell.)
Recurrent pneumonia: Many conditions cause recurrent pneumonias (Table

6.78).
Table 6.78: Conditions causing recurrent pneumonias.
Bronchial obstruction (e.g. foreign body, bronchial stenosis, compression of bronchus,
endobronchial lesions)
Bronchiectasis
Immunocompromised state
Sequestration of lung
Ciliary dyskinesia
Multiple myeloma and other lymphoreticular malignancies
Prevention of Further Episodes of Pneumonia
Cessation smoking
Influenza vaccine (Flu shot—Oct through Feb): It offers 90% protection
and reduces mortality by 80%.
Pneumococcal vaccine (Pneumonia shot): It protects against 23 types of
Pneumococci. About 70% of individuals have Pneumococci in the
respiratory tract. Vaccination reduces mortality.
Pneumococcal Pneumonia (Lobar Pneumonia)
Q. Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations, diagnosis,
complications and treatment/management of pneumococcal
pneumonia (lobar pneumonia/ Streptococcus pneumoniae).
Definition: Lobar pneumonia is characterized by diffuse inflammation
affecting the part or entire lobe, usually the lower lobes.
Etiology
Causative organism: Most common form of pneumonia and is caused by
Streptococcus pneumoniae (e.g. Pneumococcus, a Gram-positive, lancet-
shaped Diplococcus).
Mode of infection: By droplet infection.
Risk factors for pneumococcal pneumonia
Age: Younger than 2 years or older than 65 years
Strongest independent risk factor for invasive pneumococcal disease:
Cigarette smoking

Strongest independent risk factor for CAP: Alcoholism
(ALPS: Alcoholism, leucopenia, pneumococcal sepsis: Mortality rate
80%)
Poverty and overcrowding
Lowered systemic resistance of the host: It may be due to:
–   Chronic diseases: Diabetes mellitus, severe liver disease, chronic lung
disease
–   Immunological deficiency: Defects in innate immunity and humoral
immunodeficiency (complement or immunoglobulin), defects in cell-
mediated immunity (congenital and acquired), HIV infection
–   Treatment with immunosuppressive agents
–   Leukopenia
–   Asplenia or hypospleniaImpaired local defense mechanisms
–   Loss or suppression of the cough reflex: For example, coma,
anesthesia, drugs, chest pain, or neuromuscular disorders. It may lead
to aspiration of gastric contents into the lung.
–   Damage or injury to the mucociliary apparatus: It may be due to
cigarette smoke, viral diseases, inhalation of hot or corrosive gases,
or genetic defects of ciliary function (e.g. the immotile cilia
syndrome).
–   Accumulation of secretions: Cystic fibrosis and bronchial obstruction.
–   Interference with the phagocytic or bactericidal action of alveolar
macrophages: It may be due to alcohol intoxication, tobacco smoke,
anoxia, or oxygen intoxication . Antecedent influenza
–   Pulmonary congestion and edema.
Clinical FeaturesSudden onset of high fever, chills and rigors, coughs, and vomiting.
Fever is usually high grade (39–40 °C). Convulsions may occur in
children.
Cough is initially short, painful and dry, but soon becomes productive
with mucopurulent sputum. Rust colored sputum (‘rusty’ sputum) is
characteristic but occasionally may be frankly blood stained.

Nonspecific symptoms include loss of appetite, headache and pains in the
body and limbs
Localized pleuritic chest pain develops at an early stage due to
fibrinosuppurative pleuritis. It may be referred to the shoulder or
abdominal wall. It may be companied by pleural friction rub. Breathing is
rapid and shallow due to pleuritic pain.Other features are tachycardia, hot and dry skin, herpes labialis, and
flushed face.
Physical signs in the chest
Q. Write short note on signs of consolidation
First 2 days: The physical signs are minimal and include diminished
respiratory movements, slight impairment of percussion note and pleural
rub. In early stages, numerous fine crepitations are audible.After 2 days: Frank signs of consolidation appear (Box 6.15).
Box 6.15: Signs of consolidation.
Diminished respiratory movements
Dull percussion note
No mediastinal shift
Markedly increased vocal fremitus and vocal resonance
High-pitched tubular bronchial breathing
Bronchophony, egophony and whispering pectoriloquy may be present.
During resolution coarse crepitations
If parapneumonic effusion develops, additional signs of pleural effusion
Investigations
Blood
–   Severe neutrophil leukocytosis
–   Blood culture may show Streptococcus pneumoniae.
Sputum
–   Gram staining of the sputum may show pneumococci which appear as
gram-positive, lancet-shaped diplococci.
–   Sputum culture may show Streptococcus pneumoniae.
–   Assays on sputum are based on detecting nucleic acids for

pneumococci.
Serological tests: They can detect pneumococcal antigen in serum, urine
and sputum. Detection of C-polysaccharide (part of pneumococcal cell
wall) in urine by an immunochromatography assay is quite sensitive.
Urinary antigen remains positive for weeks after onset of severe
pneumococcal pneumonia. However, it is often negative in mild
pneumococcal pneumonia.Chest radiograph (Figs. 6.32A and B)
–   Involved lobe or segment appears homogeneous radiopaque with air
bronchograms.
–   Associated parapneumonic effusion or empyema can also be detected.
Others: In rare instances fibreoptic, bronchoscopic aspiration or
transthoracic needle aspiration may be necessary.
Figs. 6.32A and B: Chest X-ray. (A) Shows right upper lobe pneumonia; (B) Shows right middle lobe
pneumonia.
Complications (Table 6.79)
Q. Write short essay on complications of lobar pneumonia.
Table 6.79: Complications of lobar pneumonia.
Pulmonary
Delayed/incomplete resolution
Spread to other lobes (rare)Cardiovascular
Acute circulatory failure
Acute pericarditis
Endocarditis (rare)

Pleural:  Spread of infection to the pleural cavity:
Sterile pleural effusion
Empyema
PyothoraxNeurological
Mental confusion
Meningism
Meningitis (rare)
Treatment
General measures
Administration of oxygen in high concentration to all hypoxemic patients.
Treatment of pleuritic pain with mild analgesics like paracetamol and NSAIDs. However, few
may require pethidine 50–100 mg or morphine 10–15 mg intramuscularly or intravenously.
Antibiotic therapy (Discussed earlier on pages 304-5)
Vaccine:  Two types:
1. Pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPV):  Consists of 23 most common capsular serotypes
that produce invasive pneumococcal disease. However, it has poor protection in individuals at
greatest risk for severe pneumococcal disease namely elderly, immunocompromised, and infants
younger than 2 years.
2. Polysaccharide-protein conjugate pneumococcal vaccine (pneumococcal conjugate vaccine—
PCV): It targets seven serotypes responsible for most of pneumococcal infections in children.
Hence, it is used mainly in children younger than 2 years.
Indications for Vaccination (Table 6.80)
Staphylococcal Pneumonia
Q. Write short essay/note on staphylococcal pneumonia.
It produces bronchopneumonia that is characterized by widespread
focal/ patchy areas of acute suppurative inflammation .
They are centered on bronchioles and bronchi with subsequent spread to
surrounding alveoli. The involved alveoli show consolidation .
Causative agent: Staphylococcus aureus. Methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is an important pathogen in nosocomial
pneumonia. Recently, community-acquired MRSA (CA-MRSA)
infections (skin and soft tissue infections, and necrotizing pneumonia)
developing in previously healthy persons has emerged as a serious clinical
condition.Predisposing factors: Common following influenza, in debilitated
patients in hospital, and patient with cystic fibrosis.
Characteristic features:
–   Abscess formation is very common. These abscesses are multiple and
often bilateral.

–   Abscesses may rupture into pleura leading to pneumothorax or
pyopneumothorax.
Chest radiograph  shows bronchopneumonia. It is often bilateral, with
multiple thin-walled cyst-like lesions (pneumatoceles).
Sputum smear shows gram-positive Staphylococcus aureus in clumps.
Table 6.80: Indications for vaccination.
Age 65 years
Patients with risk factors: Congestive heart failure, asthma and COPD, diabetes mellitus, chronic
liver disease, alcoholism
Splenectomized patients including patients with sickle cell anemia
Persons living in long-term care facilities
Immunocompromised persons
Treatment
Drug of choice is Penicillin.
Methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus: Oxacillin or flucloxacillin.
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus: Vancomycin, Teicoplanin.
Ceftaroline and Ceftabiparole, new fifth generation cephalosporins.
Drugs used in treatment of resistant Staphylococcus  discussed on page 120.
Complications
Toxic shock syndrome  (TSS) (Discussed on page 119).
Klebsiella Pneumoniae (Friedlander’s Pneumonia)
Q. Write short note on diagnosis and treatment of Klebsiella
pneumoniae (Friedlander’s pneumonia).
Causative agent: Klebsiella pneumoniae (Friedlander’s bacillus).
Predisposing factors: Common in alcoholics and diabetics.
Characteristics:
–   Severe illness with a high mortality rate.
–   Massive consolidation of one or more lobes. The upper lobes most
often affected.
–   Abscess formation and pleural effusion are common.
Investigations

Sputum:
–   It may be viscid, jelly-like and blood stained (red-current-jelly
sputum). Sometimes it may be purulent or rusty.
–   Sputum smear shows gram-negative Klebsiella pneumoniae. Klebsiella
Pneumoniae can be cultures from the sputum.
Chest radiograph
–   It shows air space pneumonia, usually in one of the upper lobes, with
abscess formation and pleural effusion.
–   Bulging interlobar fissure is a characteristic finding.
Treatment:  Antibiotic therapy
Gentamicin, ceftazidime or ciprofloxacin for 2–3 weeks.
Severe cases: Piperacillin + tazobactam or meropenem.
Extended–spectrum-lactamases (ESBL) producing organisms: Meropenem (or imipenem +
cilastin), amikacin and tigecyclin. Polymyxin B for highly resistant strains.
Atypical Pneumonias
Q. Discuss the etiology (organisms causing atypical pneumonias),
clinical features, investigations and treatment of atypical
pneumonias
Causes: Mycoplasma pneumoniae, L. pneumophila, C. pneumoniae, C.
burnettii, viruses (influenza, adeno. RSV, measles, VZV, CMV).
Evolve much more slowly than bacterial pneumonias.
Symptoms >> signs.
They tend to have a slower onset, often with more prominent
extrapulmonary symptoms and complications.
Suspicion of atypical pathogens as the cause of pneumonia should be
thought if patient has three or more of the parameters listed in Table 6.81.
Table 6.81: Parameters that favor the diagnosis of atypical pneumonias.
1. Age 60 years
2. Absence of any underlying co-morbid condition
3. Paroxysmal cough
4. No expectoration
5. Few clinical signs on examination of chest
If total WBC count 10,000/mm3 is added to the above five parameters, then presence of 4 features

indicates a strong likelihood of atypical pneumonia.
Mycoplasma Pneumoniae
Q. Discuss the clinical features, laboratory diagnosis and treatment of
pneumonias caused by Mycoplasma pneumoniae .
Cause: Mycoplasma pneumoniae which lacks cell wall. It is most often
associated with atypical pneumonia.
Clinical Presentation
Onset is insidious ranging from several days to a week.
Constitutional symptoms include headache exacerbated by cough, sore
throat, malaise, and myalgias. Cough is dry, paroxysmal and worse at
night.
Clinical course is usually mild and self-limited.
Complications
Pulmonary complications: Pleural effusion, empyema, pneumothorax
and respiratory distress syndrome.
Infection is severe in sickle cell disease and other HbS-related
hemoglobinopathies (functional asplenia). Especially prone to digital
necrosis in patients with high titer of cold antibodies.
Extrapulmonary complications
–   Ear pain: Bullous myringitis
–   Erythema multiforme: Target/iris lesion, SJ (Stevens-Johnson) syndrome
–   Digital necrosis (especially in patients with sickle cell disease)
–   Neurological: Encephalitis, cerebellar ataxia, GBS (Guillain-Barré Syndrome), transverse
myelitis, peripheral neuropathy.
–   Hematological: Hemolytic anemia and coagulopathy
♦   M. pneumonia evoke IgM antibodies which agglutinate human RBC’s at 4°C
–   Others: Myocarditis, pericarditis and pancreatitis.
Laboratory Findings and Diagnosis
Mild leukocytosis can be found.
Four-fold increase in antibody titers.
Cold agglutinins are non-specific but helpful in diagnosis.

Treatment of Mycoplasma:  Macrolides ( azithromycin ) is the drug of choice, followed by
doxycycline and fluroquinalones.
Chlamydia Pneumonia
Cause: Chlamydophila (Chlamydia) pneumoniae which is an obligate
intracellular organism. Another species of Chlamydophila, i.e. Chlamydia
psittaci  can also cause pneumonia. It usually infects birds but occasionally
infects humans (psittacosis).
Mode of transmission : Through respiratory secretions.
Incubation period : Several weeks.
Predisposing factor: Old age with comorbid diseases.
Clinical presentation : Sore throat, headache, low grade fever and cough
that can persist for months.
Chest radiographs: Show less-extensive infiltrates than those with other
causes of pneumonia.
Treatment:  Doxycycline is the drug of choice.
Legionella Pneumoniae or Legionnaire’s Disease
Q. Give short essay/note on Legionella pneumoniae (Legionnaire’s
disease).
Pontiac fever: Acute self-limiting febrile illness
Legionnaire’s disease: Pneumonia
Most common species causing human infections: L. pneumophila
Most common serogroup causing CAP: 1
Most common serogroup causing nosocomial pneumonia: 6
Mode of transmission: Through water droplets originated from infected
humidifier cooling systems, and from stagnant water in cisterns and
shower heads.
Clinical FeaturesFever, chills and cough with scanty mucoid sputum. Gastrointestinal
symptoms like nausea, abdominal pain and diarrhea are common. Mental
confusion or delirium may also develop.
Uncommon features: Myocarditis, pericarditis and prosthetic valve

endocarditis, glomerulonephritis, pancreatitis and peritonitis.
Investigations
Chest X-ray: Shows parenchymal lesions progressing from patchy to
lobar consolidation. Pleural effusion may be observed in more than one-
third patients. Complete clearing of lung infiltrates may take 1–4 months.
Blood: Relative lymphopenia, very high ESR, hyponatremia, proteinuria
and microscopic hematuria.
Culture: Definitive and most sensitive method, requires 3–5 days.
Gram stain: Many PMN’s, no organisms-suggestive (usual picture with
all atypical pneumonias).
False +ve AFB stain: Legionella micdadei  also known as Pittsburgh
pneumonia agent.
Direct fluorescent antibody (DFA) test: Sensitive and specific.
Antibody: Four fold rise in titer from acute to convalescent stage is
diagnostic. Serology has only epidemiologic significance
Urinary antigen: Second to culture in terms of both sensitive and
specificity
Prognosis: Among the atypical pneumonia, Legionnaires’ disease
presents with most severe clinical course and can progress more severely
if the infection is not treated appropriately and early.
Q. Give short essay/note on antibiotics used in atypical pneumonias.
Treatment:  Antibiotic therapy of atypical pneumonias
Drug of choice: Erythromycin or one of the other macrolides (clarithromycin or azithromycin).
Doxycycline is also an effective drug.
Fluoroquinolones have excellent activity against Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydophila
pneumoniae and Legionella pneumophila. Additional advantage of fluoroquinolones is once daily
dose and excellent bioavailability, whether they are given intravenously or orally.
β-lactams are not effective.
Actinomycosis
Q. Write short note/essay on actinomycosis.
Cause: Actinomyces israeli, an anaerobic organism present in the oral
cavity as a commensal. When local defenses are impaired, it can produce

disease. Companion bacteria
Forms:
–   Oral-cervicofacial actinomysosis: Present as soft tissue swelling,
abscess and discharging sinuses.
–   Abdominal actinomycosis: Presents with discharging sinuses,
abdominal mass or abscess.
–   Pulmonary actinomycosis: Causes widespread suppurative
pneumonia, empyema (often bilateral) and persistent discharging chest
wall sinuses.
Pus obtained from the sinuses show ‘sulfur grains’.
Treatment: Antibiotic therapy with benzylpenicillin 18–24 million units intravenously (four
divided doses) for 4–6 weeks. This is followed by oral penicillin for 6–12 months.
Acute Bronchopneumonia
Q. Write short note on acute bronchopneumonia.
Bronchopneumonia is characterized by patchy (scattered solid foci) area
consolidation in the same or several lobes of the lung.
It is a type of secondary pneumonia, invariable proceeded by bronchial
infection. Common in patients with chronic bronchitis.
Bronchopneumonia is characterized by widespread focal/ patchy areas of
acute suppurative inflammation . They are centered on bronchioles and
bronchi  with subsequent spread to surrounding alveoli. The involved
alveoli show consolidation . The consolidated areas larger and more
numerous in lower lobes (because of the tendency of secretions to
gravitate into the lower lobes) and frequently bilateral .
Predisposing factors:
–   In children: As a complication of measles or whooping cough.
–   In adults: As a complication of acute bronchitis or influenza.
–   In elderly or debilitated patients: As hypostatic pneumonia.
Viral pneumonias and ‘atypical’ pneumonias may also present as
bronchopneumonia.

Fig. 6.33: Chest X-ray of bronchopneumonia.
Clinical Features
High fever, severe cough with purulent expectoration, breathlessness,
tachypnea, tachycardia, and central cyanosis.
Physical signs in the chest: Early stage signs of acute bronchitis, later
stage numerous crepitations.
Investigations
–   Chest X-ray: Bilateral mottled opacities, predominantly in the lower
zones (Fig. 6.33).
–   Blood: Neutophilic leukocytosis common.
Treatment:  Antibiotic therapy
Mild cases: Ampicillin or cotrimoxazole given orally is effective.
Serious cases: Third generation cephalosporin along with a macrolide
Aspiration Pneumonia
Q. Write short note on aspiration pneumonia.

It develops due to abnormal entry of fluid, particulate exogenous
substances or endogenous secretions into the lower airways.
Types: (i) Chemical aspiration pneumonia, and (ii) bacterial aspiration
pneumonia.
Predisposing Factors
Acute aspiration of gastric contents into the lungs: Reduced
consciousness, as a complication of anesthesia.
Mechanical disruption of the glottis closure or cardiac sphincter due to
tracheostomy, endotracheal intubation, bronchoscopy, upper endoscopy
and nasogastric feeding.Disorders of the upper gastrointestinal tract: Esophageal disease, surgery
involving the upper airways or esophagus, and gastric reflux.
Dysphagia from neurologic deficits
Miscellaneous conditions: Protracted vomiting, large volume tube
feedings and feeding gastrostomy.
Chemical Aspiration Pneumonia
Develops due to the aspiration of substances that are toxic to the lower
airways, independent of bacterial infection.
Chemical pneumonitis associated with the aspiration of gastric acid as a
complication of anesthesia particularly during pregnancy (Mendelson’s
syndrome). It can produce an extremely severe and sometimes fatal
illness because of the intense destructiveness of gastric acid.
Clinical FeaturesAbrupt onset of low-grade fever and dyspnea.
Physical examination reveals cyanosis and diffuse crepitations.
Chest radiograph: Infiltrates involving dependent pulmonary segments
that usually develop within 2 hours of aspiration.
Treatment
Tracheal suction:  To clear fluids and particulate matter.
Support of respiration:  Mechanical ventilation may be needed.
Corticosteroids:  Use controversial.
Antibiotics:  In acute events.

Bacterial Aspiration Pneumonia
Most common type of aspiration pneumonia caused by bacteria that
normally reside in the upper airways or stomach.
Predisposing factors: Hospitalized patients with depressed gag reflex,
impaired swallowing, or nasogastric or endotracheal tube. Elderly
individuals and patients with impaired consciousness (e.g. drug, alcohol,
stroke).
Clinical FeaturesHighly variable and depend upon the bacteria involved and status of the
host.
Most cases are due to anaerobic bacteria that normally reside in the
gingival crevices.
Usual features of pneumonia such as cough, fever, purulent sputum and
dyspnea. The process evolves over a period of several days or weeks
instead of hours in usual pneumonia.Other features: Weight loss and anemia.
Oral examination: May reveal periodontal disease.
Diagnosis
Sputum: Putrid discharge is considered as diagnostic of anaerobic
infection
Chest radiograph: Involvement of dependent pulmonary segments by
aspiration. Lower lobes are involved when aspiration occurs in upright
position and the superior segments of the lower lobes or posterior segment
of the upper lobes when aspiration occurs in recumbent position.
TreatmentPenicillin. However, about 25% of cases are caused by penicillinase-producing anaerobic bacteria.
Clindamycin (600 mg 8 hourly IV followed by 300 mg 6 hourly orally) is the drug of choice for
anaerobic infections above the diaphragm (e.g. pulmonary infections).
Other drugs include amoxicillin-clavulanate or newer fluoroquinolones (levofloxacin and
gemifloxacin).
Metronidazole alone should not be used as a monotherapy because of failure rate of about 50%.
Hospital-Acquired Pneumonia (Nosocomial Pneumonia)

Q. Write short essay on hospital-acquired pneumonia (nosocomial
pneumonia) and its management.
Hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP) or nosocomial pneumonia is a new
episode of pneumonia developing in hospital in a patient who is beyond 2
days (more than 48 hours) of their initial admission to hospital, which was
not incubating at the time of admission. Most common resistant organism
causing HAP is Staphylococcus aureus.Second most second common (urinary infection being first) hospital-
acquired infection (HAI) and the leading cause of HAI-associated death.
The hospital-acquired pneumonias are serious and may be life threatening.Ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP): It is a subcategory of nosocomial
pneumonia that occurs in patients who have been on ventilator support for
any reason. Pneumonia is termed as VAP if it occurs after 48 hours after
endotracheal intubation for mechanical ventilation, but within 72 hours of
start of ventilation. Most common mechanism of nosocomial pneumonia is
aspiration and most common organism is Staphylococcus aureus. The
most common multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacilli (MDR-GNB)
causing HAP/VAP: P. aeruginosa.Early onset HAP and VAP: Occurring within the first 4 days of
hospitalization, usually carry a better prognosis, and are more likely to be
caused by antibiotic sensitive bacteria.Late-onset HAP and VAP (5 days or more) are more likely to be caused
by multidrug-resistant (MDR) pathogens, and are associated with
increased patient mortality and morbidity.
CriteriaAt least two of three clinical features (fever greater than 38°C,
leukocytosis or leukopenia, and purulent secretions), a positive culture of
sputum or tracheal aspirate, and a new lung infiltrate.When fever, leukocytosis, purulent sputum, and a positive culture of a
sputum or tracheal aspirate are present without a new lung infiltrate, the
diagnosis of nosocomial tracheobronchitis should be considered.

Etiology (Table 6.82)
The organisms causing hospital-acquired pneumonias are different from
those causing CAP.
Risk factors for nosocomial pneumonia: Severe underlying disease,
malnutrition, uremia, alcoholism, cigarette smoking, immunosuppression,
increasing age, nasogastric tube (Lesser risk with orogastric tube),
endotracheal tube, decreased level of consciousness, prior AMA use,
decreased gastric acidity, upper abdominal surgery.
Risk factors for VAP: Re-intubation, supine positioning, enteral nutrition,
heavy sedation, paralytic agents, H2 antagonists and antacids.
Table 6.82: Various etiological agents causing hospital-acquired
pneumonia.Early onset:  (within 4 days of hospitalization): Staph. aureus, EGNB, S. pneumoniae and H.
influenzae
Late onset:  S. aureus, Pseudomonas, Enterobacter, Klebsiella, Acinetobacter
Clinical Features
The diagnosis should be considered in any hospitalized or ventilated patient
who develops:
Purulent sputum (or endotracheal secretions)
New infiltrate on chest radiograph
Unexplained increase in oxygen requirement
Core temperature of more than 38.3°C
Leukocytosis or leukopenia.
Investigations
Patents with hospital-acquired pneumonia should have blood cultures, and
microbiological confirmation should be sought whenever possible.
Vigorous attempts must be made to obtain respiratory secretions for
identification of the organism and determining its sensitivity to antibiotics.
In mechanically ventilated patients, bronchoscopy-directed protected
brush specimens, bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) or endotracheal aspirates
may be obtained.

Full blood count (FBC), urea and electrolytes (U&E), erythrocyte
sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP), and arterial blood
gas analysis and a chest X-ray performed.
Management/Treatment
The principles of management are similar to those for CAP. These include adequate oxygenation,
appropriate fluid balance and antibiotics.
In early-onset HAP:
–   Patients who have not received previous antibiotics can be treated with co-amoxiclav or
cefuroxime.
–   If the patient has received a course of recent antibiotics are treated with piperacillin/tazobactam
or a third generation cephalosporin.
In late-onset HAP:
–   The choice of antibiotics must cover the gram-negative bacteria, Staph. aureus (including
MRSA) and anaerobes.
–   Antipseudomonal cover by a carbapenem (meropenem) or a third-generation cephalosporin
combined with an aminoglycoside. MRSA cover may be provided by glycopeptides
(vancomycin or linezolid).
–   Acinetobacter baumannii  is usually sensitive to carbapenems but resistant cases may require
the prolonged administration of nebulized colistin.
Prevention of Ventilator-associated Pneumonia (Table 6.83)
Table 6.83: Prevention of ventilator-associated pneumonia.
Good hygiene: Rigorous handwashing by caregivers and sterility of any equipment used
Minimize the risk of aspiration
Semi recumbent positioning of the patient to prevent aspiration
Avoidance of gastric distention
Continuous subglottic suctioning
Adequate nutritional support
Early removal of endotracheal and nasogastric tubes
Oral antiseptic (chlorhexidine 2%) may be used to decontaminate the upper airway
Use of sucralfate (for stress-ulcer prophylaxis)
Avoidance of prophylactic antibiotic
Influenza
Q. Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations, complications
and management of influenza.
Definition

Influenza is an acute systemic viral infection caused by influenza viruses that
primarily affects the upper and/or lower respiratory tract.
Etiology
The influenza virus is a spherical or filamentous enveloped RNA virus.
Influenza A Virus
It is responsible for pandemics and epidemics.
Antigenic variation and influenza outbreaks and pandemics: The most
extensive and severe outbreaks of influenza are due to influenza A viruses.
This may be because H and N antigens of these viruses undergo periodic
antigenic variation. Immunity following viral infection is type-specific and
of short duration.Antigenic/genetic shift: Major antigenic variations (switch in the
hemagglutinin or neuraminidase antigen generates new influenza A
subtypes) is called antigenic/genetic shift. Antigenic shift results in a virus
of different antigenic character to which most or all of the population is
susceptible and is the basis for influenza pandemics. For example, an
antigenic shift involving both the hemagglutinin and the neuraminidase
occurred in 1957 resulting in severe pandemic. It was due to shift of
predominant influenza A virus subtype from HINl to H2N2.Antigenic/genetic drifts: These are due to minor antigenic variations.
Minor antigenic may periodically involve the hemagglutinin or the
neuraminidase component or both. Antigenic drift result viruses that are
different enough from preceding strains and enables the virus to evade
previously acquired immunity and contributes to yearly seasonal
epidemics.
Influenza viruses also infect other species (e.g. birds and pigs) and these
animal strains may infect humans and spread from person to person.
Clinical FeaturesIncubation period: 1–3 days.
Clinical manifestations: Influenza is respiratory illness characterized by
systemic symptoms such as sudden onset of headache, fever, chills,
myalgia, nausea, vomiting and malaise. The respiratory signs and
symptoms include harsh unproductive cough and sore throat cough.

Physical findings: Usually minimal in uncomplicated cases. Pharynx may
be unremarkable despite a severe sore throat and chest is usually clear.
In uncomplicated cases, the symptoms usually subside within 3–5 days.
Investigations
Blood: Leukopenia.
Throat swab or nasopharyngeal aspirate or sputum: Virus may be detected
in throat swabs or nasopharyngeal aspirate or sputum.
Reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR): Most
sensitive and specific technique for detection of influenza viruses.
Rapid influenza diagnostic tests (RIDTs): Detect influenza virus antigens
by immunologic or enzymatic techniques.
Complications
Pulmonary complications: Primary influenza viral pneumonia,
secondary bacterial pneumonia (most often due to superinfection with
Strep. pneumoniae, Staph. aureus or other bacteria), mixed viral and
bacterial pneumonia, exacerbation of underlying asthma and COPD.Extrapulmonary complications:
–   Myositis, myocarditis, pericarditis, worsening of underlying congestive
heart failure and coronary artery disease.
–   Neurological complications: Reye’s syndrome in children, encephalitis
or transverse myelitis.
–   Post-influenzal asthenia and depression.
Management
Bed rest till fever subsides.
Paracetamol 0.5–1 g every 4–6 hourly.
Avoid aspirin, particularly in adolescents and children, because of its association with the Reye’s
syndrome.
Specific antiviral therapy-administration of neuraminidase inhibitor:  Oral oseltamivir (75 mg
twice daily) or inhaled zanamivir (10 mg twice daily) for 5 days reduces the severity of symptoms
and duration of illness if given within 48 hours of onset of symptom onset of both influenza A and
B. Amantadine (100 mg twice a day) and rimantadine (100 mg twice a day) which are useful only
for influenza A.Specific treatment of complications.

Prevention
Vaccination
Indications:  Prevention annual seasonal vaccination is advised to elderly, individuals with chronic
medical illnesses (which increases the risk of the complications of influenza), such as chronic
cardiopulmonary diseases or immunocompromised or renal disease and their health-care workers.
Specific vaccination gives about 70% protection.
Types of vaccine:  Two types of vaccines against seasonal influenza are available namely
inactivated (killed-injectable) and live attenuated vaccines (nasal spray). Both vaccines contain
three strains of influenza: an H3N2 virus, an H1N1 (seasonal) virus and an influenza B virus.
Vaccine composition is changed yearly to cover the ‘predicted’ seasonal strains, but vaccination
may fail when a new pandemic strain of virus emerges.
Chemoprophylaxis:  Antiviral drugs may be used as chemoprophylaxis against influenza. However,
they may lead to development of resistance.Chemoprophylaxis with oseltamivir or zanamivir are helpful against influenza A and B;
amantadine and rimantadine are useful for influenza A.
Swine Flu (H1N1 Influenza)
(refer pages 166-7)
Avian Influenza
Q. Write short essay on avian influenza.
Avian influenza is caused by avian influenza A viruses  and is primary
public health concern of the 21st century.
Avian influenza A viruses caused sporadic avian influenza and small
outbreaks in humans, usually after direct contact with birds (most
commonly poultry). There is no sustained person-to-person transmission.
Clinical Features
History of exposure to infected birds.
Incubation period: Usually 2–5 days after exposure (longer than with
human influenza infection).
Symptoms: Fever (at least 100.4°F), cough and myalgias. Watery
diarrhea is fairly common. Usually complicated by viral pneumonia
causing increasing respiratory distress and cyanosis. Ventilatory support is
often necessary and mortality rate may be as high as 50%.
Investigations
Blood: Leukopenia.

Liver function tests: Raised hepatic aminotransferase, lactate
dehydrogenase and creatine kinase.
Chest X-ray: Infiltrates seen 7 days after the onset of fever.
Diagnosis:
–   Isolation of virus or detection of H5 specific RNA. Pharyngeal swabs
are preferred than nasal swabs, because of greater titers in the throat
and lower respiratory tract.
–   Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays are more
sensitive than commercial rapid antigen tests.
Prevention: Whenever there is an outbreak of avian influenza, avoid live
animal markets and poultry farms.
Treatment
Drug treatment:  Same as H1N1 influenza (refer page 167).
Non-pharmacologic approachesInfluenza surveillance: For early warning, travel restrictions, quarantine, use of N 95 particulate
respiratory masks, communication networking.
Proper poultry-handling and personal hygiene (such as handwashing) and minimizing contact with
birds during an outbreak.
Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome
Q. Write a short essay/note on severe acute respiratory syndrome
(SARS) and its laboratory findings.
An extraordinary outbreak of the coronavirus-associated disease known as
severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) was described for the first time
in 2002–2003 from Southern China and quickly spread to several
countries within less than a year. A death rate of nearly 10% was reported.
Though, presently it has not been reported from any country, there is
possibility of either human or animal reservoirs of the virus and this may
lead to return of SARS.Etiology
SARS is caused by a previously unknown novel coronavirus (SARSCoV).
It is not closely related to any of the previously described coronaviruses.
Mode of spread: By close person-to-person contact via droplet transmission
or fomite.

Clinical Features
Incubation period: 2–7 days (range 1–14 days).
Symptoms: Begins as a systemic disease with persistent fever,
chills/rigor, myalgia, malaise, headache, and myalgias followed in 1–2
days by a nonproductive/dry cough and dyspnea. About 25 % have
diarrhea and about 20% develop ARDS over a period of 3 weeks.Older individuals may present with decrease in general well-being, poor
feeding, fall without the typical febrile response.
Laboratory Findings
Blood
Lymphopenia due to the destruction of both CD4+ and CD8+ T-cells.
Thrombocytopenia may occur as the disease progresses.
Raised serum levels of aminotransferases, creatine kinase, and lactate
dehydrogenase.
Laboratory features of low-grade disseminated intravascular coagulation
(DIC): Thrombocytopenia, prolonged activated partial thromboplastin
time and raised D-dimer.
Chest X-rayMost frequently peripheral and lower zone or interstitial infiltrates show
patchy areas of consolidation. There will no cavitation, hilar
lymphadenopathy or pleural effusion.Patchy areas may progress to diffuse involvement.
Spontaneous pneumomediastinum may occur in few.
Chest X-ray may be normal in about 25%.
Diagnosis
Detection of SARS CoV: A rapid diagnosis of SARS-CoV infection by
reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR). The samples use includes:
–   During early phase: Respiratory tract (e.g. nasopharyngeal aspirate)
samples and plasma
–   During later phase: Urine and stool specimen.
Quantitative measurement of SARS-CoV RNA in blood with RT-PCR
technique

Viral culture of respiratory tract samples.
Treatment
No specific therapy.
Supportive care:  It is the mainstay in therapy and includes maintenance of fluid and electrolyte
balance, oxygenation and, if necessary ventilation with proper protection of health care workers.
High dose methylprednisolone (0.5 g daily) is given if pneumonia or hypoxemia develops.
However, its benefit remains to be established.
Middle East Respiratory Syndrome
Q. Write short note on Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS).
Caused by novel coronavirus namely MERS-CoV.
Most cases have been reported in Arab Peninsula and neighboring
countries with more than 70% from Saudi Arabia.
Mode of transmission: Human to human transmission can occur although
spread may not be efficient. Unlike SARS coronavirus, MERS-CoV does
not preferentially infect health care workers.
Source of infection: Camels are major reservoir host for MERS-CoV and an
animal source of infection in humans.
Incubation period: 2–14 days (mean 5.2 days)The virus causes more severe disease in individuals who are old, with
weakened immune systems, with chronic diseases (e.g. cancer, chronic
lung disease and diabetes).
Clinical features: Typical MERS symptoms include fever, cough and
shortness of breath. Pneumonia is common, but not always present.
Gastrointestinal symptoms, including diarrhea, have also been reported.About 36% of reported patients with MERS died mostly due to ARDS.
Renal failure also can develop.
Investigations: Leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, raised elevated liver
enzymes, LDH and creatinine kinase.
Treatment: Neither vaccine nor specific treatment is currently available. Treatment is supportive and
based on the patient’s clinical condition.
DIFFUSE PARENCHYMAL LUNG

DISEASE/INTErSTITIAL LUNG DISEASE
Q. Discuss the etiology and approach to diffuse parenchymal lung
disease/interstitial lung diseases.
Definition: Diffuse parenchymal lung diseases [DPLD, also referred to as
interstitial lung diseases-(ILDs)] are a heterogeneous group of conditions
affecting the parenchyma of lung and alveoli.
Diffuse: Refers to the nonspecific radiological patterns
Lung parenchyma includes the alveoli, the alveolar epithelium, the
capillary endothelium, the spaces between those structures (interstitium)
as well as the perivascular and lymphatic tissues. However, the term is
often used loosely to refer to any form of lung tissue. Many of these
diseases involve the alveoli air space as well.Interstitium of the lung:  It is defined as continuum of loose connective tissue throughout the lung
and composed of three subdivisions:
1. Bronchovascular (axial), surrounding the bronchi, arteries, and veins from the lung root to the
level of the respiratory bronchiole.
2. Parenchymal  (acinar), situated between the alveolar and capillary basement membranes.
3. Subpleural , situated beneath the pleura, as well as in the interlobular septae.
Interstitium of the lung is not normally visible radiographically. It becomes visible only when
its volume increases.
They are non-infectious and non-malignant and usually chronic diseases that diffusely
involve the lungs.
Diffuse parenchymal lung diseases can progress fibrosis in the interstitium (interstitial
pulmonary fibrosis) of the lung.
Etiology (Table 6.84)
Q. Write short essay/note on causes/etiology of interstitial lung disease.
Many diseases can produce interstitial lung disease. Based on the major
underlying histopathology, ILDs can be divided into two groups: (1) those
associated with predominant inflammation and fibrosis and (2) those with a
predominantly granulomatous reaction in interstitial or vascular.
Table 6.84: Major causes of interstitial lung disease (ILD)/diffuse
parenchymal lung diseases (DPLD).
ILD/DPLD due to known causes ILD/DPLD due to unknown causes
Non-granulomatous interstitial inflammation (predominant inflammation and fibrosis)

Drugs: Antibiotics, gold, amiodarone, D-
penicillamine, nitrofurantoin,
Chemotherapeutic (e.g. busulphan, bleomycin,
methotrexate, CCNU)
Asbestos
Fumes and gases
Radiation
Aspiration pneumonitis
Residual of acute respiratory distress
syndrome
Smoking related: Pulmonary Langerhans cell
histiocytosis, respiratory bronchiolitis
interstitial lung disease and desquamative
interstitial pneumoniaAcute eosinophilic pneumoniaIdiopathic interstitial pneumonias (IIPs)
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Pulmonary autoimmune rheumatic diseases
(e.g. systemic lupus erythematosus,
rheumatoid arthritis)Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis
Eosinophilic pneumonias
Lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM)
Diffuse pulmonary hemorrhage
Goodpasture’s syndrome
Idiopathic pulmonary hemosiderosis
Lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia (seen in
HIV)
Granulomatous interstitial inflammation
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (organic dusts)
Inorganic dusts: For example, silicosis,
berylliosisSarcoidosis
Pulmonary Langerhans’ cell histiocytosis
Granulomatous lung disease with vasculitis
(e.g. Wegener, Churg–Strauss)
Clinical Features
Q. Write short essay/note on clinical features of diffuse parenchymal
lung disease/ interstitial lung diseases.
Depending on the duration of illness and clinical presentation, ILDs is
divided into acute, subacute and chronic.
Acute presentation  (days to weeks)
–   This presentation is uncommon  but may develop with drugs, acute
idiopathic interstitial pneumonia and hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
–   Chief symptoms are cough, dyspnea and occasionally fever.
–   Chest X-ray shows diffuse alveolar opacities which can be confused
with ‘atypical’ pneumonia.
Subacute presentation  (weeks to months)
–   Symptoms: Gradually increasing cough and dyspnea over weeks to
months.
–   This type of presentation can occur especially with sarcoidosis, and
drug-induced ILDs.
Chronic presentation (months to years)

–   Most common presentation in which symptoms are present for months
to years.
–   Common symptoms: Shortness of breath, dry cough, fatigue,
weakness, loss of appetite and weight.
Physical Examination
The findings include tachypnea, grossly decreased chest expansion and
bibasilar fine end-inspiratory dry crackles (Velcro) which are common
in ILD associated with inflammation. Clubbing, cyanosis and features of
right-sided heart failure occurs in advanced disease.
Signs of underlying cause.
Investigations
Laboratory Investigation
Blood: Total leukocyte count, ESR, renal and liver functions, antinuclear
antibodies, rheumatoid factor and circulating immune complexes.
Serum precipitins: Confirm exposure when hypersensitivity pneumonitis
is suspected.
Angiotensin converting enzyme levels: Elevated in ILDs (e.g.
sarcoidosis).
Antibodies: Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies and anti-basement
membrane antibodies are useful if vasculitis is suspected (e.g. Wegener’s
granulomatosis, Goodpasture’s syndrome).
Chest Imaging StudiesChest X-ray (Figs. 6.34A and B): Often shows a bibasilar reticular or
linear pattern or ground glass appearance. Nodular or mixed pattern of
alveolar filling and reticular pattern may also be observed. Nodular
opacities in the upper lung zones seen in sarcoidosis, chronic
hypersensitivity pneumonitis, silicosis, rheumatoid arthritis.
Honeycombing (due to small thick-walled cystic spaces and fibrosis) in
long-standing conditions. It indicates poor prognosis. Basal fibrosis,
pleural thickening and pleural plaques suggest asbestosis.Computed tomography: High-resolution CT (HRCT) of chest is superior
to chest radiography for (i) early detection and confirmation of suspected

interstitial lung disease, (ii) demonstrates the extent and distribution of
disease, (iii) detection of co-existing disease (e.g. lymphadenopathy,
emphysema, carcinoma) and (iv) to determining the most appropriate area
for biopsy (if necessary).Pulmonary function tests: It shows following findings:
Figs. 6.34A and B:  Chest x ray of bilateral interstitial lung disease (A) AP view; (B) lateral view.
Q. Write short note on pulmonary function tests in interstitial lung
disease.
–   Restrictive ventilatory defect in the presence of reduced lung volumes
and impaired gas transfer.
♦   Restrictive defect is characterized by reduced FVC, reduced FEV1,
normal or elevated FEV1: FVC ratio, total lung capacity, reduced
diffusion capacity.
♦   Obstructive pattern is seen in sarcoidosis, hypersensitivity
pneumonitis, Lymphangioleiomyomatosis, tuberous sclerosis and
neurofibromatosis.
–   Exercise tests: Help in the evaluation of severity of the disease. The
six-minute walk test records oxygen saturation before, during and after
exercise and measures the total distance walked.Arterial blood gas: It may reveal hypoxemia and respiratory alkalosis.
Hypercapnia is rare and may develop in the end-stage. Increased alveolar-

arterial oxygen gradient [P(A-a)O2].
Fiberoptic bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL): In
selected cases (e.g. sarcoidosis, hypersensitivity pneumonitis, cancer),
cellular analysis of BAL may be useful in narrowing the differential
diagnosis. Transbronchial biopsy may aid in diagnosis.
–   Sarcoidosis and hypersensitivity pneumonitis: It fluid shows T cell
lymphocytosis (increased CD4 cells in sarcoidosis and CD8 cells in
hypersensitivity pneumonitis).
–   Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF): It shows predominant neutrophils
and eosinophils.
– Pulmonary alveolar proteinosis: It is milky and microscopically contains
foamy macrophages with PAS positive material.Diffuse pulmonary hemorrhage: It shows RBCs and hemosiderin-laden
macrophages.
Biopsy: Open or video assisted lung biopsy is used for confirmation of
diagnosis and assessment of activity.
Treatment
Major Goals
Treat the underlying cause if possible.
Permanent removal of the offending agent if known.
General
–   Oxygen therapy: For patients with documented hypoxia, SpO 2 <89%,–PaO 2 <55 mm Hg.
Improves exercise tolerance.
–   Adequate nutrition, immunizations (pneumococcal, influenza).
–   Pulmonary rehabilitation: Treatment of pulmonary hypertension, single-lung transplantation.
Early identification and aggressive suppression of the acute and chronic inflammatory process,
thereby reducing further damage to the lung.
Drugs
Corticosteroids are the mainstay for the suppression of the inflammation present in ILD, though
they are not effective in majority, particularly those with significant fibrosis. Prednisone in the
dose is 0.5–1 mg/kg once daily for 4–12 weeks. If the patient improves it is then tapered to
maintenance dose of 0.25–0.5 mg/kg level for an additional 4–12 weeks.N-Acetylcysteine:  600 mg thrice daily. Has been found promising in the management of DPLD.
Other immunosuppressants:  If the patient does not respond to steroids, another
immunosuppressant such as cyclophosphamide or azathioprine (1–2 mg/kg lean body weight per
day) mycophenolate mofetil, rituximab with or without glucocorticoids may be tried.
Other drugs:  Include colchicine, cyclosporine and N-acetylcysteine (a precursor to the naturally
occurring antioxidant glutathione).
Pirfenidone is an anti-fibrotic drug used for idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). Mechanism of

action is via the down regulation of the production of growth factors and procollagens I and II
leading to decrease fibroblast proliferation.
Idiopathic Interstitial Pneumonias
Idiopathic interstitial pneumonias (IIPs) are characterized by diffuse
inflammation and fibrosis in the lung parenchyma in which the etiology is
not known. They form a major subgroup of interstitial lung diseases or
diffuse parenchymal lung diseases. The lung parenchyma shows varying
combinations of fibrosis and inflammation.
Classification of idiopathic interstitial pneumonias (ATS/ERS joint
consensus statement-2002). Based on mainly histological patterns/in order
of relative frequency is presented in Table 6.85.
Table 6.85: Classification of idiopathic interstitial pneumonias based
mainly on histological patterns/in order of relative frequency.Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF)/usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP)
Non-specific interstitial pneumonia (NSIP)
Cryptogenic organizing pneumonia (COP)/bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia (BOOP)
Acute interstitial pneumonia (AIP)/(Hamman-Rich syndrome) rapidly fatal
–   Respiratory bronchiolitis associated interstitial lung disease (RBILD)
–   Desquamative interstitial pneumonia (DIP)
–   Lymphoid interstitial pneumonia (LIP)
Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis
Q. Write short essay/note on clinical features, investigations and
treatment of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.
Also known as usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP) and was previously called
as cryptogenic fibrosing alveolitis (CFA).
Definition: It is a progressive fibrosing interstitial pneumonia of unknown
cause.
Contributory factors: Cigarette smoking, chronic aspiration, antidepressants,
infections (e.g. Epstein–Barr virus), exposure to occupational dusts (e.g.
wood, metal dusts) and chronic gastroesophageal reflux.
Clinical features and investigations are discussed under ILD (refer pages 343-
5).

Treatment
Refer treatment of ‘interstitial lung disease’ as discussed above.
Corticosteroids: Response is poor.
OCCUPATIONAL LUNG DISEASES
Q. Write short essay/note on common occupational lung diseases and
their etiology/common causes of pneumoconiosis.
Exposure to dusts, gases, vapors and fumes at work can cause many types
of lung disease. It is difficult to distinguish occupational and
environmental lung diseases from those of non-environmental origin.
Pneumoconioses are defined as lung diseases produced by organic as
well as inorganic particulates and chemical fumes and vapors.
However, sometimes the term occupational lung diseases and
pneumoconiosis are used interchangeably.Common  pneumoconiosis are those due to inorganic (mineral) dusts.
Occupational exposure and associated lung diseases are listed in Table
6.86.
Table 6.86: Occupational exposure and associated lung diseases.
Occupational exposure Disease associated with chronic exposure
Diseases due to inorganic (mineral) dusts: Common pneumoconiosis
Coal
Silica
Asbestos
Beryllium
Iron oxide
Tin dioxideCoal-worker’s pneumoconiosis (CWP)
Silicosis
Asbestos-related diseases
Berylliosis
Siderosis
Stannosis
Diseases due to organic dusts
Cotton, flax or hemp dust
Mouldy hay, grain, straw
Mould malting
Contaminated bagasse (sugar cane)Byssinosis
Farmer’s lung
Malt worker’s lung
Bagassosis
Diseases due to gases and fumes
Irritant gases, isocyanates cadmium
Platinum saltsOccupational asthma, bronchitis, ARDS
Occupational asthma

Diseases due to biological substances
Proteolytic enzymes, alllergens from animals
and insects (excreta), contaminated grain dustOccupational asthma, bronchitis
Diseases due to chemicals and radioactive substances
Polycyclic hydrocarbons, radon Bronchial carcinoma
Coal-workers’ Pneumoconiosis
Q. Write a short essay/note on coal-worker’s pneumoconiosis (CWP).
Definition: Coal-workers’ pneumoconiosis (CWP) is the parenchymal
lung disease caused by prolonged inhalation of carbon particles (coal
mine dust).
Coal-worker’s pneumoconiosis develops in coal miners with a prolonged
history of inhalation of coal dust. The coal mine dust particles about 2–5
μm in diameter are retained in the small airways and alveoli of the lung.
The incidence of the disease depends on the total dust exposure, and
availability of ventilation and dust suppression. The risk of this disease is
reduced due to improved ventilation and working conditions.Incidence is more in anthracite coal miners compared to bituminous
miners.
Classification: Based on the size and extent of radiographic nodularity, CWP
is subdivided into:Simple coal-worker’s pneumoconiosis (SCWP)
Progressive massive fibrosis (PMF).
Simple Coal-worker’s Pneumoconiosis
Simple coal-worker’s pneumoconiosis (SCWP) refers to the deposition of
coal dust in the lung and produces small radiographic (micronodular)
shadows/nodules on the chest X-ray in an otherwise asymptomatic
individual. It is the most common type of pneumoconiosis.Develops after prolonged exposure (15–20 years) to coal dust.
SCWP does not impair lung function and does not progress if the miner
leaves the industry/exposure ceases.
Grading of simple coal-workers pneumoconiosis: Depending on the chest
X-ray appearance, simple CWP is divided into three categories (Table
6.87).

Simple pneumoconiosis (categories 2 and 3) can progress to progressive
massive fibrosis (PMF).
Table 6.87: Grading of simple coal-worker’s pneumoconiosis.
Category Chest X-ray appearance
1 Few small round opacities
2 Numerous small round opacities but normal lung markings still visible
3 Very numerous small round opacities and normal lung markings partly or totally
obscured
Progressive Massive Fibrosis
Q. Write a short essay/note on progressive massive fibrosis (PMF).
PMF progresses even after the miner leaves the industry/exposure ceases.
Chest X-ray: Characterized by single or multiple round fibrotic
nodules/masses several centimeters in diameter (>1 cm in size to large
dense masses), invariably in the upper lobes. Sometimes these nodules
show central necrotic cavities.Lung function tests: Mixed restrictive and obstructive ventilatory defect
with loss of lung volume, irreversible airflow limitation and reduced gas
transfer.Clinical features: Progressive breathlessness/dyspnea and cough with
blackish sputum (melanoptysis).
Complications: Respiratory failure, right ventricular failure and Caplan’s
syndrome.
Caplan’s syndrome
Q. Write a short essay/note on Caplan’s syndrome (rheumatoid
pneumoconiosis).
Caplan’s syndrome is the combination of pneumoconiotic nodules with
sero-positive rheumatoid arthritis.
Pneumoconiotic nodules are round, fibrotic and measure 0.5–5 cm
diameter and are found mainly in the periphery of the lung fields.
Rheumatoid factor is positive and pathological features are similar to a
rheumatoid nodule.
This syndrome can also seen in pneumoconiosis (e.g. silicosis) other than

CWP.
Asbestos-Related Lung and Pleural Diseases
Q. Write a short essay/note on the asbestos-related diseases of lungs and
pleura.
Asbestos types: Asbestos has the unique property of occurring naturally
as a fiber. It is remarkably resistant to heat, acid and alkali. Major types
are: chrysotile (white asbestos), crocidolite (blue asbestos) and amosite
(brown asbestos).All of these types are fibrogenic and have the potential
to cause asbestos-related diseases. It is widely used for roofing, insulation
and fireproofing.Occupational exposure: It is highest with workers involved in the
production of asbestos products (mining, milling and manufacturing),
shipyard and construction industries. Exposure can also occur in
automobile and railroad workers and those involved in thermal and
electrical wire insulation.Asbestos Related Diseases
1. Asbestosis (progressive pulmonary fibrosis)—highest dose is required to
cause asbestosis
2. Benign localized pleural fibrous plaques—calcification of parietal pleura
more pronounced on the diaphragm and mediastinum.
3. Benign pleural effusions
4. Carcinoma of lung
5. Malignant mesotheliomas of pleura and mesothelioma of peritoneum (rare)
6. Laryngeal carcinomas.
Asbestosis
Definition: Asbestosis is defined as interstitial fibrosis of the lung caused
by exposure to asbestos dust. It does not include asbestos-induced pleural
diseases and carcinoma of lung that are found in asbestos-exposed
workers.Duration of exposure: Development of asbestosis is directly related to
the intensity and duration of exposure. It develops after moderate to severe
exposure for at least 10 years.

Clinical features: Progressive exertional breathlessness, finger clubbing
and late-inspiratory crepitations/crackles over the lower zones of lung.
Investigations:
–   Radiography:
♦   Chest radiographic hallmark of asbestosis is presence of irregular or
linear opacities in the lower lung fields. An indistinct heart border or
a ‘ground-glass’ appearance in the lung fields may be observed.
♦   HRCT: May show subpleural curvilinear lines 5–10 mm in length
which appear to be parallel to the pleural surface. Plain chest X-ray
many not show pleural disease; however, CT can demonstrate
pleural disease in more than 90% cases. Honeycomb lung may also
be seen.
–   Pulmonary function tests: Restrictive pattern with a decreased both
lung volumes and diffusing capacity.
–   Lung biopsy: May show asbestos bodies and fibrosis.Complications: Respiratory failure, right ventricular failure and bronchial
carcinoma.
Lung Cancer
Most common cancer associated with asbestos exposure. Minimum latent
period range from 15 to 20 years between first exposure and development
of cancer.Histological, it may be squamous cell carcinoma or adenocarcinoma.
Mesothelioma
Mesothelioma is a primary malignant tumor of mesothelial lining of pleura
and/or peritoneum and both can develop with asbestos exposure and is
most commonly caused by blue asbestos.In contrast to lung cancer, development of mesothelioma has not
association with smoking.
Relatively short period of exposure (even 1–2 years) that occurred more
than 20–40 years ago is associated with development of mesothelium.
Clinical presentation: Persistent chest pain (due to involvement of chest
wall), breathlessness (due to pleural effusion) and usually unilateral
hemorrhagic pleural effusion. As the tumor advances, it encases the

underlying lung, may invade into the lung parenchyma, the mediastinum
and the pericardium.
Diagnosis is confirmed by video-assisted thoracoscopic biopsy of pleura.
Mesothelioma is almost invariably fatal.
Silicosis
Q. Write a short essay/note on silicosis.
Definition: Silicosis is a parenchymal lung disease associated with
inhalation of crystalline silicon dioxide (silica).
Occupational exposure: High-risk occupations include mining, stone
cutting, sand blasting, and quarrying (e.g. granite), pottery and ceramics
industry, foundry work, boiler scaling, glass and cement manufacturing,
etc.Silica is highly fibrogenic and causes the development of hard nodules
that coalesce as the disease advances. Pulmonary fibrosis depends on dose
and develops after many years of exposure.Associated risk: Silicosis is associated with increased risk of tuberculosis
(silicotuberculosis), lung cancer and COPD. The increased risk is lifelong
even if exposure ceases. Chemoprophylaxis using INH for 9 months is
recommended if latent tuberculosis is diagnosed with a positive tuberculin
test. Other diseases that can develop in silicosis include chronic renal
insufficiency and autoimmune diseases (e.g. scleroderma, rheumatoid
arthritis and Wegener’s granulomatosis).
Forms of silicosis (silica-induced lung disease): Chronic, acute or
accelerated.Chronic or simple silicosis
–   Most common form of silicosis. It occurs after many decades (10 to 20
years) of exposure to relatively low levels of silica.
–   Clinically characterized by gradually progressive dyspnea and dry
cough. It is often compatible with normal life.
–   Radiological features: Variable and similar to those of coal-worker’s
pneumoconiosis. It may show multiple well circumscribed 3 to 5 mm
nodular opacities mainly in the mid- and upper-zones. As the diseases
progresses extensive fibrosis develops and resembles PMF. The
involvement of hilar lymph nodes by chronic silicosis is characteristic

(but is uncommon and non-specific), with a tendency towards
peripheral calcification, which produces the so-called egg-shell
calcification .
–   Pulmonary function tests: Mixed pattern of obstruction and
restriction with a reduced diffusion capacity.
–   No specific treatment.
Acute silicosis
–   It occurs after intense exposure (very high concentration of dust) to
very fine crystalline silica dust over a few months (about less than 10
months of exposure) and is usually rapidly fatal within years.
–   Characterized by pulmonary edema, interstitial inflammation and
accumulation of proteinaceous fluid rich in surfactant within the
alveoli.
–   Chest radiograph: May show miliary infiltration or areas of
consolidation. HRCT chest may show pattern known as ‘crazy paving’.Accelerated silicosis
–   It occurs after a few years (typically 5–10 years) of exposure to silica.
–   More aggressive course associated with rapidly progressive features of
dyspnea and pulmonary fibrosis.
–   Involves mainly middle and lower zones of the lungs as compared to
chronic silicosis.
Pulmonary Fibrosis
A wide variety of lung disorders heal by producing fibrous tissue and results
in fibrosis of the lung.
Types of Pulmonary Fibrosis
Q. Write a short essay/note on types of pulmonary fibrosis and causes of
interstitial fibrosis.
1. Replacement fibrosis: In this the damaged lung parenchyma (e.g.
suppuration, infarction) replaced by fibrous tissue.
Common causes: Pulmonary tuberculosis, bronchiectasis, lung
abscess, pulmonary infarcts and necrotizing pneumonias
2. Focal fibrosis: In focal fibrosis, the extent of fibrosis varies from small
nodular lesions to extensive areas.

Common causes: Coal-worker’s pneumoconiosis (CWP), asbestosis
and silicosis.
3. Interstitial fibrosis: In this fibrosis is diffuse and represents the end result
of interstitial lung diseases.
Common causes of interstitial lung disease (refer Table 6.84).
Clinical Features of Replacement Fibrosis
Q. Write a short essay/note on clinical features, radiological features
and management of replacement fibrosis.
History of cough with or without expectoration and dyspnea. Sputum may
be blood-tinged.
Physical findings in the chest
Inspection and palpation:
–   Features on the affected side: Shifting of the trachea and
mediastinum towards the affected side. Drooping of the shoulder,
flattening, hollowing, and crowding of the ribs, diminished movements
of the chest wall and scoliosis of the spine. The hemithorax is smaller,
its expansion and spinoscapular distance are diminished and
spinoacromial distance is increased. Vocal fremitus is usually
decreased.
–   Chest expansion is reduced.Percussion: On the affected side  there is impaired note.
Auscultation
–   When fibrosis is extensive, the intensity of breath sound is reduced and
vesicular in character with prolonged expiration.
–   Vocal resonance is reduced. Crepitations are heard.
–   Sometimes if trachea or major bronchus is pulled up due to fibrosis,
tubular bronchial breathing can be heard.
Fibrothorax
Causes of fibrothorax: Empyema, pleural effusion, traumatic
hemothorax, tuberculosis, benign asbestos pleural effusion, connective and
collagen vascular disorders, uremia, paragonimiasis, and drug induced
(e.g. ergot alkaloids, bromocriptine, pergoline, methysergide, and

methotrexate).
Clinical features of fibrothorax: (1) marked limitation of chest
movements, (2) mediastinal shift to same side, trachea may be central or
shifted to affected side, (3) decrease in size of hemothorax and (4)
crowding of ribs.
Radiological findings on the affected side: Shift of the mediastinum towards
the affected side. Smaller hemithorax than the other unaffected hemithorax.
Crowding of the ribs, pulling of hilum upwards, raised diaphragm (tenting)
and lung fields show fibrous bands.
Management/Treatment of Replacement FibrosisSymptomatic measures:  For example, breathing exercises, expectorants.
Treatment of infections:  Antibiotics.
Treatment of the underlying disease/cause:  For example, tuberculosis.
Surgery:  Resection in selected cases.
Primary Bronchial Tumors
Q. Write a short essay/note on classification of primary bronchial
tumors.
Classification of primary tumors of the lung (Table 6.88)
Table 6.88: Classification of tumors of the lung.
Benign tumors (5%) Malignant tumors (95%)
Benign epithelial tumors
Papillomas
Adenomas
Mesenchymal tumors
Chondroma
Lipoma
Miscellaneous tumors
Pulmonary hamartoma
Sclerosing hemangiomaNon-small cell carcinoma (75%)
–   Squamous or epidermoid carcinoma
–   Large-cell carcinoma
–   Adenocarcinoma
♦Bronchioloalveolar cell carcinoma
(presently termed adenocarcinoma in
situ)
Small-cell carcinoma (oat cell carcinoma)
(25%)
Adenosquamous carcinoma/Sarcomatoid
carcinoma
Salivary gland tumor:  Mucoepidermoid
carcinoma, adenoid cystic carcinoma
Carcinoid tumor:  Typical carcinoid, atypical
carcinoid

LUNG CANCER (BRONCHIAL CARCINOMA)
Q. Discuss the etiology/risk factors, clinical features, investigations,
diagnosis, metastatic and non-metastatic complications, and
management of bronchial carcinoma (bronchogenic carcinoma, lung
cancer).
Carcinoma of the lung is the most common cause of cancer death . This
is mainly due to the carcinogenic effects of cigarette smoke.
In the past, the term bronchogenic carcinoma was used for primary lung
cancer, to indicate the origin from the bronchi. Now it is known that about
5% of primary lung cancers do not arise from bronchus. Hence, the term
lung cancer is used.Bronchial carcinoma is the most common primary malignant tumor of the
lung and arises from the bronchial epithelium or mucous glands.
Incidence
Age and gender: Mostly found between 50 and 80 years of age. More
common in males, but there is a recent increase in females due to
increased smoking among females.
More in urban than rural dwellers and more in smokers than non-smokers.
Etiology
Cigarette (tobacco) smoking
–   There is strong evidence that tobacco smoking is the most important
cause of cancer of lung. Smoking also multiplies the risk of other
carcinogenic influences such as asbestos and uranium. The strongest
association of smoking is with squamous cell and small cell
carcinoma. The risk of cancer is directly proportional to the amount of
daily smoking, tendency to inhale and duration of the smoking habit.
Compared to nonsmokers, the smokers have a 10 times and heavy
smokers (more than 40 cigarettes per day for several years) 60 times
more risk of lung cancer. Females are more susceptible to tobacco
carcinogens than males. Cessation of smoking for 10 years reduces risk
but not to the level in nonsmokers. However, only 11% of heavy
smokers develop lung cancer, which indicates that genetic factors are
involved. Pipe and cigar smokers have lower incidence than
cigarette smokers. Bidi smoking may be associated with more risk of

lung cancer than cigarette smoking. Second-hand smoke exposure
(passive smoking) is also a risk factor. Adenocarcinoma is usually not
related to smoking.
–   More than 60% of new lung cancers occur in never smokers (smoked
<100 cigarettes per lifetime) or former smoker (smoked 100 cigarettes
per lifetime, quit 1 year), 1 in 5 women and 1 in 12 men diagnosed
with lung cancer have never smoked.
–   Major carcinogens in tobacco smoke include both initiators and
promoters (such as phenol derivatives). These include polycyclic
aromatic hydrocarbons (e.g. Benzo[a]pyrene, dibenzanthracene) and
radioactive elements and other contaminants (e.g. arsenic, nickel,
cadmium, molds, and vinyl chloride).
–   Environmental tobacco smoke = Main stream smoke + Side stream
smoke
Main stream smoke refers to the smoke inhaled by smoking directly while
side stream smoke refers to the smoke emitted by the burning cigarette.
Both contain carcinogens
–   In Indians with lung cancer, history of active tobacco smoking was
found in 87% of males and 85% of females. History of passive tobacco
exposure is found in 3%. Thus, 90% of all cases in India resulted from
tobacco exposure.
–   The relative risk of developing lung cancer is: 2.64 for beedi smokers,
2.23 for cigarette smokers and 2.45 as the overall relative risk (RR).Industrial and occupational hazards
–   Ionizing radiation: High-dose of ionizing radiation is carcinogenic
(uranium mining-oat cell carcinoma is the most common type).
–   Uranium: It is weakly radioactive and uranium miners (both
nonsmokers and smokers) have higher incidence of lung cancer than in
the general population.
–   Asbestos: Exposure increases the risk and risk increases when
associated with smoking. It develops after a latent period of about 10
to 30 years. Insulation and shipyard workers, increase in risk of lung
cancer after 10 years of exposure, with concurrent smoking increases
risk 90 fold.
–   Other carcinogens: Chloromethyl, ethers and mustard gas (squamous

and undifferentiated are most common types), chromium, nickel, vinyl
chloride, polyaromatic hydrocarbons, cadmium, formaldehyde and
dioxin.
Atmospheric pollution: The risk of lung cancers is higher in urban
areas than rural areas, suggesting role of air pollution. Major air pollutants
include polycyclic hydrocarbons from fossil fuels and motor vehicle
exhaust especially diesel smoke. Studies from China have shown coal
burning at home is a significant risk factor for development of lung cancer
in nonsmoking females. Coal smoke contains potential carcinogens SO2,
CO, TSP, B (a) P, radon, thorn.Diet: Vitamin A deficiency → leads to squamous metaplasia → increased
susceptibility to cancer. Folate, carotenoid rich fruits and vegetables,
vitamin E and beta-carotene are associated with reduced risk of lung
cancer.Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: It is associated with increased risk of
lung cancer.
Prior lung diseases such as chronic bronchitis, emphysema, and
tuberculosis
Genetic predisposition: Genetic polymorphisms involving cytochrome P-
450 gene CYP1A1→ increased capacity to metabolize procarcinogens
present in the cigarette smoke → increased risk of lung cancer.
–   First-degree relatives of lung cancer probands have a two-to threefold
excess risk of lung cancer and other cancers, many of which are not
smoking-related.
–   Individuals with inherited mutations in RB (retinoblastoma) and p53
(Li-Fraumeni syndrome) genes may develop lung cancer.A rare germline mutation (T790M) involving the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) maybe linked to lung cancer susceptibility in never
smokers.
Examples of the oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes involved in lung
cancer are presented in Table 6.89.
Table 6.89: Examples of the oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes
involved in lung cancer.
Histology Oncogene Tumor-suppressor genes

Adenocarcinoma EGFR, KRAS, ALK TP53, CDKN2A/B(p16, p14),
LKB1
Squamous cell carcinoma EGFR, PIK3CA, IGF-1R TP53, TP63
Small cell carcinoma MYC, BCL-2 TP53, RB1, FHIT
Large cell carcinoma (not well studied)
Pathology
Clinical subgroups of lung cancer (Table 6.90): Lung carcinomas can be
divided into two clinical subgroups on the basis of likelihood of metastases
and response to therapies.
Small cell lung cancer (SCLC), non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
(includes adenocarcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma and large cell
carcinoma) account for approximately 90% of all epithelial lung cancers.Among women and young adults (< 60 years), adenocarcinoma tends also
to be the most common form of lung cancer.
Neuroendocrine tumors of the lung arise from Kulchitsky cells of the
bronchial mucosa and consist of typical carcinoid, atypical carcinoid and
small-cell lung cancer.
Table 6.90: Clinical subgroups of lung cancer.
Small cell lung carcinomas (SCLC) -highly
metastatic, high response to chemotherapyNon-small cell lung carcinomas (NSCLC) -less
metastatic, less responsive Small-cell (oat cell) carcinoma Squamous (epidermoid) carcinoma
Adenocarcinoma (including
bronchioloalveolar carcinoma)
Large cell carcinoma
Lung Cancer in India
Non-small-cell lung cancer constitutes 75–80% of lung cancers. More than
70% of them are detected in stages III and IV. Thus, curative surgery
cannot be done in these cases. In many Western countries adenocarcinoma
has become the most common lung cancer. However, in India it is still
most common is squamous cell carcinoma in both males and females.Small-cell lung carcinoma constitutes 20% of all lung cancers. It is
detected at an extensive stage in 70% of patients at the time of diagnosis.
Site: Depending on the site, the lung cancers are divided into:
Central (hilar): Lung cancers arise in and around the hilus of the lung are

the most common . About 75% arise from first, second, and third-order
bronchi. Squamous cell and small-cell carcinomas are generally centrally
placed.
Peripheral: Lung cancers may also arise in the periphery of the lung from
the alveolar septal cells or terminal bronchioles. They are usually
adenocarcinomas, including bronchioloalveolar type.
Bronchioloalveolar carcinoma (BAC) is a subtype of adenocarcinoma that
grows along the alveoli without invasion. It can present with profuse, mucoid
sputum (bronchorrhea).
Clinical Features
More than 50% of patients present with locally advanced or metastatic
disease at the time of diagnosis. Majority patients present with signs,
symptoms, or laboratory abnormalities that may be due to the (i) primary
lesion, (ii) local tumor growth, (iii) invasion or obstruction of adjacent
structures, (iv) metastatic tumor, or as a (v) paraneoplastic syndrome. Clinical
manifestations of bronchial carcinoma can be studied under the following
headings:1. Manifestation due to the location of the primary tumor/growth  (Table
6.91)
Table 6.91: Manifestation due to the location of the primary tumor.
Due to a central or endobronchial growth Due to a peripheral growth
Cough
Hemoptysis
Wheeze and stridor
Breathlessness/dyspnea
Postobstructive pneumonitis presenting with
fever and productive coughChest pain from pleural or chest wall
involvement
Dyspnea on a restrictive basis
Symptoms of lung abscess due to cavitation
of tumor
2. Manifestation due to the regional spread of tumor in the thorax  (Table
6.92)
Table 6.92: Manifestations of lung cancer due to regional spread of
tumor in the thorax.
Pathological basis Local effects
Obstruction of airway by tumor Pneumonia, abscess, atelectasis, focal

emphysema
Tracheal obstruction Stridor (a harsh inspiratory noise) and dyspnea
Local spread into pleura Pleuritis and malignant effusion
Local spread to pericardium Pericarditis, effusion, tamponade
Compression of SVC by tumor Superior vena cava syndrome
Invasion of structure Its effects
Recurrent laryngeal nerve Hoarseness of voice and ‘bovine’ cough
Phrenic nerve Diaphragm paralysis and dyspnea
Sympathetic ganglia Horner syndrome
Esophagus Dysphagia
Chest wall (direct extension) Destruction of rib producing rib pain,
pathological fractures and intercostal neuralgia
Superior sulcus tumor (destruction of the T1
and C8 roots in the lower part of the brachial
plexus by an apical lung tumor)Pancoast’s syndrome ((pain in the inner aspect
of the arm, sometimes with small muscle
wasting in the hand)Lymphatic obstruction Pleural effusion
Vascular obstruction Superior vena cava (SVC) syndrome
Pericardial and cardiac extension Pericardial effusion, cardiac tamponade,
arrhythmias or cardiac failure
3. Manifestations of extrathoracic metastasis (Table 6.93)
Table 6.93: Manifestations of extrathoracic metastasis.
Site of metastasis Manifestations
Adrenal glands  (~50%) Usually asymptomatic, Addison’s disease
Liver (30–50%) Anorexia, nausea, biliary obstruction, weight loss, right upper
quadrant pain and pain
Brain (20%) Headache, vomiting, focal neurologic deficits, epileptic seizures
confusion, and raised intracranial pressure
Bone (20%) Bony pain, pathologic fractures or raised alkaline phosphatase
Bone marrow Cytopenias or leukoerythroblastosis
Lymph node Lymphadenopathy—commonly to mediastinal, cervical,
supraclavicular region (scalene node), and even axillary or intra-
abdominal nodes
Epidural and bone
metastasesSpinal cord compression (if spine is involved) syndromes
Paraneoplastic Syndromes (Table 6.94)

Q. Write short essay/note on:
Paraneoplastic syndromes/manifestations associated with
bronchogenic carcinoma.
Mention the non-metastatic manifestations/complications of
bronchial carcinoma.
Paraneoplastic syndromes are symptom complexes in cancer patients
which are not directly related to mass effects or invasion or metastasis
or by the secretion of hormones indigenous to the tissue of origin .
Lung cancer may occasionally be associated with paraneoplastic
syndromes. They are summarized in Table 6.94.
Paraneoplastic syndromes manifest due to the peptide hormone secreted
by the tumor and may be in the first manifestations of lung cancers. They
are often relieved by successful treatment of the primary lung cancer.
They are common with small-cell carcinoma.
Table 6.94: Paraneoplastic syndromes in lung cancer.
System involved Manifestations
SystemicAnorexia, cachexia, weight loss, fever
Endocrine Syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone causing
hyponatremia (small-cell carcinoma)
Ectopic ACTH secretion resulting in hypokalemia, rather than full-blown
Cushing’s syndrome (small cell carcinoma)
Hypercalcemia due to ectopic production of parathyroid hormone or
parathyroid hormone related peptide (squamous cell carcinoma)
Carcinoid syndrome, acromegaly, hypoglycemia, hyperthyroidism
Gynecomastia
Skeletal Clubbing of fingers (usually NSCLC) non-small cell carcinoma
Hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy (usually adenocarcinoma)-HPOA
Neuromyopathic Polyneuropathy
Myelopathy encephalomyelitis, opsoclonus-myoclonus, limbic encephalitis
Cerebellar degeneration
Myasthenia (Lambert–Eaton syndrome) and retinal blindness (small-cell
carcinoma)
HematologicalMigratory venous thrombophlebitis (Trousseau’s syndrome)
Marantic endocarditis
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
Anemia, granulocytosis, leukoerythroblastosis

Cutaneous Dermatomyositis
Acanthosis nigricans
Renal Nephrotic syndrome
Glomerulonephritis
Lamber-Eaton Myasthenic Syndrome (LMS)
Autoimmune disorders of neuromuscular junction due to anti–voltage-
gated calcium channel antibodies.
Proximal muscle weakness, usually in lower extremities
Occasionally autonomic dysfunction and rarely cranial nerve symptoms.
Frequently depressed deep tendon reflexes.
In contrast to patients with myasthenia gravis, strength improves with
serial effort.
Treatment of LMS
Chemotherapy is the initial treatment of choice.
3, 4–diaminopyridine: It increases duration of presynaptic action potential by blocking potassium
efflux, prolonging the activation of VGCC and increasing calcium entry into nerve terminals.
Table 6.95: Causes of large bronchus obstruction.
Common
Neoplasm (bronchial carcinoma or adenoma)
Enlargement of tracheobronchial lymph nodes (malignant or tuberculous)
Inhaled foreign bodies (more common in the right lung)
Bronchial casts or plugs composed of inspissated mucus or blood clot (especially asthma, cystic
fibrosis, hemoptysis, and debility)
Collections of mucus or mucopus retained in the bronchi as a result of ineffective expectoration
(especially postoperative following abdominal surgery)
Rare
Aneurysm of aorta
Giant left atrium
Pericardial effusion
Congenital bronchial atresia
Bronchial stricture (e.g. following tuberculosis or bronchial surgery/lung transplant)
Differential Diagnosis of Large Bronchus Obstruction (Table
6.95)

Investigations
Main aims of investigation: (1) to confirm the diagnosis, (2) establish the
histological cell type, (3) to stage the extent of the disease and (4) to assess
fitness to undergo treatment.
Imaging:
–   Chest X-ray
–   Plain chest radiographs may show evidence of lung cancer or
nonspecific appearances (Table 6.96).
–   Evidence of lung cancer: A normal finding does not rule out the
presence of an underlying tumor. Tumor is visible if greater than 1 cm
diameter.
Computed tomography (CT) of chest and abdomen: It is an important
for diagnosis and staging of carcinoma. Its uses are:
–   To know the tumor size and extent of disease [pleural extension, detect
occult abdominal disease (e.g. liver and adrenals).
–   To evaluate mediastinal or hilar lymph node involvement. If nodal
involvement is observed it should be confirmed by histopathology.
–   To plan biopsy procedures: Use for guided biopsy of suspected lesions
to know whether a tumor is accessible by bronchoscopy or
percutaneous CT-guided biopsy.
–   To assess the response to treatment.
Table 6.96: Common radiological presentations of bronchial carcinoma.
Finding Interpretation
Unilateral enlargement at
hilumCentral tumor or enlargement of hilar lymphnode or a peripheral
tumor in the apical segment of the lower lobe
Peripheral lung opacity
with or without cavitation,
solitary pulmonary noduleUsually irregular but well circumscribed, and may contain irregular
cavitation (squamous cell carcinoma may cavitate)
Collapse of the whole lung,
lobe or segmentEndoluminal (tumor within the bronchus) tumor or compression of
the main bronchus by enlarged lymph glands may produce
occlusion leading to complete collapse
Broadening of
mediastinum, enlarged
cardiac shadow, elevation
of a hemidiaphragmParatracheal lymphadenopathy (widening of the upper
mediastinum). Malignant pericardial effusion (enlargement of the
cardiac shadow). Raised hemidiaphragm (phrenic nerve palsy).
Mediastinal widening due to mediastinal invasion
Pleural effusion Usually indicates tumor invasion of pleural cavity/space distal to abronchial carcinoma. Usually effusion is unilateral and large and

bronchial  carcinoma . Usually effusion is unilateral  and large  and
may mask an underlying mass or pleural tumor (D/D
mesothelioma)
Destruction of rib
(osteolytic lesions)Direct extension of tumor or blood-borne metastasis
Single mass/diffuse,
multinodular lesion/fluffyBronchoalveolar carcinoma
Cytological examination: Specimens that may be obtained for examining
for malignant cells include: sputum, bronchial brushings and washings,
percutaneous (CT guided) needle aspiration biopsy from a peripheral
tumor and fine needle aspiration of lymph node, skin or liver in patients
with metastasis.Fibreoptic bronchoscopy:
–   It permits visualization and biopsy of an intrabronchial tumor.
–   Useful for collecting bronchial washings from the suspicious segments
for cytological study.
–   It helps in assessment of operability and the proximity of central
tumors to the main carina
Percutaneous aspiration and biopsy: Peripheral lung tumors cannot be
seen by fibreoptic bronchoscopy. Hence, samples are obtained by
aspiration or biopsy through the chest wall under CT guidance.
–   Diagnosis of lung cancer rests on the morphologic or cytological
features correlated with clinical and radiographic findings.
Use of immunohistochemistry:
–   To verify neuroendocrine differentiation within a tumor, with markers
such as neuron-specific enolase (NSE), CD56 or neural cell adhesion
molecule (NCAM), synaptophysin, chromogranin, and Leu7.
–   Helps in differentiating primary from metastatic adenocarcinomas. For
example: thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1), is positive in more
than 70% of pulmonary adenocarcinomas and is a reliable indicator of
primary lung cancer, provided a thyroid primary has been excluded.
–   To narrow the differential diagnosis: For example, cytokeratins 7 and
20.Investigations for staging to guide treatment:
–   Fine needle aspiration: (1) endoscopic ultrasound-guided fine needle
aspiration (FNA) of tumor or lymph node,(2) endobronchial

ultrasound–guided fine needle aspiration and (3) endoscopic
ultrasound via the esophagus.
–   Scalene node biopsy, mediastinoscopy, pleural aspiration and biopsy
and barium swallow.
–   Ultrasonography examination of liver and adrenal glands.
–   If metastasis is suspected: Bone scans, bone marrow trephine biopsies
and brain CT.
–   Positron emission tomography (PET) imaging/CT: It helps in
detecting the intrathoracic tumor, assessing the extent of mediastinal
nodal involvement and detection of distant metastases. PET images
combined with CT are better than CT or PET alone.
Other investigations: Complete blood count for the detection of anemia,
and biochemistry for liver involvement, hypercalcemia and hyponatremia.
Molecular testing for guiding treatment: Test for EGFR mutations and
ALK fusion.
Staging
Staging of non-small-cell carcinoma (Table 6.97): Staged into stages I to
IV depending on the size and location of primary tumor, involvement of
lymph nodes and distant metastasis (TNM International Staging System).Staging of small-cell carcinoma: It is staged into limited-stage and
extensive-stage disease depending on whether the tumor can be
encompassed within a tolerable radiation therapy port.
Table 6.97: TNM staging of non-small-cell carcinoma.
TNM Description
Tx Main tumor cannot be assesses, or cancer cells seen on sputum cytology or
bronchial washing but no tumor can be found
T1 Tumor < 3 cm in diameter; surrounded by lung or pleura; does not invade main
bronchus
T1a Tumor 2 cm or less in greatest dimension
T1b Tumor >2 cm but <3 cm
T2 Tumor >3 cm in diameter; may invade pleura; may extend into main bronchus
bur remains 2 cm or more distal to carina
T2a Tumor >3 cm but <5 cm
T2b Tumor >5 cm but <7 cm
T3 Tumor >7 cm, invasion of chest wall, diaphragm, pleura or pericardium; main

bronchus <2 cm distal to carina; atelectasis of entire lung
T4 Invasion of mediastinum, heart, great vessels, trachea, esophagus, vertebral body
or carina; separate tumor nodules; malignant pleural effusion
N0 No nodal metastasis
N1 Involvement of ipsilateral peribronchial or hilar nodes and intrapulmonary nodes
N2 Involvement of ipsilateral mediastinal or subcarinal nodes
N3 Involvement of contralateral nodes or any supraclavicular nodes
M0 No distant metastasis
M1 Distant metastasis
Staging of the small cell and non-small-cell carcinoma (Table 6.98)
Q. Discuss the staging, diagnosis and treatment of small cell carcinoma.
Table 6.98: Satging of carcinoma of lung.
Stages of non-small-cell carcinoma based on TNM classification
Occult carcinoma TX, N0, M0
IA T1a,bN0MO
IB T2aNOMO
IIA T2bN0M0; T1a, bN1M0; T ٢aN١M٠
IIB T2bN1M0; T3N0M0
IIIA T1a, b, T2a, b, N2M0; T3N1, N2M0; T4N0, N1M0
IIIB T4N2M0; any T N3M0
IV Any T any NM1
Stage of small-cell
carcinomaDescription
Limited stage 30–40% of small cell lung cancers
Confined to the hemithorax, mediastinum, and ipsilateral
supraclavicular lymph node
Within the confines of radiation port
Extensive stage 60–70% of small cell lung cancers
Any distant spread
Assessing fitness for treatment: Before radical treatment, an assessment
of fitness for treatment should be done. These include:
–   Evaluation of performance (Karnofsky performance status: Eastern
cooperative Oncology Group Performance Status).
–   Full lung function test: Specifically FEV1 and diffusion capacity

–   Tests for any cardiovascular disease if there is evidence of disease (e.g.
cardiopulmonary exercise testing, stress echo or occasionally
preoperative angiography).
Table 6.99: Treatment of non-small cell lung cancer.
Stage IA:
Lobectomy is treatment of choice. T1N0, lobectomy has 70% 5 year recurrence free survival.
If inoperable:
–   30% cure rate with XRT alone.
–   Stereotactic radiosurgery (Cyber Knife).
–   Radiofrequency ablation.
Stage 1B:
Lobectomy.
Adjuvant chemotherapy adds a 4–12% survival benefit. Best in tumors > 4 cm.
Stage II:
Lobectomy is treatment of choice.
Adjuvant chemotherapy now standard.
Consider adjuvant XRT to mediastinum
Stage III:
Combination chemotherapy with XRT is treatment of choice.
Surgery has yet to be established consistently as benefit in randomized trials.
Neoadjuvant therapy followed by surgical resection is option in IIIA.
Stage IV:
Chemotherapy
Treatment
1. Non-small-cell carcinoma
a. Surgical treatment:  Surgical resection of the tumor is done in early stage (1a, 1b, IIA, IIB and
selected IIIa) of non-small cell lung cancer.
Postoperative chemotherapy (adjuvant therapy): Where surgical staging of resected lung
cancer has lymph node involvement, patients need adjuvant chemotherapy.
Preoperative chemotherapy (neoadjuvant chemotherapy: May improve survival in stage
IIIB patients and can effectively ‘down-stage’ disease. Commonly used drugs are
carboplatin, pacilitaxel ± behacizumab (an antiangiogenesis drug).
Contraindications to surgical resectionStage IIIB or IV.
Extensive invasion into surrounding structures: Involvement of vena cava, atrium, recurrent
laryngeal or phrenic nerve and contralateral lymph nodes. Others include SVC obstruction,
malignant effusion, and pericardial tamponade.Medically unfit: Poor cardiac or pulmonary status, predicted postoperative FEV1% <40%,
predicted postoperative DLCO% < 40% and exercise studies for marginal candidates.

b. Radiotherapy
Radiotherapy for cure:  Radiotherapy is much less effective than surgical therapy. In selected
cases with adequate lung function and early stage NSCLC, high dose radiotherapy or
continuous hyperfractionated accelerated regimens (CHART) is a good alternative to surgical
resection. It is the treatment of choice if surgery is contraindicated due to comorbidities.
Radiation treatment for symptoms:  Radiation can be used as palliative for distressing
symptoms/complications in lung cancer. Indications for palliative radiotherapy are: bone and
chest wall pain from metastases or direct invasion, recurrent hemoptysis and occluded trachea,
bronchi and superior vena cava obstruction.
c. Chemotherapy
Adjuvant chemotherapy with radiotherapy improves response rate and extends median survival.First-line drugs:  Two drug regimen namely cisplatin/carboplatin + 1 other
(Paclitaxel/Docetaxel/Gemcitabine). Common side effects are nausea and vomiting and are
best treated with 5-HT3 receptor antagonists.
Second line therapy:  Newer targeted agents against epidermal growth factor receptors and
tyrosine kinases in NSCLC (in particular adenocarcinoma) in selected patients and can also
be used where intravenous chemotherapy produces severe toxicity or as second line
chemotherapy. These include gefitinib, erlotinib, cetuximab, tirapazamine, thalidomide,
vandetanib antiangiogenesis (e.g. bevacizumab) and ALK tyrosine kinase inhibitors (e.g.
Crizotinib).
Treatment of non-small cell lung cancer is summarized in Table 6.99.
2. Small-cell carcinoma
General treatment plan for small-cell carcinoma (Table 6.100).If the patient responds to treatment plan, prophylactic radiotherapy to brain is advised. High-
dose radiotherapy to the entire brain is also advised to patients with documented brain
metastasis.
Chemotherapeutic regimens for small-cell carcinoma
–   Commonly used combination Cisplatin/carboplatin + etoposide, ifosfamide, irinotecan plus
cisplatin, carboplatin and etoposide with or without vincristine
Laser therapy and tracheobronchial stents
In selected patients with inoperable lung cancer, palliation of symptoms due to tracheobronchial
narrowing from intraluminal tumor or extrinsic compression can be achieved by bronchoscopic
laser treatment.It helps to clear tumor tissue and allow re-aeration of collapsed lung. It is useful mainly when
the tumor is the main bronchi.
In case of extrinsic compression by malignant nodes, endobronchial stents can be used to
maintain airway patency.
Table 6.100: General plan of treatment small-cell carcinoma.
Stage Status of patient Treatment
Limited stage With good performance status of
patientChemotherapy + radiotherapy
With poor performance status of
patientModified chemotherapy and/or
palliative radiotherapy

Extensive stage With good performance status of
patientChemotherapy ± local radiotherapy
With poor performance status of
patientModified chemotherapy and/or
palliative radiotherapy
Neurological Manifestations of Bronchial Carcinoma (Table
6.101)
Table 6.101: Neurological manifestations of bronchial carcinoma.
Regional effects Remote effects (Paraneoplastic)Nerve paralysis
–   Recurrent laryngeal nerve
–   Phrenic nerve
Intercostal neuralgia
Horner’s syndrome
Pancoast’s syndromePolyneuropathy
Myelopathy
Polymyositis and dermatomyositis
Eaton-Lambert syndrome
Cerebellar degeneration
Cortical degeneration
Limbic encephalitis
Metastatic effects:  Brain and spine
Q. Write short note on the neurological manifestations of bronchial
carcinoma.
Hypertrophic Osteoarthropathy (Hypertrophic Pulmonary
Osteoarthropathy)
Q. Write short note on pulmonary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy
(hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy).
Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (HOA) is characterized by clubbing of
digits and in more advanced stages, by periosteal new-bone formation and
synovial effusions.
Clubbing is almost always found in HOA but can occur as an isolated
manifestation.
Primary HOA is also called Pierre-Marie-Bamberger syndrome.
Clinical features
Sites involved: Most common are the distal parts of the long bones of
wrists (radius and ulna) and ankles (tibia and fibula).
Symptoms: Pain and swelling of the wrists and ankles, to a lesser extent

in knees and shin. Pain is aggravated by dependency and relieved by
elevation of the affected limb.
Physical examination: Digital clubbing, swollen and tender joints, and
pitting edema of the anterior aspect of shin.
Investigations
–   X-ray (Fig. 6.35): Periosteal thickening and subperiosteal new bone
formation along the shaft of distal ends of long bones. The ends of
distal phalanges may show osseous resorption.
–   Radionuclide studies of bones: It shows pericortical linear uptake
along the cortical margins of long bones. These changes may be
detected even before any radiographic changes.
Fig. 6.35:  X-ray of the wrist showing subperiosteal new bone formation—HPOA.
Treatment
Identify and treat the associated disease.
Vagotomy or percutaneous blocking of the vagus nerve: It may give relief in few patients.
Analgesics: Aspirin or other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
Pancoast’s Syndrome (Pancoast’s Tumor; Superior Sulcus
Tumor Syndrome)
Q. Write short essay/note on clinical features of Pancoast (superior
pulmonary sulcus) tumor.

Q. Write short note on Horner’s syndrome.
Pancoast’s tumor also known as Pancoast-Tobias tumor or superior sulcus
tumor.
Pancoast tumor is a tumor at the apex of lung which  may invade the
neural structures around the first rib, subclavian vessels and the
cervical sympathetic plexus. Chest X-ray appearance is shown in
Figure 6.36.Local extension of the tumor can involve the eighth cervical (C8) and first
thoracic (T1) nerves.
Features of Pancoast’s syndrome
–   Shoulder pain which radiates in the distribution of ulnar nerve of the
arm (i.e. along the C8, T1 distribution).
–   Wasting of the small muscles of the hand from due to C8, T1 nerve
involvement.
–   Pain and tenderness over the first and second ribs and radiological
evidence of rib destruction due to local invasion by tumor.
–   Horner’s syndrome  (enophthalmos, ptosis, miosis, and anhidrosis) on
the same side as the tumor due to involvement of the sympathetic
pathway as it passes through the T1 root.
Investigations: CT scan, fine needle aspiration and MRI.


Fig. 6.36:  X-ray showing mass lesion in the right upper zone with erosion of ribs—Pancoast’s tumor.
Treatment:  Combined chemoradiotherapy and surgery. Preoperative radiotherapy along with
chemotherapy (cisplatin and etoposide) is given followed by en-bloc resection of the tumor.
Superior Vena Cava Syndrome
Q. Write short essay/note on:
Causes, clinical features and management of superior vena cava (SVC)
syndrome.
Superior vena caval obstruction.
It develops due to the obstruction of SVC secondary to compression
and/or invasion by tumors or other lesions in the superior mediastinum (Table
6.102).
Bronchial carcinoma and lymphoma are the most common causes and
others are very rare causes of SVC obstruction.
Table 6.102: Causes of superior vena cava obstruction.
Neoplastic Non-neoplastic
Primary
–   Bronchial carcinoma (75%)
–   Lymphomas (20%)
–   Thymoma
–   Parathyroid tumorMetastatic tumorsTuberculosis
Fibrosing mediastinitis
Retrosternal goiter
Central venous catheter, causing thrombosis
Aortic arch aneurysm
Clinical Features
Due to involvement of other structures of mediastinum (refer mediastinal
tumors, page 359.)
Due to involvement of SVC: Headache, visual disturbances change in the
state of consciousness and orthopnea.
Physical signs:
–   Distended, non-pulsatile neck veins, dilated veins on the upper thorax
and upper limbs.
–   Conjunctival edema, suffusion and subconjunctival hemorrhage.
Features based on location of SVC obstruction

–   Preazygos or supra-azygos: Obstruction to the return of blood above
the entry of azygous vein into the SVC produces distension of veins
and edema of the face, neck and upper extremities.
–   Postazygos or infra-azygos: Obstruction below the entry of azygos
vein into the SVC causes retrograde flow of blood through the azygos
via collaterals to the inferior vena cava. This leads to the symptoms
and signs of preazygos disease and dilation of the veins over the
abdomen. This is usually more severe and poorly tolerated than
preazygos obstruction.Investigation and Diagnosis
Based on clinical features.
Chest radiograph: Widening of the superior mediastinum (mostly on the
right side). Pleural effusion may be found in about 25% patients.
CT of the chest: Most useful.
Invasive procedures: Bronchoscopy, percutaneous needle biopsy,
mediastinoscopy and thoracoscopy.
Management
Diuretics, head elevation and oxygen for temporary symptomatic relief in few patients.
If there is tracheal obstruction: Emergency radiotherapy.
Radiotherapy (elective): It is the treatment of choice for non-small-cell tumors of lung and
metastatic tumors producing SVC syndrome.
Chemotherapy: For example, small-cell carcinoma of lung or lymphoma.
Seriously ill patients may be given empiric corticosteroids and cyclophosphamide intravenously
for temporary relief.
Endovascular stent placement.
Mediastinum
Q. Define mediastinum. What are its various compartments?
Mediastinum is the region of the thoracic cavity located between the pleural
cavities (sacs) in the chest. It extends antero-posteriorly from the sternum to
the spine (paravertebral gutter and ribs) and sagittally from the thoracic inlet
(above) to the diaphragm (below) and laterally mediastinal pleura. It has
numerous organs and structures and makes it a veritable Pandora’s box,
within which congenital cysts, benign tumors, and primary and malignant
neoplasms may develop.

Compartments
Mediastinum is divided into four compartments based on the lateral chest
radiograph (Table 6.103).
Table 6.103: Various compartments of mediastinum and their normal
contents..
Superior mediastinum
Trachea, upper esophagus, thymus gland, thoracic duct, lymph nodes
Vessels: Superior vena cava (SVC), arch of aorta and its branches
Nerves: Phrenic nerve, vagus nerve, left recurrent laryngeal nerve
Anterior mediastinum
Thymus gland
Anterior mediastinal lymph nodes, internal mammary artery and vein
Adipose tissue
Posterior mediastinum
Esophagus, lymph nodes
Vessels: Descending aorta, azygos vein
Thoracic duct, sympathetic chain
Middle mediastinum
Heart, ascending aorta, arch of aorta, vena cavae, brachiocephalic arteries and veins, pulmonary
arteries and veins
Trachea, main bronchi, hilar lymph nodes
Phrenic nerves
Common Mediastinal Tumors, Cysts and Masses (Fig. 6.37)
Q. Write short essay/note on causes of mediastinal mass.
Clinical Features
Q. Write short essay/note on clinical features, investigations and
management of mediastinal tumors.
Age group: Germ-cell tumors and lymphoma/leukemias are more
common between 20 and 40 years of age.
Clinical features are due to the compression and/or invasion (infiltration)
of the structures of mediastinum (Table 6.104). Benign tumors cause
compression without invasion, whereas malignant tumors compress and
invade the vital structures of mediastinum.

Table 6.104: Structures involved and clinical features of malignant
mediastinal invasion.
Trachea and main bronchi:  Stridor, breathlessness, cough, collapse of lung
Esophagus:  Dysphagia, esophageal displacement or obstruction on barium swallow examination
Phrenic nerve:  Diaphragmatic paralysis and dyspnea
Left recurrent laryngeal nerve:  Paralysis of left vocal cord producing hoarseness and ‘bovine’
cough
Sympathetic trunk: Horner’s syndrome
Superior vena cava (SVC):  SVC syndrome: Non-pulsatile distension of neck veins, subconjunctival
edema, and edema and cyanosis of head, neck, hands and arms. Dilated anastomotic veins on chest
wall.
Pericardium:  Pericarditis and/or pericardial effusion, cardiac tamponade
Fig. 6.37:  Location of most common lesions of mediastinum.
Investigations
Cytological examination of sputum for malignant cells.
α-fetoprotein and β-human chorionic gonadotropin levels: Elevated in
non-seminomatous germ cell tumors of anterior or superior mediastinum
in male.
Radiological investigations:
–   Plain radiograph of chest:
♦   Benign tumor appears as a sharply circumscribed opacity in the
mediastinum which may encroach on one or both lung fields.

♦   Malignant tumor appears as a lesion with ill-defined margins and
often causes a generalized widening of the mediastinal shadow.
–   Fluoroscopic examination: For diaphragm analysis.
–   Barium swallow: For identifying esophageal involvement.
–   CT scan of thorax
–   Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI): Useful for evaluating cystic
lesions.
–   Positron emission tomography (PET)Bronchoscopy if there is suspicion of lung cancer.
Mediastinoscopy: To remove lymph node from anterior mediastinum.
Exploratory thoracotomy: For removal of part or entire tumor for
histopathological examination.
Table 6.105: Differential diagnosis of solitary pulmonary nodules.
Malignant tumors
Bronchogenic carcinoma (adenocarcinoma,
large cell, squamous, small cell)
Carcinoid
Pulmonary lymphomaNon-infectious granulomas
Rheumatoid arthritis
Wegener’s granulomatosis
Sarcoidosis
Paraffinoma
Benign tumors
Hamartoma
Adenoma
LipomaOthers
Miscellaneous
Bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia
(BOOP)
Abscess
Infectious granulomas
Tuberculosis
Histoplasmosis
CoccidioidomycosisPseudotumor
Spherical pneumonia
Pulmonary infarction
Arteriovenous malformation
Bronchogenic cyst
Amyloidoma

Fig. 6.38:  Chest X-ray of solitary pulmonary nodule.
Management
Benign mediastinal tumors: Surgical removal.
SVC obstruction: Refer SVC syndrome, page 358.
Lung cancer with lymph nodal metastases: Radiotherapy and/or chemotherapy.
Treatments of lymphomas and leukemias (refer relevant chapters).
Solitary Pulmonary Nodule
Criteria: A single discrete pulmonary opacity surrounded by normal lung
tissue. Not associated with adenopathy or atelectasis.
Size and nature: Solitary pulmonary nodule must be 3 cm or less in
diameter. Lesions larger than 3 cm are almost always malignant.
Malignant nodules have a tumor doubling time between 30–300 days,
where as benign nodules it is either less than 30 days or more than 300
days.Prompt diagnosis and resection are usually advisable. Chest X-ray
appearance of solitary pulmonary nodule is shown in Figure 6.38.
Differential diagnosis of solitary pulmonary nodules (Table 6.105).

RESPIRATORY FAILURE
Q. Define respiratory failure. Describe in detail the causes and
management of various types of respiratory failures.
Q. Discuss the role of oxygen therapy in chronic type II respiratory
failure complicating chronic bronchitis.
Q. Write short essay/note on:
Acute respiratory failure
Clinical features of type I and type II respiratory failure.
Definition
Respiratory failure is the term used when pulmonary gas exchange fails to
maintain normal arterial oxygen and carbon dioxide levels.
Respiratory failure is a syndrome of inadequate gas exchange due to
dysfunction of one or more essential components of the respiratory
system:
–   Chest wall (including pleura and diaphragm)
–   Airways
–   Alveolar–capillary units
–   Pulmonary circulation
–   Nerves
–   CNS or brainstemCriteria: Respiratory failure is present when PaO2 is 60 mm Hg (8.0
kPa) and/or PaCO2 is 50 mm Hg (6.5 kPa).
Features of respiratory failure: (1) breathlessness at rest, (2) central
cyanosis, (3) raised respiratory rate and (4) drowsiness, confusion or
unconsciousness. In such patients arterial blood gas analysis to be done.
Classification
It can be classified in different ways: (1) type I, II, III and IV, (2) acute and
chronic type I respiratory failure; acute and chronic type II respiratory failure
and (3) type I (hypoxemic) respiratory failure and type II (hypercapnic)
respiratory failure.

Type I or Hypoxemic (PaO 2 < 60 at sea level): Failure of oxygen
exchange
Increased shunt fraction (QS/QT)
–   Due to alveolar flooding.
–   Hypoxemia refractory to supplemental oxygen.
Type II or Hypercapnic (PaCO 2 > 45): Failure to exchange or
remove carbon dioxide
Decreased alveolar minute ventilation (VA).
Often accompanied by hypoxemia that corrects with supplemental oxygen.
Type III Respiratory Failure: Perioperative respiratory failure
Increased atelectasis due to low functional residual capacity (FRC) in the
setting of abnormal abdominal wall mechanics.
Often results in type I or type II respiratory failure.
Can be ameliorated by anesthetic or operative technique, posture,
incentive spirometry, postoperative analgesia, and attempts to lower intra-
abdominal pressure.
Type IV Respiratory Failure: ShockType IV describes patients who are intubated and ventilated in the process
of resuscitation for shock.
Goal of ventilation is to stabilize gas exchange and to unload the
respiratory muscles, lowering their oxygen consumption.
Rate of development: Respiratory failure may
Acute: In which pH of blood may drop to below 7.2.
Chronic: In which pH is normal or slightly reduced and bicarbonate is
elevated due to renal compensation. Due to associated hypoxemia, patient
may develop polycythemia, pulmonary hypertension and cor pulmonale.
Acute on chronic (e.g. acute exacerbation of advanced COPD)
It may be transient or persistent.
Various mechanisms of producing respiratory failure is listed in Table
6.106.

Table 6.106: Mechanisms of producing respiratory failure.
Decreased inspired oxygen concentration
High altitude: Acute mountain sickness, chronic mountain sickness
Hypoventilation
Diminished ventilatory drive, e.g. drug overdose, primary alveolar hypoventilation, stroke
Impaired neuromuscular transmission, e.g. Guillain-Barre syndrome, myasthenia gravis, phrenic
nerve injury, spinal cord lesion, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Weakness of muscle, e.g. myasthenia gravis, muscular dystrophies, electrolyte disturbances
Disorders of chest wall, e.g. kyphoscoliosis, ankylosing spondylitis, severe obesity
Disorders of pleura, e.g. pneumothorax, pleural effusion
Parenchymal lung disease
Airway obstruction, e.g. COPD, acute severe asthma, foreign body, vocal cord palsy
Ventilation-perfusion (V/Q) mismatch
Interstitial lung disease
Obstructive airway disease, e.g. chronic bronchitis, emphysema, bronchiectasis, bronchial asthma
Alveolar diseases, e.g. pneumonia, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
Pulmonary vascular diseases, e.g. pulmonary embolism, pulmonary hypertension
Decreased cardiac output
Shunt
Intracardiac right to left shunts, e.g. tetralogy of Fallot.
Intrapulmonary shunts, e.g. pulmonary arteriovenous shunts, alveolar collapse, pneumonia,
pulmonary edema, pulmonary hemorrhage
Diffusion abnormality
Interstitial lung disease, ARDS, interstitial pneumonias
Hypoventilation: It may be due to (1) low tidal volume, (2) increased
dead space or (3) reduced respiratory rate. In hypoventilation PaCO2
increases, PaO2 decreases and alveolar arterial oxygen gradient is normal.
Ventilation-perfusion (V/Q) mismatch: Are the most common cause of
hypoxemia and administration of 100% O2 will markedly improve
hypoxemia. There is elevation of alveolar-arterial oxygen gradient.
Shunt: If there is a shunt, deoxygenated blood bypasses ventilated alveoli
and mixes with oxygenated blood and produce hypoxemia. In these
patients, hypoxemia will persist even if patient is given 100% oxygen.
Hypercapnia will not develop when shunt fraction is more than 60%.
There is elevation of alveolar-arterial oxygen gradient.Diffusion abnormality is an uncommon cause of hypoxemia.

Acute Type I and Chronic Type I Respiratory Failure
Q. Write short essay/note on the causes of acute type I respiratory
failure.
Acute type I respiratory failure usually develops abruptly, often in patients
with previously normal lungs. Common causes of acute and chronic type I
failure are listed in Table 6.107.
Table 6.107: Causes of acute and chronic type I respiratory failure.
Acute type I respiratory failure Chronic type I respiratory failure
Pneumonia
Pulmonary edema
Acute asthma
Pulmonary embolism
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
PneumothoraxDiseases with widespread pulmonary fibrosis
Chronic pulmonary edema
Chronic disorders of chest wall or
neuromuscular diseases
Chronic pulmonary thromboembolism
Acute Type II and Chronic Type II Respiratory Failure
Common causes of acute and chronic type II failure are listed in Table 6.108.
Q. Write short essay/note on management of type I and type II
respiratory failure.
Management of Respiratory Failure
Flowchart 6.7 shows an approach to identify the mechanism of respiratory failure.
1. Secure airway by:
Endotracheal intubation or tracheostomy
Invasive mechanical ventilation
Non-invasive ventilation
Indications for mechanical ventilation
Cardiac or respiratory arrest
Tachypnea or bradypnea with respiratory fatigue or impending arrest
Acute respiratory acidosis
Inability to protect the airway associated with depressed levels of consciousness
Refractory hypoxemia [when the PaO 2 could not be maintained above 60 mm Hg with inspired
O2 fraction (FIO 2)>1.0]
Shock associated with excessive respiratory work
Inability to clear secretions with impaired gas exchange or excessive respiratory work
Newly diagnosed neuromuscular disease with a vital capacity <10–15 mL/kg
Short-term adjunct in management of acutely increased intracranial pressure (ICP).

Indications for noninvasive ventilation:
COPD exacerbation
Cardiogenic pulmonary edema
Obesity hypoventilation syndrome
Noninvasive ventilation may be tried in selected patients with asthma or noncardiogenic
hypoxemic respiratory failure
2. Supplemental oxygen as needed
3. Treat underlying condition
Infection: Antimicrobials and source control
Airway obstruction:  Bronchodilators, glucocorticoids
Improve cardiac function: Positive airway pressure, diuretics, vasodilators, morphine,
inotropy, and revascularization.
4. Respiratory stimulants like doxapram hydrochloride, nikethamide, progesterone, modafanil,
acetazolamide can increase or maintain ventilation for a short time, at most 24 hours. However, its
role is controversial.
Flowchart 6.7:  shows step-by-step approach to respiratory failure.
Table 6.108: Causes of acute and chronic type II respiratory failure.
Acute type II respiratory failure
Respiratory depressant drugs, e.g. diazepam, opiates, alcohol
Severe obstruction to the airflow, e.g. severe acute asthma, laryngeal and tracheal obstruction,
acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
Disorders of respiratory muscles , e.g. acute polymyositis
Injuries to chest , e.g. tension pneumothorax, massive hemothorax and flail chest
Brainstem damage, e.g. stroke, encephalitis, trauma

Disorders of spinal cord, nerves and neuromuscular transmission , e.g. spinal trauma,
transverse myelitis, acute GB syndrome, poliomyelitis, myasthenia gravis and botulism
Chronic type II respiratory failure
COPD (most common)
Chest wall abnormalities, e.g. marked kyphoscoliosis, marked obesity
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, muscular dystrophy
Central hypoventilation
Flowchart 6.8:  shows step-by-step approach to respiratory failure.


SLEEP APNEA/HYPOPNEA SYNDROME
Q. Write short note on sleep apnea syndromes.
Sleep apnea is defined as an intermittent recurrent reduction or cessation
of breathing (upper airway obstruction) during sleep.
Apnea: Defined by the American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM)
as the cessation of airflow for at least 10 seconds.
Hypopnea: Defined as a recognizable transient reduction (but not
complete cessation) of breathing for 10 seconds or longer, a decrease of
greater than 50% in the amplitude of a validated measure of breathing, or a
reduction in amplitude of less than 50% associated with oxygen
desaturation of 4% or more.Respiratory effort-related arousal  (RERA): It is an event characterized
by increasing respiratory effort for 10 seconds or longer leading to an
arousal from sleep. It does not fulfil the criteria for a hypopnea or apnea.
Types of Sleep Apnea: (1) Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA), (2) central sleep apnea and (3) mixed
sleep apnea (combination of factors).
Obstructive  sleep apnea are characterized by continued thoracoabdominal effort in the setting of
partial or complete airflow cessation.
Central  sleep apnea is characterized by the lack of thoracoabdominal effort in the setting of partial
or complete airflow cessation.
Mixed sleep apnea has both obstructive and central features. They generally begin without
thoracoabdominal effort and end with several thoracoabdominal efforts in breathing.
Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA)
Risk Factors (Table 6.109)
Table 6.109: Risk factors for obstructive sleep apnea.
Obesity (major) Mandibular retrognathia and micrognathia
Male sex (major) Family history
Enlarged tonsils (especially in Children) Endocrine diseases (e.g. acromegaly,
hypothyroidism)
Menopause Advancing age
Nasal obstruction (e.g. nasal deformities, rhinitis,
polyps, adenoids)Respiratory depressant drugs (e.g. alcohol,
sedatives, strong analgesics)
Smoking

Clinical Features (Table 6.110)
364Pickwickian syndrome (obesity-hypoventilation syndrome): It is
characterized by morbid obesity (body mass index greater than 40 kg/m2),
chronic sleep-induced central hypoventilation with hypercapnia (PaCO2
greater than 45 mm Hg) during wakefulness. Awake resting hypoxemia,
hypersomnolence, signs of cor pulmonale (right-sided heart failure and lower
extremity edema), and nocturnal hypoventilation.
Table 6.110: Clinical features of obstructive sleep apnea.
Nocturnal features Daytime features
Snoring, usually loud, habitual
Witnessed apnea, which often interrupt the
snoring and end with a snort
Nocturnal gasping and choking sensations
Nocturia
Insomnia
Restless sleepNonrestorative sleep (i.e. waking up as tired
as when they went to bed)
Morning headache, dry or sore throat
Excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS)
Daytime fatigue/tiredness
Cognitive deficits; memory and intellectual
impairment (short-term memory,
concentration) and impaired work
performanceDecreased vigilance
Morning confusion
Personality and mood changes, including
depression, anxiety and irritability
Physical Examination
Obesity: Body mass index (BMI) greater than 30 kg/m2
Large neck circumference: Greater than 17 inches in men and 15 inches in
women
Abnormal (increased) Mallampati score
Narrowing of the lateral airway walls
Other risk factors mentioned in Table 6.109 may be found.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis can be made on the basis of history and pulse oximetry
demonstration of at least a 10 mm Hg increment in PaCO2 during sleep.
Polysomnography
–   Sleep stages are recorded via an EEG, electrooculogram, and chin

electromyogram (EMG).
–   Heart rhythm is monitored with a single-lead ECG.
–   Leg movements are recorded via an anterior tibialis EMG.
–   Breathing is monitored, including airflow at the nose and mouth (using
both a thermal sensors and a nasal pressure transducer), effort (using
inductance plethysmography), and oxygen saturation.
–   The breathing pattern is analyzed for the presence of apnea and
hypopneas
–   Apnea-hypopnea index (AHI): AHI is defined as the average number
of episodes of apnea and hypopnea per hour. Diagnosis of sleep apnea
is confirmed if AHI ≥5 (Table 6.111).Excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS) assessed by Epworth Sleepiness
Scale (ESS).
Respiratory disturbance index (RDI): It is the average number of
respiratory disturbances (obstructive apneas, hypopneas, and respiratory
event-related arousals [RERAs]) per hour.
Table 6.111: Degree of obstructive sleep apnea and apnea-hypopnea index.
Degree of obstructive sleep apnea Apnea-hypopnea index (AHI)
Mild 5–15
Moderate 16–30
Severe >30
TreatmentMild apnea: Wider variety of options
Moderate-to-severe apnea: Should be treated with nasal continuous positive airway pressure
(CPAP).
1. Conservative nonsurgical treatment
Weight reduction in obese individuals
Avoidance of alcohol for 4–6 hours prior to bedtime.
Sleeping on one’s side rather than on the stomach or back.
2. Nasal CPAP therapy
Most effective for OSA. Increases the calibre of the airway in the retropalatal and
retroglossal regions. It increases the lateral dimensions of the upper airways and thins the
lateral pharyngeal walls. Maintain upper airways patency during sleep, preventing the soft
tissues from collapsing.Indications:  (1) Patients with an apnea-hypopnea index (AHI) greater than 15 regardless of
symptomatology. (2) For patients with an AHI of 5–14.9, if the patient has one of the
following: excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS), hypertension, or cardiovascular disease.

3. Other modalities: BiPAP therapy and oral appliance therapy.
4. Surgery for obstructive sleep apnea, e.g. nasal surgery (septoplasty, sinus surgery, and
others), tonsillectomy ± adenoidectomy, uvulopalatopharyngoplasty (UPPP), etc.
5. Pharmacotherapy:
Many drugs (e.g. mirtazapine, protriptyline, theophylline, naloxone, doxapram,
oxymetazoline nasal application, inhaled nasal corticosteroids, and acetazolamide) have been
tried without much benefit in OSA.Modafinil is used in patients who have residual daytime sleepiness despite optimal use of
CPAP.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor agents such as paroxetine and fluoxetine have been
shown to increase genioglossus muscle activity and decrease REM sleep (apneas are more
common in REM).
Central Sleep Apnea
It occurs without obstruction of the airway.
Causes: Congenital central sleep apnea (Ondine’s curse) and a many
neurological lesions.
Mechanisms:
–   Primary central alveolar hypoventilation syndrome.
♦   Etiology not known. Probably due to high chemoresponsiveness of
the respiratory system. Apnea is terminated with an abrupt, large
breath.
♦   Daytime somnolence is less common
–   Others: High altitude, stroke, neurodegenerative diseases (e.g.
Parkinson’s disease), left ventricular failure with Cheyne-Stokes
breathing.
TreatmentAdministration of oxygen during sleep.
Nasal CPAP.
Noninvasive positive-pressure ventilation (bilevel nasal positive pressure).
Acetazolamide and theophylline may be tried though effect is modest.
Treatment of underlying cause: β-blockers in congestive heart failure).
Oxygen Therapy
Q. Write short essay/note on different types of oxygen therapy.
Therapeutic Indications for Oxygen Therapy (Table 6.112)

Q. Write short essay/note on common therapeutic indications of oxygen
therapy in clinical practice.
Table 6.112: Therapeutic indications for oxygen therapy.
Pulmonary edema
Acute attack of bronchial asthma
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD)
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)Respiratory paralysis
Anaerobic infections
High altitude
Prevent development of severe pulmonary
hypertension
Hazards of Oxygen Therapy
Q. Write short essay/note on hazards of oxygen therapy.
CO2 narcosis
Pulmonary complications: Irritation of respiratory tract, pulmonary edema, ARDS, consolidation,
reduction in lung compliance → fibrosis.
In premature infants and neonates: Retrolental fibroplasias, blindness, bronchopulmonary
dysplasia.
Idiopathic epilepsy.
Technique of Administration
Fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2) while inhaling 100% oxygen depends
upon rate of oxygen flow and minute ventilation of patient. Merits and
demerits of various techniques of oxygen administration are presented in
Table 6.113.
Oxygen delivery system can be divided into:
–   Low flow systems
–   High flow systems
Hyperbaric Oxygen Therapy
Hyperbaric oxygen (HBO) exposure (breathing oxygen at increased ambient
pressure), usually 2 to 3 atmospheres absolute (ATA) causes an increase in
PaO2.
1. Indication for HBOT
Poisoning: Carbon monoxide
Infections: Clostridial myonecrosis

Acute ischemia: Crush injury
Chronic ischemia: Radiation necrosis
Ischemic ulcers: Diabetic ulcers.
Table 6.113: Merits and demerits of various techniques of oxygen
administration.
Merits Demerits
Nasal catheter, nasal cannula (Simple plastic tubing + prongs)
Easy to fix
Keep hands free
Not much interference with further airway
care
Useful in both spontaneous breathing and
apneicMucosal irritation (uncomfortable)
Gastric dilatation (especially with high flows)
Simple face mask
Simple
Lightweight
FiO2 up to 0.60Need to remove when speak, eat, drink,
vomiting, expectoration of secretions
Drying/irritation of eyes
Uncomfortable when facial burns/trauma
Application problem when Ryle’s tube in situ
Partial rebreathing mask (polymask)
FiO2 delivered >0.60 is delivered in moderate
to severe hypoxia
Exhaled oxygen from anatomic dead space is
conservedInsufficient flow rate may lead to rebreathing
of CO 2
Claustrophobia
Drying and irritation of eyes
Non-rebreathing mask
Higher oxygen concentration Air dilution (if not fitting properly)
Rebreathing (if O 2 flow is inadequate)
Interfere with further airway care
Uncomfortable (sweating, spitting)
Fixed performance device Venturimask
(color coded fixed FiO 2 and oxygen flow)
Endotracheal tube-oxygen can be directly
delivered
Mechanical Ventilation
Q. Write short essay on noninvasive ventilation.

Types of mechanical ventilation: (1) invasive and (2) non-invasive.
Indications for mechanical ventilation are mentioned in Box 6.16.
General Principles of Ventilation
Endotracheal tube should be inserted to an average depth of 23 cm in men
and 21 cm in women (measured at the incisor).
Pressure in the cuff generally should not exceed 25 mm Hg.
Tracheostomy should be done if anticipating ventilator setting for more
than 3 days.
Routine suctioning is not recommended because it may be associated with
complications (e.g. desaturation, arrhythmias, bronchospasm, severe
coughing and introduction of secretions into the lower respiratory tract).
Box 6.16: Indications of mechanical ventilation.
Apnea with respiratory arrest
Acute lung injury
Respiratory rate >35 breaths per minute
Vital capacity <15 mL/kg
PO2 <60 at FiO 20.6
Respiratory muscle fatigue
Obtundation or coma
Bradypnea
PCO 2 of >50 mm Hg with pH <7.25
Modes of ventilatory support: Controlled mode ventilation (CMV), assist
control mode ventilation (ACMV), synchronized intermittent mandatory
ventilation (SIMV) and continuous positive airway pressure/positive end-
expiratory pressure (CPAP/PEEP).Controlled mode ventilation
–   Used for initiation of the ventilation
–   No patient contribution
–   All variables are independent (FiO 2, TV, RR, I/E)
Assist control mode ventilation
–   Inspiratory cycle is initiated either by the patient or if no patient effort is present then by a timer
signal within the ventilator.
–   Also commonly used for initiation.
–   Synchronization of ventilator cycle with patient’s inspiratory effort.
–   Drawbacks: Respiratory alkalosis, myoclonus and seizures.Synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation (SIMV)

–   Patient is allowed to breathe spontaneously without ventilator assist in between the ventilator
breaths.
–   Ventilator breath is delivered in synchrony.
–   Mandatory are the number of present breaths.
–   Intermediate mode.
–   Helpful in weaning.Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP)
–   Not a true mode of ventilation.
–   All ventilation occurs because of patients spontaneous efforts ventilator just gives fresh gas to
the breathing circuit with operator depended positive pressure.
–   Used to access the extubation potential in the patient who require very little ventilator support
or in patient with intact respiratory system function who require an ET tube for airway
protection.
Weaning
Arterial pH: 7.35–7.40
SO2 >90% with FiO2 0.5
PEEP <5 mm Hg
Intact cough reflex (assessed during suctioning)
Weaning index: RR/TV <105
Patient off inotropes.
Complications of Ventilation
Pulmonary: Barotrauma (>50 mm Hg), interstitial emphysema,
pneumomediastinum, subcutaneous emphysema, pneumothorax,
ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP ), tracheal stenosis.
Hypotension: Resulting from elevated intrathoracic pressure and
decreased venous return and it is responds to volume repletion.
Gastrointestinal: Stress ulcers and cholestasis.
–   Neuromuscular weakness
–   Pressure sores
–   Raised intracranial pressure
–   Sinusitis, oral ulcers.
Acute Lung Injury and the Acute Respiratory Distress
SyndromeQ. Describe acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), non-

cardiogenic pulmonary edema and acute lung injury (ALI).
Definition: Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is a sudden and
progressive form of acute respiratory failure in which the alveolar capillary
membrane becomes damaged and more permeable to intravascular fluid
resulting in severe dyspnea, hypoxemia and diffuse pulmonary infiltrates.
The Berlin definition of ARDS (Table 6.114): An acute, diffuse,
inflammatory lung injury that leads to increased pulmonary vascular
permeability, increased lung weight, and a loss of aerated tissue.
ARDS and ALI are serious diseases characterized by damage to alveolar
epithelium and pulmonary capillary endothelium. Alveoli become filled with
edema fluid of high protein content and inflammatory cells.
Table 6.114: The Berlin definition of acute respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS).
The Berlin definition of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
Timing Within 1 week of a known clinical insult/new/worsening respiratory
symptoms
Chest X-ray Bilateral opacities-not fully explained by effusions, lobar/lung
collapse or nodules
Origin of edemaRespiratory failure not fully explained by cardiac failure or fluid
overload
Need objective assessment (e.g. echocardiography) to exclude
hydrostatic edema if no risk factor is present.
Oxygenation
Mild 200 mm Hg <PaO 2/FiO2 ≤300 mm Hg with PEEP or CPAP >5 cm
H2O
Moderate 100 mm Hg <PaO 2/FiO2 ≤ 200 mm Hg with PEEP >5 cm H 2O
Severe PaO2/FiO2 ≤100 mm Hg with PEEP >5 cm H 2O
Etiology of ARDS and ALI (Table 6.115)
ARDS may develop due diffuse lung injury from many medical and surgical
disorders. The lung injury may be direct (e.g. toxic inhalation) or indirect
(e.g. in septicemia).
Pathophysiology (Flowchart 6.9)
Natural history of ARDS can be divided into three: Exudative, proliferative
and fibrotic.

1. Exudative phase (1–7 days): Diffuse acute inflammation (e.g.
neutrophils) occurs throughout the lungs, involving both endothelial and
epithelial surfaces. Activated neutrophils are sequestered into the lungs
and increase the capillary permeability as well as damages type I and II
alveolar cells. The leaked proteins aggregate in the air spaces with cellular
debris and dysfunctional pulmonary surfactant to form the characteristic
hyaline membranes. Activated macrophages and neutrophils release
cytokines and chemokines which progressively recruit more inflammatory
cells and amplify the inflammatory response. There is loss of surfactant
and impaired surfactant production as a secondary event. The net effect is
alveolar collapse (most marked in dependent regions of the lung) and
results in hypoxemia due to ventilation-perfusion mismatch and increased
pulmonary shunt.
Flowchart 6.9:  Pathophysiology of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).
2. Proliferative phase (3–7 days): Resolution often starts at this phase along
with the initiation of repair process. The alveolar exudate undergoes
organization and neutrophils disappear with appearance of lymphocytes.
Type II pneumocytes starts proliferating. Connective tissue and other
structural elements in the lungs proliferate in response to the initial injury,
including development of fibroblasts. The terms ‘stiff lung’ and ‘shock
lung’ frequently used to characterize this stage.

3. Fibrotic phase (>10–14 days): It occurs in some cases and is
characterized by proliferation of fibroblasts resulting in interstitial fibrosis.
Lung function may continue to improve for as long as 6 to 12 months after
onset of respiratory failure, depending on the precipitating condition and
severity of the initial injury.
Table 6.115: Disorders commonly associated with ARDS.
Direct lung injury
Pulmonary infections Pneumonia (Viral, bacterial, fungal pneumocystis jirovecii,
Mycoplasma)
Aspiration Aspiration of gastric contents (vomitus)
Inhalation of toxic gas Ammonia, chlorine, nitrogen dioxide, ozone, oxygen,
smoke
Blunt chest trauma Pulmonary contusion
Near drowning
Indirect lung injury
Systemic disorders Shock, septicemia, uremia, eclampsia
Severe trauma Multiple bone fractures (fat embolism), flail chest, head
trauma, burns
Blood Multiple transfusions
Drug overdoseNarcotic overdose Heroin, methadone, morphine, dextropropoxyphene
Non-narcotic drugs Barbiturates, thiazides, nitrofurantoin
Others Acute pancreatitis, cardiopulmonary bypass, trauma,
Goodpasture’s syndrome, SLE
Results
Hypoxemia (V/Q mismatch, impaired hypoxic pulmonary
vasoconstriction)
Increase in dependent densities (surfactant dysfunction, alveolar
instabilities)
Decreased compliance (surfactant dysfunction, decreased lung volume,
fibrosis)
Collapse/consolidation (increased compression of dependent lung)
Increased minute ventilation (increased in alveolar dead space)
Increased work of breathing-WOB (increased elastase, increased minute
volume requirement)

Pulmonary hypertension (vasoconstriction, microvascular thrombi,
fibrosis, PEEP (positive end expiratory pressure).
Clinical Features
Development of acute dyspnea and hypoxemia within hours to days of
an inciting event.
Tachypnea, tachycardia, cyanosis and the need for a high fraction of
inspired oxygen (FiO2) to maintain oxygen saturation.
Febrile or hypothermic.
Sepsis-hypotension and peripheral vasoconstriction with cold extremities. 
Bilateral rales/crepitations.
Manifestations of the underlying cause.
Because cardiogenic pulmonary edema must be distinguished from ARDS,
carefully look for signs of congestive heart failure or intravascular volume
overload, including jugular venous distension, cardiac murmurs and
gallops, hepatomegaly, and edema.
Fig. 6.39:  Bilateral alveolar shadows in ARDS on Chest X-ray.
Investigation
Chest radiograph (Fig. 6.39): Diffuse, bilateral alveolar infiltrates
consistent with pulmonary edema

–   Early stage: Infiltrates associated with ARDS may be variable: mild
or dense, interstitial or alveolar, patchy or confluent.
–   Initially, the infiltrates may have a patchy peripheral distribution,
but soon they progress to diffuse bilateral involvement with ground
glass changes or frank alveolar infiltrates.
–   Cardiogenic edema: Increased heart size, increased width of the
vascular pedicle, vascular redistribution toward upper lobes, the
presence of septal lines, or a perihilar (‘bat’s wing’) distribution of the
edema. Lack of these findings, in conjunction with patchy peripheral
infiltrates that extend to the lateral lung margins, suggests ARDS.Arterial blood gas analysis:
–   PaO2/FiO2 ratio and severity (Table 6.116)
–   In addition to hypoxemia, arterial blood gases often initially show a
respiratory alkalosis.
–   However, in ARDS occurring in the context of sepsis, a metabolic
acidosis with or without respiratory compensation may be present.
–   As the condition progresses and the work of breathing increases, the
partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PCO2) begins to rise and respiratory
alkalosis gives way to respiratory acidosis.
To exclude cardiogenic pulmonary edema
–   Echocardiogram: Left ventricular ejection fraction, wall motion, and
valvular abnormalities.
–   Plasma B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) value.
CT scan:
–   Diffuse consolidation with air bronchograms, bullae, pleural effusions,
pneumomediastinum and pneumothorax. Later may show lung cysts.
Table 6.116: ARDS severity and PaO2/FiO2.
ARDS severity PaO2/FiO 2
Mild 200–300
Moderate 100–200
Severe <100
Management

Goals of Management of patients with ARDS
Treatment of respiratory system abnormalities.
Diagnose and treat the precipitating/initiating cause of ARDS. Support or treat other organ system
dysfunction or failure.
Maintain oxygenation.
General critical care, adequate early nutritional support, prophylaxis against deep vein thrombosis
(DVT) and gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding.
Maintaining adequate oxygenation
Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) is employed.
When utilized in sufficient amounts PEEP allows FiO 2 to be lowered from high potentially toxic
concentrations.
Lung-protective mechanical ventilation
–   Mechanical ventilation using limited tidal volumes.
–   The goals of lung-protective ventilation are to avoid injury due to overexpansion of alveoli
during inspiration (‘volutrauma’) and injury due to repetitive opening and closing of alveoli
during inspiration and expiration (‘atelectatrauma’).
Low tidal volume ventilation (LTVV)
–   Set initial tidal volume to 8 mL/kg IBW.
–   Reduce tidal volume to 7 mL/kg IBW then 6 mL/kg IBW over the next 1–3 hours.
–   Set respiratory rate to < ٥٣  bpm to match baseline minute ventilation.
Permissive hypercapnia is defined as clinician-allowed hypercapnia during assisted ventilation,
despite an ability to achieve a level of minute ventilation sufficient to maintain a normal.
Fluid management
Primary ARDS due to aspiration, pneumonia, or inhalational injury, usually can be treated with
fluid restriction.
Secondary ARDS due to remote infection or inflammation requires initial fluid and potential
vasoactive drug therapy.
Prone positioning ventilation
About two-thirds of patients with ARDS improve their oxygenation after being placed in a prone
position.
Adjuncts to lung protective mechanical ventilation
Inhaled nitric oxide, inhaled prostacyclin, tracheal gas insufflation, extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation (ECMO) or extracorporeal CO 2 removal (ECCO 2R)
CorticosteroidsCorticosteroids have little or no role in acute phase of ALI or ARDS. However, the role of
corticosteroids in later phases of ALI or ARDS has been controversial.
Experimental therapies
Surfactant replacement therapy: Improves oxygenation but no improvement in mortality.
Ketoconazole: Antifungal that inhibits thromboxane synthase and 5-lipooxygenase.
Future nonventilatory therapeutic options
Gene therapy for ALI/ARDS
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC).
Sarcoidosis

Q. Discuss the clinical features, investigations and management of
sarcoidosis.
Definition: Sarcoidosis is a multisystem disorder of unknown etiology
characterized by noncaseating granuloma which affects mainly lung but can
also any other organs.
Etiology
Etiology of sarcoidosis is remains unknown , but several lines of evidence
suggest that it is a disease of disordered immune regulation in genetically
predispose individual.
Factors that play a role in its pathogenesis are: 1) environmental agents
(infectious and noninfectious), 2) genetic (e.g. HLA-A1 and HLA-B8) and
3) immunological  (cell-mediated immune response).
The granuloma is the pathologic hallmark of sarcoidosis. The sarcoid
granulomas develop as an exaggerated cell-mediated immune response to
an unidentified environmental antigen. (Infectious or noninfectious) agent
in a genetically susceptible individual. Probable infectious inciting agent
includes: mycobacteria (both Mycobacterium tuberculosis and
nontuberculous mycobacteria), Propionibacterium acnes, Borrelia
burgdorferi , viruses, fungi, spirochetes, and Rickettsia.
PathologyNoncaseating granulomas are composed of an aggregate of epithelioid
cells and lymphocytes (mainly CD4+ T-cell). Epithelioid cells are
modified macrophages and characteristically have abundant eosinophilic
cytoplasm and vesicular nuclei. Schumann bodies and stellate inclusion as
asteroid bodies enclosed with in giant cells are formed in approximately
60% of granulomas.Organs involved: Sarcoidosis can affect every organ of the body. It most
commonly affects the lung and the lymph nodes in the mediastinum and
hilar regions. Other organs commonly affected are the liver, spleen, skin,
parotid glands and eye.
Clinical Features
Age and gender: It occurs mainly in 3rd or 4th decade of life. More
predominant in women.

More prevalent in Swedes, Danes, and US blacks.
Systems involved: Pulmonary (90%), lymph nodes (70%), hepatic (50–
80%), cardiac (30%), cutaneous (25%), and ocular (20%).
Manifestations of sarcoidosis
Asymptomatic form (30–45%): It is usually detected incidentally on a
routine chest X-ray (~30%) or abnormal liver function tests.
Acute or subacute form (10–15%)
Chronic form (40–60%).
Pulmonary manifestations
First site of involvement. Begins with alveolitis involving small bronchi
and small blood vessels. Alveolitis either clear-up spontaneously or lead to
granuloma or fibrosis.Other features: Interstitial lung diseases, atelectasis, cavitation, unilateral
pleural effusion, pulmonary nodules, miliary mottling, lymphadenopathy.
Most patients have the pulmonary manifestations, most commonly
presenting with incidental findings on CXR as an interstitial disease.
Symptoms include dry cough, dyspnea, and chest discomfort.
Unpredictable course.
Extrapulmonary involvement
1. Lymph nodes: Lymph nodes are involved in almost all cases (mainly hilar
and mediastinal nodes), but any nodes may be involved. Involved nodes
are characteristically enlarged discrete and sometimes calcified.
Typical
–   Bilateral hilar and right paratracheal lymph nodes.
–   Middle mediastinal lymph node (50% of cases).
–   Left paratracheal, aorto-pulmonary and subcarinal lymph nodes.
1-2-3 sign present in 95% of cases. This is called Garland triad.Atypical
–   Unilateral hilar lymph node.
–   Anterior or posterior mediastinal lymph nodes.
–   Lymph node calcification (amorphous, punctate, popcorn or
eggshell calcification).

Tonsil may be affected in about quarter to one-third of the cases.
2. Skin (33%): Erythema nodosum, plaques, maculopapular eruptions,
subcutaneous nodules, lupus pernio, keloid, infiltration of previous scars
by granuloma.
3. Eyes (25%): Anterior uveitis, iridocyclitis, retinitis, phlyctenular
conjunctivitis, lacrimal gland involvement-keratoconjunctivitis sicca (dry
eyes).
4. Salivary glands: Parotid gland enlargement.
Q. Write short note on Heerfordt-Waldenström syndrome.
Heerfordt’s syndrome/uveoparotid fever/Heerfordt-Mylius
syndrome/Waldenström’s uveoparotitis is a rare manifestation of
sarcoidosis. It is characterized by uveitis, swelling of the parotid gland,
chronic fever, and facial nerve palsy (in some cases).
5. Heart: Cardiac arrhythmias, heart block, sudden death, CHF.
6. Liver and spleen: Granulomatous liver disease, hepatosplenomegaly,
Budd-Chiari syndrome.
7. Nervous system: Cranial nerve palsy, pachymeningitis, space occupying
lesion, diabetes insipidus due to hypothalamic involvement, mononeuritis
multiplex, peripheral neuropathy
8. Kidneys: Nephrocalcinosis, hypercalciuria, renal stones.
9. Musculoskeletal Arthropathies, osteoporosis, phalangeal bone cysts, polymyositis,
chronic myopathy
Endocrine
Diabetes insipidus, anterior pituitary dysfunction, Addison’s syndrome.
10. Lupus pernio
It is a specific complex involvement of skin around nose, eye and
cheeks.
These chilblains like lesions often cause disfiguration by eroding the
cartilage and bone, especially around the nose.
It is diagnostic for chronic form of sarcoidosis and is associated with
more sever pulmonary disease.
Associated with poor prognosis of sarcoidosis.

Table 6.117: Staging of pulmonary sarcoidosis according to radiographic
patterns and corresponding clinical features.
Stage X-ray finding Clinical features
I Bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy (BHL)
without any parenchymal abnormalities
(50% cases)Often asymptomatic, but may be associated
with erythema nodosum and arthralgia.
Majority resolve spontaneously within 1
year
II BHL with diffuse pulmonary infiltrates
(30% cases)May present with breathlessness or cough.
Majority resolve spontaneously
III Diffuse pulmonary infiltrates without BHL
(10% cases)Disease is less likely to resolve
spontaneously
IV Evidence of diffuse pulmonary fibrosis Can progress to ventilatory failure,
pulmonary hypertension and cor pulmonaleQ. Write short note on Löfgren’s syndrome.
Löfgren’s syndrome: It is an acute triad of erythema nodosum, joint pains,
and radiographic evidence of bilateral hilar adenopathy. It is often seen in
young women and resolves over 6 months—2 years with NSAIDs.
Investigations
Q. Write short note on radiological/X-ray findings in sarcoidosis.
Radiological investigations
–   Classic radiographic patterns of pulmonary sarcoidosis (Table
6.117): The chest X-ray is the most commonly used tool to assess the
lung involvement in sarcoidosis. According to the pattern of
involvement on X-ray findings, sarcoidosis is classifies into four
stages.
–   Computed tomography of the chest (contrast-enhanced): Helps in
better delineation of the hilar and mediastinal lymph nodes.
–   HRCT: Characteristic appearance is presence of reticulonodular
opacities that follow a perilymphatic distribution, centred on
bronchovascular bundles and the subpleural areas. Confluence of many
interstitial granulomas can produce large, irregular, mass-like opacities
(alveolar sarcoid). Small satellite nodules are usually found at the
periphery of these large nodules termed the ‘galaxy sign’ (a collection
of stars). Honeycombing is not common.
–   Gallium 67 scan: Shows diffuse uptake.

–   PET scan: Using radiolabeled fluorodeoxyglucose is more useful than
gallium-67 scan to detect areas of granulomatous disease in the chest
and other sites and select potential area for biopsy.
–   MRI: May be useful in the assessment of extrapulmonary sites (e.g.
brain, heart and bone).
Complete blood count: There may be a mild normochromic, normocytic
anemia, lymphocytopenia (characteristic), eosinophilia, raised ESR,
hyperglobulinemia, elevated serum alkaline phosphatase.Serum biochemistry: Serum calcium is often raised (hypercalcemia due
to increased production of 1, 25-dihydroxyvitamin D by the granuloma)
and there is hypergammaglobulinemia.Serum angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) level is elevated in more
than 75% of patients with untreated sarcoidosis. Elevated levels are not of
diagnostic value because it may also be elevated in lymphoma, pulmonary
tuberculosis, asbestosis and silicosis. However, it is useful in assessing
disease activity and response to treatment.Mantoux test: Skin sensitivity to tuberculin is reduced or absent. So,
Mantoux test is a useful screening test and a strongly positive reaction
virtually rules out sarcoidosis.Lung function tests: They show a typical restrictive lung defect in
patients with pulmonary infiltration or fibrosis. There is a decrease in
TLC, FEV and FVC, and gas transfer. Lung function is usually normal in
patients with extrapulmonary disease or those with only hilar
lymphadenopathy on chest X-ray.Bronchoscopy: May show a ‘cobblestone’ appearance of the mucosa.
Bronchial and transbronchial biopsy: Most useful investigation. It
usually shows noncaseating granulomas composed of epithelioid cells and
multinucleate giant cells.Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL): Shows increased proportion of
lymphocytes, mostly activated Th1 (subset of Cd4+ cells) cells. BAL fluid
also shows an increased CD4:CD8 T-cell ratio.Kveim (or Kveim-Siltzbach) test: It involves intradermal injection of 0.1
mL of an antigen obtained from sarcoidosis spleen extract. Development
of small nodule at the injection site indicates the test as positive. The
nodule is biopsied at 4–6 weeks and shows typical non-caseating

epithelioid granuloma. However, this test is obsolete now.
Mediastinoscopic biopsy of mediastinal or hilar lymph nodes.
Exercise tests: May show oxygen desaturation.
Bone marrow examination may show granulomas in about 30% cases
Differential diagnosis of bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy (Table 6.118).
Table 6.118: Differential diagnosis of bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy.
1. Lymphoma
2. Pulmonary tuberculosis
3. Carcinoma of the bronchusInvolvement of only the hilar lymph nodes is rare
Symmetrical enlargement of hilar lymph nodes is
rare
Malignant spread to the contralateral hilar lymph
nodes is rarely symmetrical
Various causes of granuloma are listed in Table 6.119.
Table 6.119: Causes of granulomas.
Infectious diseases Noninfectious diseases
Mycobacterial infections
Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM)
Fungal infections: Histoplasma, Cryptococcus,
Coccidioides, Blastomyces, Penumocystis
jirovecii, AspergillusOther infections: Brucella, Chlamydia, Cat
scratch diseaseSarcoidosis, lymphoma, chronic beryllium
disease, hypersensitivity pneumonitis,
Wegener’s granulomatosis, Churg-Strauss
syndrome, talc granulomatosis, rheumatoid
nodule, foreign body
Treatment
Treatment should be based on symptoms or presence of organ or life-threatening disease.
Minimal or no symptomsNo treatment is required when there is only hilar lymphadenopathy.
Persisting infiltration found on the chest X-ray with normal lung function tests requires careful
monitoring.
Symptomatic single organ disease
Symptoms limited to only one organ: Topical steroid therapy is preferable.
Symptomatic multiple organ disease
Multiorgan or disease too extensive for topical therapy requires systemic therapy and are usually
immunosuppressive including glucocorticoids, cytotoxics or biologics.Glucocorticoids:  Remain the drugs of choice and given immediately in the presence of
hypercalcemia, pulmonary impairment, renal impairment and uveitis. Prednisolone is given 20–40
mg/day for 6 weeks, followed by a maintenance dose of 7.5–10 mg daily for 6–12 months.
Steroid-sparing agents:  In patients with severe disease, methotrexate (10–20 mg/week),

azathioprine (50–150 mg/day) and the use of specific tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-α inhibitors is
useful in patients developing toxicity with glucocorticoids. Chloroquine, hydroxychloroquine and
low-dose thalidomide may be useful for skin, bone and joint involvement.
Selected patients may be considered for single lung transplantation.
Bronchopulmonary Aspergillosis
Q. Write short essay/note on bronchopulmonary aspergillosis and
classify bronchopulmonary aspergillosis.
Bronchopulmonary aspergillosis is the term used for the bronchopulmonary
diseases caused by fungus Aspergillus species, the most common being
Aspergillus fumigates. Others fungus in Aspergillus species include A.
clavatus, A. niger, A. flavus and A.terreus.
Classification of Bronchopulmonary Aspergillosis (Table 6.120)
Table 6.120: Classification of bronchopulmonary aspergillosis.
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA-asthmatic pulmonary eosinophilia)
Extrinsic allergic alveolitis ( Aspergillus clavatus) (hypersensitivity pneumonitis)
Intracavitary aspergilloma
Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis
Chronic and subacute pulmonary aspergillosis
Q. Write short note on classification of bronchopulmonary
aspergillosis.
Allergic Bronchopulmonary Aspergillosis (ABPA-Asthmatic
Pulmonary Eosinophilia)
Q. Discuss the clinical features, diagnostic criteria and management of
allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA-asthmatic
pulmonary eosinophilia).
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) occurs due to
hypersensitivity reaction against germinating fungal spores in the wall of the
airway. Usually hypersensitivity reaction to A. fumigatus , rare cases are due
to other Aspergilli and other fungi.It can complicate bronchial asthma or cystic fibrosis.
It is one of the causes of pulmonary eosinophilia.

Pathogenesis
Exact pathogenesis of ABPA is not known but probably occurs as a result of
a hypersensitivity reaction to germinating fungal spores in the airway wall.
Thus, it may be due to Aspergillus-specific IgE-mediated type I
hypersensitivity reactions or specific IgG–mediated type III hypersensitivity
reactions and abnormal T-lymphocyte cellular immune response.
Clinical featuresFever, breathlessness, cough-up of thick sputum casts and worsening of
asthmatic symptoms.
Aspergillus may grow in the walls of proximal bronchi and may produce
proximal bronchiectasis. It may cause repeated episodes of eosinophilic
pneumonia which manifest as wheeze, cough, fever and expectoration
with sputum containing fungal mycelia.
Investigations
Radiological signs on chest X-ray:
–   Radiographically show infiltrates which may be mistaken for
pneumonia. Segmental or lobar collapse on chest X-rays in patients
where asthma symptoms are stable, suggestive of ABPA.
–   Repeated pneumonic episodes may show fleeting shadows of infiltrates
on chest radiographs. Other findings include transient area of
opacification (due to mucoid impact in of the airways), band-like
opacities with rounded distal margin (gloved finger appearance), and
‘ring sing’ and ‘tram lines’ (due to thickened and inflamed bronchi).
Eventually, it may result in central bronchiectasis and progressive
pulmonary fibrosis.Other relevant investigations and diagnostic features of allergic
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis are mentioned in Table 6.121.
Table 6.121: Diagnostic features of allergic bronchopulmonary
aspergillosis.
Rosenberg-Patterson criteria
Major criteria (ARTEPICS) Minor criteria
A = Asthma (bronchial)
R = Roentgenographic fleeting pulmonarySputum

opacities
T = Skin test positive (immediate wheal-and-flare
response) for Aspergillus (type I)
E = Eosinophilia-in peripheral blood
(>1000/mm 3)
P = Precipitating antibodies (IgG) in serum
I = IgE in serum elevated (> 1,000 IU/mL)
C = Central/proximal bronchiectasis (inner two-
thirds of chest CT field)
S = Serum A fumigatus-specific IgG and IgE
(more than twice the value of pooled serum
samples from patients with asthma who have
Aspergillus hypersensitivity)–   Fungal hyphae of A . fumigates and
eosinophils on microscopic examination of
sputum
–   Expectoration of brownish black mucus
plugs in sputum
–   Culture of A .fumigatus from sputum Delayed skin reaction to Aspergillus antigen
(type III)
Presence of 6 of 8 major criteria makes
diagnosis almost certain
ManagementCorticosteroids: Oral prednisolone 30 mg daily for 7–10 days causes rapid clearing of the
pulmonary infiltrate. Prednisolone should be gradually tapered to a maintenance dose of 5–10
mg/day for long term. Asthma responds to inhaled corticosteroids.Antifungal agents: Oral itraconazole Dose: 200 mg bid for 16 wk then once a day for 16 wk or
voriconazole should be used in patients on high doses of steroids. It reduces exacerbations and
requirement of steroids.Humanized monoclonal antibody against IgE: Omalizumab is under trial.
Bronchoscopic extraction of the casts: If there is persistent lobar collapse, bronchoscopic (usually
under general anesthesia) removal of impacted mucus and casts may result in re-inflation of the
collapsed lobe.
Aspergilloma
Q. Discuss the etiology, clinical features, diagnosis and management of
intracavitary aspergilloma (fungal ball).
Aspergilloma is the growth of aspergillus fungus within previously damaged
lung tissue and forms a ball of fungus (mycelium) within lung cavities. Most
commonly the fungal ball is produced by Aspergillus fumigatus and rarely by
other fungi (e.g. Zygomycetes and Fusarium).
Etiology
An intracavitary aspergilloma may develop in any area of damaged lung
with abnormal cavity. Inhaled Aspergillus may reach and germinate in this
cavity forming ‘aspergilloma’.Causes of cavitation associated with aspergillum: Colonization and
proliferation of fungus in a pre-existing lung cavity.

–   Common cause: Tuberculosis cavity occurs most often in the upper
lobes.
–   Less common causes: Lung abscess, sarcoidosis, Histoplasmosis,
Blastomycosis, AIDS pneumonia, bronchiectasis, rheumatoid nodules,
pulmonary infarction, lung cancer
When there are multiple aspergilloma cavities in a diseased area of lung, it
is termed a ‘complex aspergilloma’.
Aspergilloma (fungus ball) consists of fungal hyphae, inflammatory cells,
fibrin, mucous and tissue debris.
Clinical features
Simple aspergilloma is usually asymptomatic.
Occasionally it may cause recurrent scanty to massive hemoptysis.  The
source of hemoptysis is usually bronchial blood vessels. It may be due to
local invasion of blood vessels lining the cavity, endotoxins released from
the fungus or mechanical irritation of the vessels inside the cavity during
rolling of the fungus ball.Non-specific systemic features like lethargy and weight loss may be
present.
Fig. 6.40:  Chest X-ray shows air crescent sign of aspergilloma in the left upper zone.

Diagnosis
Chest X-ray: Shows a round cavity with a tumor-like opacity inside. It is
distinguished from a carcinoma by the presence of a crescentic air shadow
(halo) between the fungal ball and the upper wall of the cavity. If the
radiographs are repeated in a different position, the fungal ball occupies
the dependent portion of the cavity. Crescent sign of Monad (Fig. 6.40).HRCT is more sensitive for demonstration the fungal ball.
Serum precipitins to Aspergillus fumigatus can be detected.
Sputum:
–   Microscopic examination shows fungal hyphal fragments.
–   Culture usually grows the fungus.
Positive skin tests (hypersensitivity) to extracts of Aspergillus fumigatus.
Management
No treatment required for asymptomatic patients.
Antifungal drugs have not useful and corticosteroids may predispose to invasion.
Surgical removal:
–   Aspergillomas complicated by hemoptysis should be excised surgically in suitable patients.
–   In patient unfit for surgery, palliative procedures such as ultrasound or CT-guided local
injection of amphotericin B into the cavity and bronchial artery embolization to control
hemoptysis.
Invasive Pulmonary Aspergillosis
Q. Discuss the etiology, clinical features, diagnosis and management of
invasive pulmonary aspergillosis.
Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis (IPA) is invasion of previously healthy lung
tissue by Aspergillus fumigatus and usually develops as a complication in
patients who are immunocompromised (with profound neutropenia) either by
drugs (especially immunosuppressants) and/or disease.
Risk factors for invasive aspergillosis (Table 6.122)
Table 6.122: Risk factors for invasive aspergillosis.
Prolonged neutropenia (<500 cells/mm3 for >10 days) most common and risk is related to
duration and degree
Solid-organ (particularly lung transplantation) or allogeneic stem cell transplantation
Prolonged (>3 weeks), high dose corticosteroid therapy

Leukemia and other hematological malignancies
Cytotoxic chemotherapy
Advance AIDS
Severe COPD
Critically ill patients on intensive care units
Chronic granulomatous disease
Clinical features
Acute IPA (≤1 month): Causes severe necrotising pneumonia. They present
with fever, cough (sometimes productive), chest discomfort, mild to massive
hemoptysis, and shortness of breath.
Subacute (1–3 months):
Local invasion of pulmonary vessels causes thrombosis and infarction.
Epithelial spread: Involvement of tracheobronchial mucosa produces
fungal plaques and ulceration.
Systemic spread through blood may occur to the brain (causes seizures,
ring-enhancing lesions, cerebral infarctions, intracranial hemorrhage,
meningitis and epidural abscess), heart, kidneys and other organs.
Diagnosis
Sputum:
–   Microscopic examination shows fungal hyphal fragments.
–   Culture usually grows the fungus.
Serum precipitins to Aspergillus fumigatus can be detected.
Chest X-ray: Non-specific and include round densities, pleural based
infiltrates (suggestive of pulmonary infarctions) and cavitations.
HRCT: Very useful for diagnosis particularly in neutropenic patients.
Characteristically it shows macronodules (usually ≥ 1 cm) surrounded by a
‘halo’ (low attenuation due to hemorrhage surrounding the pulmonary
nodule) during first 5 days.Detection of cell-wall components (galactomannan and β-1, 3-glucan) in
blood or BAL fluid is useful for early confirmation of the diagnosis, and
also its serial estimation may be useful in assessing the evolution of
infection during treatment.PCR to detect Aspergillus DNA in BAL fluid and serum.
Bronchoscopy and BAL transbronchial biopsy is of little value and may

produce complications. However, biopsy may be needed for confirmation.
Management
Treatment should not be delayed because IPA has a high mortality rate. It requires aggressive
antifungal therapy and immunosuppression should be reduced if possible.
Voriconazole and liposomal amphotericin B  allow a safer and more effective treatment of invasive
aspergillosis when compared with amphotericin B-deoxycholate.
First-line agents: The treatment of choice is intravenous voriconazole (6 mg/kg every 12 hours for
two doses and then 4 mg/kg twice a day). It is better tolerated and more effective than amphotericin
B. Antifungal therapy with amphotericin (1.0–1.5 mg/kg/day) with or without flucytosine is equally
effective.
Second-line agents: Intravenous echinocandin derivatives such as caspofungin, micafungin and
anidulafungin are used in refractory cases or if the patient cannot tolerate first-line agents.
In less immunosuppressed patients, oral itraconazole (200 mg twice a day) may be given.
Fungal Infections of Lung (Box 6.17)
Box 6.17: Fungal infections of the lung.
Endemic fungal pneumonia pathogens in healthy and in immunocompromised individualsHistoplasma capsulatum
Coccidioides immitis
Blastomyces dermatitidis
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis
Sporothrix schenckii
Cryptococcus neoformans
Opportunistic fungal infections organisms in patients with congenital or acquired defects in the
host immune defenses
Candida spp.
Aspergillus spp.
Mucor spp.
Cryptococcus neoformans
HEMOPTYSIS
Q. Write essay on hemoptysis (its definition, causes, clinical features,
investigations and management).
Definition
Hemoptysis is defined as coughing of blood originating from below the
vocal cords.
Hemoptysis can range from blood-streaking of sputum to the presence of

gross blood in the absence of any accompanying sputum.
Life threatening (or) massive hemoptysis is defined as coughing of blood
> 150 mL/time (or) > 600 mL/24 hours.
Only 5% of hemoptysis is massive but mortality is 80%.
Clinical definition of massive hemoptysis is any bleeding that result in a
threat to life because of airway or hemodynamic compromise due to
bleeding.
Causes of Hemoptysis (Tables 6.123 and 6.124)
Q. Write short essay/note on common causes of hemoptysis.
Table 6.123: Causes of hemoptysis.
Structure
involvedCommon causes Uncommon causes
Bronchial disease Bronchial carcinoma, bronchiectasis,
acute and chronic bronchitisBronchial adenoma, foreign body
Parenchymal
disease of lungPulmonary tuberculosis (Rasmussen‘s
aneurysm-dilation of a pulmonary
artery in a tuberculous cavity), lung
abscess, pneumonia (particularly
Klebsiella), fungal infections
(aspergilloma and invasive
aspergillosis, pulmonary
contusion/laceration (traumatic)Parasites (e.g. hydatid disease, flukes),
trauma, actinomycosis, mycetoma
Vascular diseases
of lungPulmonary infarction Goodpasture’s syndrome, polyarteritis
nodosa, idiopathic, pulmonary
hemosiderosis, primary pulmonary
hypertension
Cardiovascular
diseaseAcute left ventricular failure Mitral stenosis, aortic aneurysm,
pulmonary thromboembolism
Hematological
disordersLeukemia, hemophilia, anticoagulants,
hemorrhagic diathesis
Table 6.124: Causes of massive hemoptysis.Pulmonary tuberculosis
Pulmonary infarction
Bronchiectasis
Bronchogenic carcinomaCystic fibrosis
Lung abscess
Necrotizing pneumoniaMitral stenosis
Pulmonary arteriovenous
malformation

Clinical clues for the diagnosis of cause of hemoptysis (Table 6.125)
Table 6.125: Clinical clues for the diagnosis of cause of hemoptysis.
Clinical clues Suggested diagnosis
Anticoagulant use Medication effect, coagulation disorder
Tobacco use Acute bronchitis, chronic bronchitis, pneumonia,
lung cancer
Dyspnea on exertion, fatigue, orthopnea,
paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, frothy pink
sputumCongestive heart failure, left ventricular failure,
mitral stenosis
Fever, productive cough Upper respiratory tract infection, acute
bronchitis, pneumonia, lung abscess
History of cancer (e.g. Breast, colon, or kidney) Endobronchial metastasis from carcinoma
History of chronic lung disease, recurrent lower
respiratory tract infection, cough with copious
purulent sputumBronchiectasis, lung abscess
Pleuritic chest pain, calf tenderness Pulmonary embolism or infarction
Toxic symptoms Tuberculosis
Weight loss Emphysema, lung cancer, tuberculosis,
bronchiectasis, lung abscess
Melena, alcoholism, chronic use of NSAIDs Gastritis, gastric or peptic ulcer, esophageal
varices
Association with menses Catamenial hemoptysis
Cachexia, clubbing, hoarseness Lung cancer, small cell carcinoma
Clubbing Lung cancer, bronchiectasis, lung abscess
Dullness to percussion, fever, crepitations PneumoniaDifferences between true and false hemoptysis (Table 6.126)
Table 6.126: Differences between true and false hemoptysis.
True hemoptysis False hemoptysis (Spurious)
Below vocal cords Above vocal cords
Persists as blood tinged sputum Does not persist
May be mixed with sputum Not mixed with sputum
History of cardiopulmonary disease Obvious by ENT examination
Chest X-ray may be abnormal Normal chest X-ray
Differences between hemoptysis and hematemesis (Table 6.127)

Q. Write short essay/note on differences between hematemesis and
hemoptysis.
Table 6.127: Differences between hemoptysis and hematemesis.
Hemoptysis Hematemesis
Coughing of blood. Cough precedes hemoptysis. Vomiting of blood. Nausea and vomiting
precedes hematemesis
History of cardiopulmonary disease History of gastrointestinal disease
Bright red in color Dark brown in color
Sputum remains blood stained after the attack for
few daysUsually followed by melena
Mixed with sputum Mixed with gastric contents
Blood is frothy due to admixture of air Airless and not frothy
Alkaline Acidic
Sputum contains hemosiderin laden macrophages No
Melena absent Melena present
Investigations
When a patient comes with massive hemoptysis, initial diagnostic tests
(Table 6.128) must begin in concert with efforts to stabilize the patient and
control the bleeding.
Other test includes antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, antiglomerular
basement membrane antibody, and antinuclear antibody.
Chest X-ray: Posteroanterior and lateral views may provide important
diagnostic clues. It may provide evidence of a localized lesion, including
tumor (malignant or benign), pneumonia, mycetoma or tuberculosis.
Chest X-ray may be useful in pulmonary thromboembolism, mitral stenosis,
primary pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary hemosiderosis and bronchial
adenoma.Computed tomography of the chest: Useful in delineating lesions that
are not seen on a plain chest X-ray and it defines the lesions better than
seen on X-ray.
–   It is valuable in selected cases to show the presence of lung cavities,
solid masses, and mediastinal and hilar lymphadenopathy.
–   Along with fiberoptic bronchoscopy it gives a greater positive yield of
pathology and is useful for excluding malignancy in high-risk patients.

–   Allows application of special imaging techniques, for example, HRCT
(1–3 mm thickness section) → bronchiectasis and spiral CT with
pulmonary angiography → pulmonary embolism.
Electrocardiogram: It may be useful in unsuspected mitral stenosis,
pulmonary thromboembolism and pulmonary hypertension.
Bronchoscopy: Most important diagnostic procedure.
Angiography
Isotope lung scans: Useful when pulmonary embolism is suspected in a
patient with a normal chest radiograph.
Q. Write short essay/note on:
Outline the management of a case of hemoptysis.
Management of massive (potentially lethal) hemoptysis.
Treatment
Medical
–   Endotracheal tube (single wide bore (or) double lumen). – Position of the patient in sitting (or)
bleeding side down.
–   Large bore IV line for fluids, blood transfusion. – Supplemental oxygen/mechanical
ventilation.
–   Avoid cough suppressants (if necessary benzodiazepine). – Vasopressin 0.2–0.4 units/min IV
Surgical
–   Emergency resection for bronchogenic mass. – Resection of bronchogenic mass after patient
stabilization.
–   Surgical resection for aspergilloma.
Endobronchial
–   Identify: Source, Rate and to Slow (or) Arrest bleeding.
–   The rigid bronchoscope preferred as it enables blood to be aspirated more easily.
–   The fiberoptic bronchoscopy may be used for cold saline lavage, which may sometimes arrest
bleeding. The iced saline is instilled in 50 to 100 mL aliquots followed by suctioning and
repeated until there is noticeable improvement.
–   Other techniques used to control bleeding include: Topical thrombin or fibrinogen, topical
coagulation with laser photocoagulation (Nd:YAG), argon plasma coagulator, endobronchial
brachytherapy in high doses (10–12 Gy/hour for a total of 500–4000 Gy), endobronchial
cryotherapy.
–   A balloon catheter passed through the bronchoscope can be inflated proximally in the bleeding
bronchus. This will isolate the source of bleeding from the rest of the lung and the contralateral
lung, preventing asphyxiation by blood flooding.Endovascular
–   In most patients the bleeding originates from bronchial arteries rather than pulmonary arteries.
–   Transcatheter embolization is effective in immediate control of massive hemoptysis (73–98%).

–   Causes of recurrence: Incomplete embolization of artery, recanalization of previously
embolized artery, revascularization through collateral circulation, progression of basic lung
disease.
Table 6.128: Common laboratory tests and their interpretation.
Test Diagnostic findings
Total leukocyte count with differential
countRaised leukocyte count and shift to the left in upper and
lower respiratory tract infections
Hemoglobin and hematocrit Decreased in anemia
Platelet count Reduced in thrombocytopenia
Prothrombin and partial thromboplastin
timeIncreased in anticoagulant use, disorders of coagulation
Arterial blood gas Hypoxia, hypercarbia
d-dimer Raised in pulmonary embolism
SputumGram stain, and culture and
sensitivityKlebsiella pneumoniae, identify organism in acute
exacerbations of chronic bronchitis, bronchiectasis and lung
abscessAFB (Ziehl-Neelsen stain) and
culturePulmonary tuberculosis
Cytological examination Neoplasm (bronchial carcinoma)
Tuberculin test Positive in TB
ESR ↑in infection, autoimmune disorders (e.g. Wegener’s
syndrome, SLE, Goodpasture’s syndrome) and malignancy
Urine microscopy RBCs and red cell casts in hemorrhagic diathesis and
Goodpasture’s syndrome
Management of hemoptysis is summarized in Flowchart 6.10
Flowchart 6.10:  Management of hemoptysis.

DYSPNEA
Q. Discuss briefly the differential diagnosis of acute onset dyspnea.
Q. Write short note on respiratory causes of acute breathlessness
(dyspnea).
Dyspnea or breathlessness is defined as subjective experience of breathing
discomfort (i.e. uncomfortable need to breathe). It is a sense of awareness of
increased respiratory effort that is unpleasant and recognized by the patient as
being inappropriate. Patient often complains of tightness in the chest.
Table 6.129: Causes of acute and chronic dyspnea.
Acute dyspnea Chronic dyspnea
Cardiovascular system
Cardiogenic acute pulmonary edema Chronic heart failure, myocardial ischemia
Respiratory systemAcute severe bronchial asthma
Acute exacerbation of COPD
Spontaneous pneumothoraxCOPD
Chronic bronchial asthma
Bronchial carcinoma

Pneumonia
Acute pulmonary embolism
ARDS
Inhaled foreign body (especially in children)
Lobar collapse
Laryngeal edema (e.g. anaphylaxis) or
obstruction
Metabolic acidosis (e.g. diabetic ketoacidosis,
lactic acidosis, uremia, overdose of salicylates,
ethylene glycol poisoning)Psychogenic hyperventilation (anxiety or
panic-related)Interstitial lung disease (e.g. sarcoidosis,
fibrosing alveolitis, extrinsic allergic
alveolitis, pneumoconiosis)Chronic pulmonary thromboembolism
Lymphatic carcinomatosis
Large pleural effusion(s)
Severe anemia
Obesity
Deconditioning
Causes of Dyspnea (Table 6.129)
Acute dyspnea: Dyspnea arising over the course of a few minutes to 24 to 28
hours is termed acute dyspnea.
Bronchial Obstruction
Q. Write short note on the causes, clinical presentation and
management of bronchial obstruction.
Causes (Table 6.130)
Table 6.130: Causes of bronchial obstruction.
Causes Disease/lesion
Tumors Bronchial adenoma or carcinoma
Enlarged tracheobronchial
lymph nodesMalignancy, Hodgkin lymphoma, non-Hodgkin lymphoma,
tuberculosis
Inhaled foreign bodies Common foreign bodies nuts, peas, beans, small pieces of toys,
articles of food
Bronchial casts or plugs Inspissated mucus (in asthma or pulmonary eosinophilia) or blood
clots (severe hemoptysis)
Ineffective expectoration Results in collection of mucus or mucopus in the bronchus
Rarely Congenital bronchial atresia, post-tuberculous bronchial stricture,
aortic aneurysm
Clinical Features
Depends on the following:
Cause of obstruction

Degree of obstruction: Complete or partial obstruction.
Presence or absence of secondary infection
Effect on function of lung.
Degree of obstruction
Complete obstruction
–   Consequences of complete obstruction: Absorption of air distal to the
obstruction, closure of alveolar spaces, collapse and solidification of
the affected lung distal to obstruction.
–   Physical signs on involved side: Mediastinal shift to the side of
collapse, dull percussion note, and absent/diminished breath sounds.
–   Radiological features on involved side: Mediastinal shift to the side of
collapse, elevation of the diaphragm and a dense pulmonary opacity.
When only small portion of the lung is collapsed, there may not be
mediastinal displacement and abnormal physical signs, but a
characteristic opacity will be seen on the radiograph.Partial obstruction
–   Consequences of partial obstruction: Less resistance to the airflow
during inspiration than during expiration and results is trapping of air
distal to the obstruction. This leads to over distension of the part of the
lung distal to the obstruction (obstructive emphysema).
–   Physical signs on involved side: Percussion note is hyper resonant and
breath sounds are diminished.
–   Radiological features on involved side: Hypertranslucency.
Features of secondary infection
Secondary bacterial infection usually develops distal to the obstruction
and is usually caused by microorganism of low virulence. Sometimes
suppuration can produce lung abscess.It may manifests as recurrent pneumonia in the same segment/lobe of the
involved lung.
Effect on function of lung
Symptoms usually follow if there is obstruction of a main or lobar
bronchus.
Sudden occlusion may produce severe breathlessness and hypoxemia.

Management
Identify the cause of obstruction: By chest X-ray, bronchoscopy and biopsy.
Treat the underlying cause.
Remove foreign bodies, bronchial casts, plugs and secretions by bronchoscopy.
PULMONARY EOSINOPHILIC SYNDROMES
Q. Write short essay/note on:
Causes of eosinophilia
Diagnosis, differential diagnosis and management/treatment of
tropical pulmonary eosinophilia.
Heterogenous group of pulmonary disorders characterized by pulmonary
parenchymal or peripheral blood eosinophilia.
1. Loeffler’s syndrome (simple pulmonary eosinophilia)
It is a clinical syndrome characterized by:
–   Mild respiratory symptoms
–   Peripheral blood eosinophilia, and
–   Transient, migratory pulmonary infiltrates.
Affects all ages.
Immune hypersensitivity to Ascaris lumbricoides is the likely cause.
Other parasites like Necator, Ancylostoma, Dirofilaria, etc. can be
associated
Chest X-ray: Transient, migratory, nonsegmental interstitial and
alveolar infiltrates (often peripheral or pleural based).
Pulmonary function tests: Typically reveals mild to moderate restrictive
ventilatory defect with a reduced diffusing capacity of the lungs for
carbon monoxide (DLCO).2. Drug and toxin-induced pulmonary eosinophilic syndromes
Onset: Acute or subacute.
Respiratory symptoms: Vary widely in severity.
–   Mild Loeffler’s-like illness with dyspnea, cough, and fever.
–   Severe fulminant respiratory failure.
Drugs implicated are acetyl salicylate, nitrofurantoin, bleomycin,

methotrexate, minocycline, sulfa drugs, gold salts, INH, etc.
3. Idiopathic acute eosinophilic pneumonia
More common in younger men (mean age about 30 years).
Occurs commonly in previously healthy persons. Also seen in persons
with history of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), HIV infection, recent
commencement of smoking, etc.
Diagnostic criteria:
–   Acute onset of febrile respiratory manifestations (≤1 month duration
before consultation).
–   Bilateral diffuse infiltrates on chest X-ray.
–   Hypoxemia, with PaO2 on room air < 60 mm Hg, and/or PaO2/FiO2
<= 300 mm Hg, and/or oxygen saturation on room air < 90%.
–   Lung eosinophilia, with > 25% eosinophils in BAL (or eosinophilic
pneumonia at lung biopsy).
–   Absence of infection, or of other known causes of eosinophilic lung
disease (especially exposure to drug known to induce pulmonary
eosinophilia.
Treatment
Initial doses of methyl-prednisolone used in the range from 60 to 125 mg every 6 hours.
After resolution of respiratory failure, oral prednisolone (in doses of 40 to 60 mg per day) may be
continued for 2 to 4 weeks with a subsequent slow taper over the next several weeks.
Idiopathic acute eosinophilic pneumonia (AEP) carries an excellent prognosis.
4. Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia
Q. Write short note on tropical pulmonary eosinophilia, its diagnosis
and management.
Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia (TPE) was first described in the early 1940s
by Weingarten, in India. It is seen mainly in South and South-east Asia and
Africa.
Definition: Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia is an occasional atypical host
response (hypersensitivity reaction) of an individual to a mosquito-borne
filarial infection by tissue-dwelling human nematode (microfilariae)
Wuchereria bancrofti and Brugia malayi.
Pathogenesis: When filarial parasites are destroyed, the antigens released

and initiate an immediate IgE-mediated reaction. There is dense
inflammatory reaction with eosinophils which over time, progresses to
granuloma formation and fibrosis. In children, marked enlargement of lymph
nodes and spleen (Meyers-Kouwenaar syndrome) may be evident. In
adults, symptoms are predominantly due to lung involvement. Microfilariae
are trapped in the pulmonary capillaries and produce symptoms of lung
involvement.
Clinical features: Paroxysmal dry cough, fever, malaise, anorexia weight loss, dyspnea or
wheeze/nocturnal bronchospasm (asthma-like symptoms) and miliary
pulmonary infiltrates (Weingarten syndrome or tropical pulmonary
eosinophilia).
Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia is a complication seen mainly in India.
If untreated, it may progress to chronic interstitial lung disease.
Spontaneous resolution over several weeks.Other features:
–   Presentation can be similar to status asthmaticus
–   Chest pain, muscle tenderness, pericardial and CNS involvement
–   Rarely, patients remain asymptomatic.
Chest examination: Coarse crackles and rhonchi.
Generalized lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly may be present.
Diagnosis
History of long period of residence in an endemic area.
Peripheral blood:
–   Absence of microfilariae in the despite repeated examinations.
–   Marked peripheral blood eosinophilia in excess of 3000/mL.
Chest X-ray—Miliary mottling.
Serological findings
–   High titers of antifilarial antibodies.
–   Elevated levels of total IgE (at least 1000 units/mL).
Therapeutic response to DEC (6 mg/kg/day for 3 weeks) within 7–10
days of initiating therapy.
Treatment:  Diethylcarbamazine in a dose of 2 mg/kg orally three times a day for 14–21 days or for
as long as 4 weeks. It is directly filaricidal to both adult worms and microfilariae.

5. Chronic eosinophilic pneumonia
Typically subacute presentation.
Symptoms present for several months before diagnosis.
Common presenting complaints include: Low-grade fevers, drenching
night sweats, moderate (10 to 50-pound) weight loss, cough.
History of atopy, allergic rhinitis, or nasal polyps may be found.
About 2/3 develop adult-onset asthma: Preceding or concurrent with
the occurrence of CEP.
No major extrapulmonary manifestations
Chest X-ray: Bilateral opacities in upper and mid zone. Photographic
negative of pulmonary edema.
Corticosteroids are the mainstay of therapy for CEP. Dramatic clinical,
radiographic, and physiological improvements.
6. Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (discussed on pages 373-4)
7. Churg-Strauss Syndrome
It is a form of necrotizing vasculitis in several organs, associated with
eosinophilic tissue inflammation and extravascular granulomas. It
occurs in asthmatics and presents with fever and peripheral
hypereosinophilia (discussed on pages 693-4).
8. Idiopathic hypereosinophilic syndromeSeveral names: Eosinophilic leukemia, Loeffler’s fibroblastic
endocarditis, disseminated eosinophilic cardiovascular disease.
Clinical features: Often nonspecific and include:
–   Weakness, fatigue, low-grade fevers, myalgias, cough, angiedema,
rash, retinal lesions, and dyspnea.
–   Can affect every organ system.
–   Cough is nocturnal, either nonproductive or productive of small
quantities of non-purulent sputum.
–   Wheezing and dyspnea without evidence of airflow obstruction on
spirometry.
–   Pulmonary hypertension, ARDS, and pleural effusions.
–   Progressive chronic heart failure due to eosinophilic myocarditis
and endocarditis, intracardiac thrombi and endocardial fibrosis.

–   Encephalopathy with neuropsychiatric dysfunction,
thromboembolic events, like hemiparesis. Peripheral neuropathy is
extremely common in IHS.
–   Hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy
Investigations:
–   Anemia, thrombocytopenia
–   Elevated vitamin B12 levels
–   Bone marrow: Universally affected with a striking eosinophilia (up
to 25–75% of the differential count).
Treatment
Glucocorticoids are the first line therapy in all patients without FIP1L1/PDGFRA mutation.
Patients with FIP1L1/PDGFRA mutation: Imatinib is the drug of choice with a very good
response rate.
Other drugs include: hydroxyurea, vincristine, interferons, anti–IL-5 monoclonal antibody (e.g.
mepolizumab) and an anti-CD52 antibody (alemtuzumab).
Causes of Calcification in Lung Parenchyma (Box 6.18)
Q. Write short note on causes of calcification in lung parenchyma.
Box 6.18: Calcification in lung parenchyma.
Micronodules
Pulmonary alveolar microlithiasis, occupational lung diseases (e.g. silicosis, coal-worker’s
pneumoconiosis)
Large nodules or masses
Granulomatous disease (tuberculosis, histoplasmosis)
Primary lung cancer (5–10%)
Metastasis to lung (e.g. osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma)
Non-malignant metastatic calcification in lung (e.g. renal failure, hyperparathyroidism)
Multiple pulmonary chondroma (e.g. with Carney triad)
Others:  Chickenpox pneumonia, hemosiderosis, pulmonary hemorrhage
Breath Sounds (Fig. 6.41)
Q. Write short note on:
Causes of bronchial breathing, tubular and amphoric breathing.
Three components of tubular breathing.

Cavernous breathing.
Normal breath sounds are produced by vibration of vocal cords due to
turbulent flow in the larynx. This sound is harsher anteriorly over the upper
lobes (particularly on the right).
Vesicular breath sounds: Healthy lungs filter out most of the high
frequency component, and the resulting low-pitched, rustling sounds are
called vesicular. Inspiration is longer than expiration and there is no gap in
between rustling in character.
–   Conditions with diminished vesicular breath sounds are heard in
bronchial asthma, tumors, pleural effusion (small), pleural thickening,
collapsed lung with occluded bronchus, and emphysema.Bronchial breath sounds are produced by the passage of air through the
trachea and large bronchi. It is loud and high pitched. Inspiration and
expiration are of equal duration, there is a gap between inspiration and
expiration, and the quality is guttural or aspirate.
–   Types of bronchial breathing
♦   Tubular: High pitched and heard in pneumonia with consolidation,
partially collapsed lung or lobe and above the level of pleural
effusion (relaxation atelectasis)
♦   Cavernous: Low pitched and heard in thick walled cavity with
communicating bronchus.
♦   Amphoric: Low pitched with high tone and a metallic quality. It is
heard in bronchopleural fistula, rarely over a superficial cavity and
tension pneumothorax.Bronchovesiclar breath sound: This is classically seen in obstructive lung
disease where expiration is prolonged, however there is no gap in
between.
Fig. 6.41:  Types of breath sounds.

Indications of Bronchoscopy (Table 6.131)
Q. Write short note on indications for bronchoscopy.
Table 6.131: Indications of bronchoscopy.
Diagnostic Therapeutic
Diagnosis of lung cancer
Chest radiographic abnormality (lung tumor or
changes suggestive of bronchial obstruction,
such as appearance of early volume loss or
undoubted collapse, unresolved pneumonia or
hemi-diaphragmatic paralysis)Evaluation of hemoptysis
Evaluation of persistent or recurrent cough
Evaluation of paralyzed vocal cord
To obtain positive sputum cytology
Staging of lung cancer
Diagnosis of diffuse lung disease
Identification of infecting agentsInsertion of an endotracheal tube for general
anesthesia in patients in whom extension of
neck may be dangerous (atlanto-axial
subluxation)Tamponade of endobronchial bleeding, either
with end of bronchoscope itself or by using a
fogartyRemoval of foreign bodies
Aspiration of secretions in acute inflammatory
lobar atelectasis where physiotherapy has
proved unsuccessful in achieving this endRelief of tracheobronchial narrowing by laser
treatment
Treatment of lung cancer by placement of
stents or delivery of endobronchial
radiotherapy (brachytherapy)

Cardiology

CHAPTER
7
INTRODUCTION AND SYMPTOMATOLOGY
Chest Pain
Q. Write a short essay on the differential diagnosis of chest pain. List
the non-cardiac causes of chest pain.
Chest pain is a common symptom of cardiac disease. It can be due to non-
cardiac causes such as anxiety or diseases involving the respiratory,
musculoskeletal or gastrointestinal systems.
Common Causes of Chest Pain (Fig. 7.1)
Fig. 7.1:  Causes of chest pain.
Differential Diagnosis of Chest Pain (Table 7.1)
Table 7.1: Differential diagnosis of chest pain.

Potentially life-threatening causes Common non-life-threatening causes
Acute coronary syndromes: Acute myocardial
infarction (MI), ST segment elevation MI,
non-ST segment elevation MI
Unstable angina
Pulmonary embolism
Aortic dissection
Myocarditis (most common cause of sudden
death in the young)
Tension pneumothorax
Acute chest syndrome/crisis in sickle cell
anemia
Pericarditis
Boerhaave’s syndrome (perforated esophagus)
Gastrointestinal: Perforated peptic ulcer, acute
pancreatitis, acute cholecystitisGastrointestinal
–   Biliary colic
–   Gastroesophageal reflux disease
–   Peptic ulcer disease
Pulmonary
–   Pneumonia
–   Pleuritis
Musculoskeletal pain: Costochondritis
(Tietze’s syndrome), intercostal
myalgia/neuralgia, fracture of the ribs (cough,
trauma), secondaries in the ribs, Bornholm
diseaseThoracic radiculopathy: Texidor’s twinge
(precordial catch syndrome)
Emotional: Anxiety
Neural: Shingles/herpes zoster
Differential Features of Ischemic Cardiac and Non-Cardiac Pain
(Table 7.2)
Table 7.2: Differential features of ischemic cardiac and non-cardiac pain.
Features Ischemic cardiac pain Noncardiac pain
Site Central, diffuse Peripheral, localized
Character of pain Tight, squeezing, dull,
constricting, choking or ‘heavy’Sharp, stabbing, catching
Precipitation/provocation Exertion, emotion Spontaneous, not related to
exertion
Radiation Jaw/neck/shoulder Usually no radiation
Relieving factors Rest (in less than 5 minutes),
nitratesNot relieved by rest or by
nitrates
Associated features Breathlessness, diaphoresis Depends on the cause
Differentiating Features
Differentiating features of the common causes of chest pain (Table 7.3).
Table 7.3: Differentiating features of the common causes of chest pain.
Disease Description Location Radiation Associations
Acute coronary Crushing, Retrosternal, left Right (R) or left Dyspnea,

syndromes tightening,
squeezing, or
pressure likeanterior chest or
epigastric(L) shoulder, R or
L arm/hand/jawdiaphoresis,
nausea
Pulmonary
embolismHeaviness,
tightnessWhole chest
(massive) or focal
chest (segmental)None Dyspnea, unstable
vital signs, feeling
of impending
doom if massive
or just
tachycardia,
tachypnea if
segmental
Aortic dissection Ripping, tearing Midline,
substernalIntrascapular area
of backSecondary arterial
branch occlusion
(paraplegia)
Pericarditis/cardiac
tamponadeSharp, constant or
pleuriticSubsternal None Fever, dyspnea,
pericardial
friction rub
Pneumothorax Sudden, sharp,
lancinating,
pleuriticOne side of chest Shoulder, back Dyspnea
Perforated
esophagusSudden, sharp,
after forceful
vomitingSubsternal Back Dyspnea,
diaphoresis, signs
of sepsis
PalpitationsQ. Discuss the approach to a patient with palpitations.
Palpitation is the term used to describe an uncomfortable increased
awareness of one’s own heartbeat or the sensation of slow, rapid or
irregular heart rhythms.
Palpitations do not always indicate the presence of arrhythmia and
conversely, an arrhythmia can occur without palpitations. Palpitations are
usually noted when the patient is quietly resting.Palpitation can be either intermittent or sustained and either regular or
irregular. A change in the rate, rhythm or force of contraction can
produce palpitations.
Causes of Palpitations (Table 7.4)
Table 7.4: Causes of palpitations.
Cardiac causes Drug induced

Cardiac arrhythmias
–   Premature atrial and ventricular
contractions
–   Supraventricular and ventricular
arrhythmias
Structural heart diseases
–   Atrial myxoma, valvular heart disease
–   Congenital heart disease, cardiomyopathy
–   Mitral valve prolapse, pacemakerAlcohol (use or withdrawal)
Atropine
Amphetamines
Caffeine, nicotine
Cocaine
Beta agonists, theophylline
Psychosomatic disorders
Generalized anxiety, major depression, panic
disorderEndocrine
Hyperthyroidism, hypoglycemia,
pheochromocytoma
High output states
Anemia, beriberi, fever, pregnancy,
thyrotoxicosisMiscellaneous and idiopathic
Emotional stress, hyperventilation,
premenstrual syndrome, strenuous physical
activity
Evaluation of Palpitation (Box 7.1)
Clinical Presentation
Box 7.1: Evaluation of palpitation.
Detect and identify any underlying arrhythmia
Determine presence of any organic heart disease
Determine any precipitating cause
Duration and frequency of palpitations
–   Duration may be either short-lasting or persistent.
–   Note onset and offset of palpitations.
–   Frequency: It may occur daily, weekly, monthly, or yearly.
Types of palpitations: They are classified according to the rate, rhythm,
and intensity of heartbeat as follows:
–   Extrasystolic palpitations: Due to ectopic beats, usually produce
feelings of ‘missing/skipping a beat’ and/or a ‘sinking of the heart’
interspersed with periods during which the heart beats normally.
Patients report that the heart seems to stop and then start again. It can
often seen in even in young individuals, usually without any disease of
the heart, and generally benign.
–   Tachycardiac palpitations is the rapid fluctuation like ‘beating wings’

in the chest. It may be regular (e.g. in atrioventricular tachycardia,
atrial flutter, or ventricular tachycardia) or irregular or arrhythmic (e.g.
in atrial fibrillation).
–   Anxiety-related palpitations are perceived as a form of anxiety. They
begin and end gradually.
Associated symptoms and circumstances
–   Palpitations developing after sudden changes in posture are usually due
to intolerance to orthostatic or to episodes of atrioventricular nodal re-
entrant tachycardia.
–   Occurrence of syncope or other symptoms, such as severe fatigue,
dyspnea, or angina, in addition to palpitations, is more common with
structural heart disease.
–   Hypersecretion of natriuretic hormone results in
polyuria/postpalpitation diuresis in atrial fibrillation.
–   Palpitations associated with anxiety or during panic attacks are usually
due to sinus tachycardia secondary to the mental disturbance.
–   Palpitations may be produced by an increase in the sympathetic drive
during physical exercise.Typical description
–   Flip-flopping in the chest: Palpitations are sensed as the heart
seeming to stop and then start again, producing a pounding or flip-
flopping sensation. This type of palpitation is generally caused by
supraventricular or ventricular premature contractions.
–   Rapid fluttering in the chest: It is due to a sustained ventricular or
supraventricular arrhythmia, including sinus tachycardia.
–   Pounding in the neck: An irregular pounding feeling in the neck is
caused by atrioventricular dissociation, with independent contraction
of the atria and ventricles, resulting in occasional atrial contraction
against a closed tricuspid and mitral valve. This produces cannon A
waves, which are intermittent increases in the “A” wave of the jugular
venous pulse. Cannon A waves may be seen with ventricular
premature contractions, third degree or complete heart block, or
ventricular tachycardia (VT).
Physical Examination

May help to confirm or refute the presence of an arrhythmia as a cause for
palpitations:
Measurement of the vital signs
Assessment of the jugular venous pressure and pulse
Auscultation of the chest and precordium.
Investigations
Electrocardiogram
–   Resting electrocardiogram can be used to diagnose the arrhythmia.
–   If exertion induces the arrhythmia and palpitations, exercise
electrocardiography can be used to make the diagnosis.
–   It may reveal bundle branch block, short PR interval, delta waves,
prolonged QT interval, ischemia, and enlargement of heart chambers,
prior myocardial infarction or other organic diseases of the heart.
If the arrhythmia is not frequent, other methods must be used. These include:
Continuous electrocardiographic (Holter) monitoring  or telephonic
monitoring.
Echocardiography: To evaluate any structural heart disease and
assessment of left ventricular function.
Electrophysiology study is an invasive test of electrical conduction
system of heart.
Blood tests: Hemoglobin, serum glucose level, serum electrolytes and
thyroid function tests depending on the clinical findings.
Management of palpitation
Most of the causes do not have serious arrhythmias or underlying structural heart disease.
In symptomatic patients, occasional benign atrial or ventricular premature contractions can often
be treated by beta-blockers.
Avoid precipitation factor like alcohol, tobacco, or illicit drugs.
If caused by pharmacologic agents:  Consider alternative therapies if appropriate or possible.
Psychiatric causes:  By cognitive therapy or pharmacotherapy.
Reassurance:  After all the serious causes have been excluded.
Dyspnea
Q. Write short note on causes of acute dyspnea.

Definition: “Dyspnea” is a term used to characterize a subjective experience
of breathing discomfort that is comprised of qualitatively distinct sensations
that vary in intensity. The experience derives from interactions among
multiple physiological, psychological, social, and environmental factors, and
may induce secondary physiological and behavioral responses.
Causes of dyspnea (refer Table 6.129).
Mechanisms
Chemoreceptors
–   Peripheral: Carotid and aortic bodies (sensitive to changes pO2, pCO2
and H+)
–   Central: Medulla (sensitive only to changes pCO2, not pO2, change in
pH of CSF).
Increased work of breathing
–   Airflow obstruction: Bronchial asthma, COPD, tracheal obstruction
–   Decreased pulmonary compliance: Pulmonary edema, fibrosis,
allergic alveolitis
–   Restricted chest expansion: Ankylosing spondylitis, respiratory
paralysis, kyphoscoliosis.
Increased ventilatory drive
–   Increased physiological dead space (V/Q mismatch): Consolidation,
collapse, pleural effusion (PE), pulmonary edema
–   Hyperventilation due to receptor stimulation
–   Chemoreceptors: Acidosis, hypoxia (shock, pneumonia), hypercapnia
–   J receptors at alveolo-capillary junction: Pulmonary edema,
pulmonary embolism, pulmonary congestion (activates Hering-Breuer
reflex which terminates inspiratory effort before full inspiration is
achieved—rapid and shallow)
–   Muscle spindles in intercostal muscles: Tension-length disparity
–   Central: Exertion, anxiety, thyrotoxicosis, pheochromocytoma.Impaired respiratory muscle function:  Poliomyelitis, Guillain-Barré
syndrome (GBS), myasthenia gravis.
Orthopnea: Dyspnea develops in recumbent position and is relieved by

sitting up or by elevation of the head with pillows.
Pulmonary congestion during recumbency (cannot be pumped out of LV)
seen in congestive heart failure (CHF), chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) and bronchial asthma.
Increased venous return.
Diaphragm elevation leading to decreased vital capacity.
Basics: A normal 70 kg person breathes 12–15/min with a tidal volume o f
600 mL. A normal individual is not aware of respiratory effort until
ventilation is doubled, and dyspnea is not experienced until ventilation is
tripled.
Causes of dyspnea in COPD are listed in Box 7.2.
Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea (PND): Attacks of dyspnea occur at night
and awaken the patient from sleep.
Box 7.2: Dyspnea in COPD.Hypoxia and hypercapnia:  Chemoreceptors
Increased airway resistance and hyperinflation
De-conditioning:  Reduced threshold at which respiratory muscles produce lactic acidosis
It is due to decreased responsiveness of respiratory center in brain during
sleep and pulmonary congestion (due to increased sympathetic activity
during REM sleep) 2–3 hours after onset of sleep.
Takes 10–30 minutes for recovery after upright posture.
Causes: Specific sign of LV dysfunction and includes ischemic heart
disease, aortic valve disease, hypertension, cardiomyopathy.
Differences between orthopnea and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea is
presented in Table 7.5.
Table 7.5: Differences between paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea and
orthopnea.
Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea Orthopnea
Definition Episode of sudden onset of
dyspnea 2–2.5 hours after sleepDyspnea in recumbent
posture
Timing Patient wakes up from rapid eye
movement (REM) sleepOccurs soon after lying
down
Method of relief Sits up with legs hanging down, Gets up, uses more pillows,

stands up, air hunger, self
ventilates to comfortsleeps in erect posture
Mechanism Depressed respiratory center.
Sympathetic over activity during
REM → catecholamine surge
resulting in tachycardia →
interstitial pulmonary congestion
→ respiratory center lags behind
→ perceived as acute dyspnea.
There is sudden transient increase
in PCWPShifting of venous blood
(>400 Ml) into pulmonary
circulation, V/Q mismatch,
compression of diaphragm,
postural diastolic
dysfunction. There is a slow
sustained rise in pulmonary
capillary wedge pressure
(PCWP)
Associated symptoms Angina, perspiration, palpitation,
rarely hemoptysisAll the symptoms of
congestive cardiac failure
(CCF)
Oxygen saturation Transient hypoxia Normal
Differential diagnosis Night mares/panic
attacks/nocturnal hypoglycemia/
obstructive sleep apnea (OSA)COPD/gross obesity/acute
asthma/gross ascites
Trepopnea: Aggravation of dyspnea when lying on one side and relieved by
lying on opposite side. Its causes are:Unilateral lung disease: Uninvolved normal lung receives more blood
supply due to gravity.
Congestive heart failure: Lying on right side enhances venous return and
sympathetic activity.
Lung tumor: Gravity induced compression of blood vessels or lung.
Platypnea: Dyspnea on sitting or standing and relieved by supine position.
Its causes are:
Venous to arterial shunting (lung bases)
Intracardiac shunts (ASD, pneumonectomy)
Intrapulmonary right to left shunt [hepatopulmonary syndrome, pulmonary
embolism (PE), COPD]
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).
Approach to Dyspnea
Onset and duration
–   Minutes to hours (rapid onset): Pneumothorax, acute asthma, PE,
pulmonary edema, foreign body.
–   Hours to days (gradual onset): Pneumonia, pleural effusion, anemia,

Guillain–Barré syndrome (GBS).
–   Months to years (slow onset): Pulmonary tuberculosis (PTB), COPD,
carcinoma, fibrosing alveolitis.
Severity of dyspnea (Table 7.6)
Aggravating and relieving factors
–   Improves on weekend/holidays: Occupational asthma, extrinsic
allergic alveolitis
–   Recumbency/sleep: Orthopnea/paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea (PND)
Q. NYHA functional classification of cardiac disability.
Table 7.6: Severity of dyspnea.
Medical Research Council (MRC) grading of
severity of dyspneaNew York Heart Association (NYHA)
classification of severity of heart failure
(angina, fatigue, palpitation, or dyspnea)
1. Not troubled by breathlessness except on
strenuous exertion
2. Short of breath when hurrying on level ground
or walking up slight hill
3. Walks slower than people of same age or stops
after 15 minutes when walking at own pace on
level
4. Stops after 100 yards (90 m) or after few
minutes in level ground
5. Too breathless to leave house, dress or undressClass I: No limitation with ordinary physical
activity
Class II: Mild/slight limitation of ordinary
physical activity
Class III: Marked limitation of physical activity,
symptoms with exertion
Class IV: Symptoms at rest. Unable to carry out
physical activity without discomfort
Associated symptoms
–   Pleuritic chest pain: Pneumonia, pulmonary infarction, rib fracture,
pneumothorax
–   Central non-pleuritic chest pain: Myocardial infarction, massive
pulmonary embolism
–   Cough or wheeze: Asthma, pulmonary embolism, pneumothorax.
Arterial Pulses
Q. Write short essay/note on the clinical value of examination of radial
and carotid pulses at bedside.
Definition of arterial pulse: It is a pressure distension wave produced by the

contraction and relaxation of the left ventricle against a partially filled aorta
which is transmitted to peripheries and is felt against bony prominences.
Fig. 7.2:  Normal carotid and peripheral pulse wave.
Table 7.7: Assessment of arterial pulse.
Characteristics Best assessed by palpating
Rate Radial artery
Rhythm
Volume Carotid artery
Character or quality Carotid artery (except collapsing pulse which is
appreciated better at radial artery)
Radiofemoral delay
Whether felt in all peripheral vessels
Condition of vessel wall
Peripheral arterial pulses: Include radial, brachial, carotid, femoral,
popliteal, posterior tibial and dorsalis pedis pulses. Right radial pulse is the
first pulse to be examined during clinical examination. Normal pulse wave is
depicted in Figure 7.2.

Examination of the Arterial Pulse (Table 7.7)
The character of the pulse is determined by stroke volume and arterial
compliance, and is best assessed by palpating a major artery, such as the
carotid or brachial artery.
Pulse rate
Q. Write short note on bradycardia and its causes.
Normal (resting) pulse rate in an adult is between 60 and 100 beats per
minute (bpm).
Should be counted for 1 full minute by palpating the radial artery.
–   Sinus bradycardia: Resting pulse rate is less than 60 beats/minute.
–   Sinus tachycardia: Resting pulse rate is more than 100 beats/minute.
Causes of bradycardia and tachycardia are listed in Table 7.8.
Table 7.8: Causes of bradycardia and tachycardia.
Bradycardia Tachycardia
Physiological:  Athletes, sleep
Pathological
Severe hypoxia
Hypothyroidism/myxedema
Hypothermia
Sick sinus syndrome
Vasovagal syncope
Drugs—β-blockers, verapamil, digoxin
Heart block
Raised intracranial tensionPhysiological:  Infants, children, emotion,
exertion, pregnancy
Pathological
Tachyarrhythmias
High output states: Anemia, pyrexia,
anxiety, beriberi, thyrotoxicosis, cardiac
failure, cardiogenic shock, drugs (e.g.
atropine, nifedipine, salbutamol, terbutaline,
nicotine, caffeine)
Pulse deficit (Apex-pulse deficit) is the difference between the heart rate
(counted by auscultation) and pulse rate when counted simultaneously for
one full minute.
–   Causes: Pulse deficit of more than 10/minute occurs in atrial
fibrillation and less than 10/minute may be found with ventricular
premature beats or slow/controlled atrial fibrillation (AF).Rhythm
–   Rhythm is assessed by palpating the radial pulse. The normal rhythm is
regular.

–   Causes of various types of arterial pulse rhythm abnormalities are
listed in Box 7.3.
Box 7.3: Causes of various types of arterial pulse rhythm abnormalities.
Regularly irregular
Atrial tachyarrhythmias, sinus arrhythmia, partial AV blocks
Ventricular bigemini, trigemini
Irregularly irregular
Atrial or ventricular ectopics
Atrial fibrillation
Atrial tachyarrhythmia with AV blocks
Frequent extrasystoles
Regular with occasional irregularity
Extrasystoles
Q. What are the causes for irregularly irregular pulse?
–   Ventricular ectopics: Develop as occasional or repeated irregularities
superimposed on a regular pulse rhythm. Intermittent heart block also
present with occasional beats dropped from an otherwise regular
rhythm.
–   Atrial fibrillation: Develops an irregularly irregular pulse. This
irregular pattern persists when the pulse increases in response to
exercise. On the contrary pulse irregularity due to ectopic beats
usually disappears with exercise.Pulse volume
–   Pulse volume is best assessed by palpating the carotid artery. However,
the pulse pressure (i.e. difference between systolic and diastolic blood
pressure) provides an accurate measure of pulse volume.
–   Pulse volume is normal when pulse pressure is between 30 and 60 mm
Hg, low when it is less than 30 mm Hg and large volume when more
than 60 mm Hg.Pulse character or quality
–   Causes of hypokinetic and hyperkinetic pulse are listed in Table 7.9.
Various types of pulse quality and its causes are mentioned in Table
7.10.
–   Grading of pulse: Palpation of pulse is done by the fingertips and
intensity of the pulse is graded from 0 to 4 +. 0 = pulse not palpable; 1

+ = faint, but detectable pulse; 2 + = slightly more diminished pulse
than normal; 3 + = normal pulse; and 4 + = bounding pulse.
Table 7.9: Causes of hypokinetic and hyperkinetic pulse.
Hypokinetic pulse Hyperkinetic/bounding pulse
Congestive cardiac failure
Hypovolemia
Shock
Mitral stenosis
Aortic stenosis
Constrictive pericarditisPhysiological
Fever, pregnancy, alcoholism, exercise
Pathological
High output states:  Anemia, cor pulmonale,
cirrhosis liver, beriberi, thyrotoxicosis, AV
fistula, Paget’s disease
Cardiac cause:  Aortic regurgitation,
bradycardia, complete heart block, PDA,
systolic HTN, rupture of sinus Valsava into
heart chamber, aortopulmonary window
Q. Write short note on: (1) Corrigan’s/water hammer/collapsing pulse
and its causes, (2) pulsus paradoxus and its causes and (3) pulsus
alterans.
Table 7.10: Various types of pulse quality and its causes.
Types Wave forms Causes
Catacrotic pulse Percussion(p)—ejection of blood
Tidal(t)
Dicrotic—elastic recoil of vessel
(reflected waves)Normal
Pulsus parvus et tardus A low amplitude (parvus) with a
slow rising and late peak (tardus)Severe aortic stenosis (AS)
Anacrotic pulse Single peak low volume Severe aortic stenosis
Pulsus bisferiens: Single pulse
wave with two peaks in systoleRapid rising, twice beating and
both waves felt in systoleSevere aortic regurgitation
(AR), moderate AR +AS,
hypertrophic obstructive
cardiomyopathy (HOCM)
Pulsus dicroticus Twice beating. First wave in
systole, second wave in diastole.
Seen when pulse rate and
diastolic pressure is lowTyphoid fever, severe left
ventricular failure (LVF),
dehydration, dilated
cardiomyopathy endotoxic
shock
Watson’s water hammer pulse or
collapsing pulseHigh (large) volume pulse, sharp
rise (systolic pressure is high), ill-
sustained, sharp fall (diastolicAortic regurgitation, patent
ductus arteriosus (PDA), AP
window, rupture of sinus

pressure is low), pulse pressure is
at least 60 mm HgValsalva, arteriovenous
fistula, hyperdynamic
circulation states
Pulsus paradoxus: Exaggerated
reduction in the strength of pulse
during normal respirationSystolic blood pressure falls more
than 10 mm Hg during inspiration
(exaggeration of normal
phenomenon)Constrictive pericarditis,
acute severe asthma/COPD,
cardiac tamponade, tension
pneumothorax, massive
pulmonary embolism
Absent pulsus paradoxus in an
expected diseaseASD, VSD, AR, pericardial
adhesions
Reverse pulsus paradoxus Positive pressure ventilation,
HOCM (hypertrophic
obstructive cardiomyopathy)
Pseudo-pulsus paradoxus Complete heart bock with
AV dissociation
Jerky pulse—Spike and dome HOCM
Pulsus alternans Alternating weaker and stronger
volume pulses in regular rhythm,
doubling rate of Korotkoff sound
on lowering cuff pressuresLeft ventricular failure
Plateau pulse Severe AS
Pulsus bigeminus Pulse wave with normal beat
followed by a premature beat and
a compensatory pause, occurring
in rapid succession, resulting in
alteration of the strength of pulse.Digoxin toxicity
Sinus arrhythmia Increase pulse rate with
inspiration and decrease with
expirationAbsent sinus arrhythmia in
CCF and autonomic
neuropathy
Diagrammatic appearances of various arterial waveforms are presented in
Figure 7.3.


Fig. 7.3:  Diagrammatic appearances of various arterial waveforms. A 2, aortic component of the second
heart sound; P 2, pulmonary component of the second heart sound; S 1 first heart sound.
Radiofemoral delay
–   A delayed femoral pulsation compared to right radial pulse occurs in
coarctation of aorta.
–   Demonstrated by simultaneous palpation of right radial artery and one
femoral artery.
♦   Apico-carotid  delay is seen in severe aortic stenosis where there is
a delay between apical impulse and the carotid upstroke.
Reduced or absent arterial pulses
–   It indicates impaired blood flow.
–   Causes: (1) congenital (e.g. coarctation of the aorta), (2) intrinsic
disease of artery (e.g. atherosclerosis, thrombosis, arteritis), (3)
disorders with vasospasm (e.g. Raynaud’s phenomenon), (4) extrinsic
compression of blood vessel (e.g. thoracic outlet syndrome, trauma,
neoplasms).
Jugular Venous Pressure
Q. Write short essay/note on jugular venous pulse (JVP) and its clinical
significance.
Definition: Jugular venous pulse (JVP) is defined as the oscillating top o f
undulating vertical column of blood in the right internal jugular vein
that faithfully reflects the pressure and volumetric changes in the right
atrium that varies with all phases of cardiac cycle and respiration .
Jugular venous pressure (JVP) is the vertical height of oscillating column of
blood.
Advantages of Internal Jugular Vein (IJV) vs External Jugular
Vein (EJV)
IJV is anatomically (Fig. 7.4) closer to and has a direct course to right
atrium while EJV does not directly drain into superior vena cava.
IJV is valveless and pulsations can be seen. EJV has valves and pulsations
cannot be seen.
EJV can become small and barely visible when there is vasoconstriction

secondary to hypotension (as in congestive heart failure).
EJV is superficial and prone to kinking.
Importance of Right Internal Jugular Vein
Right internal jugular veins extend in an almost straight line to superior
vena cava, thus favoring transmission of the hemodynamic changes from
the right atrium.
The left innominate vein is not in a straight line and may be kinked or
compressed between aortic arch and sternum, by a dilated aorta, or by an
aneurysm.
Fig. 7.4:  Diagrammatic appearance of anatomic relations of jugular veins and right atrium.
Technique of Measuring JVP
Position: Semi-reclining position with 45° angle between the trunk (not
the neck) and the bed turn the head slightly towards left shoulder, so that
the neck muscles are relaxed (Fig. 7.5). Tangential light source can be put
from opposite side.
–   Not in sitting position: Because the upper level of venous column is
below the clavicle.
–   Not in supine position: Because the whole venous column moves
beyond the angle of jaw into the intracranial cavity.Identify jugular venous pulsation
–   Assure good lighting (can use tangential beam of light through torch).

–   Look between the two heads of sternocleidomastoid.
–   Note the upper level of pulsation, waveform and respiratory variation.
–   Do not mistake the carotid pulsations for venous pulsations (Table
7.11).
Q. Write short essay/note on differentiation of jugular venous pulse
from carotid pulse.
Table 7.11: Differences between jugular venous pulsations and carotid
pulsations.
Jugular vein Carotid artery
Pulsations not palpable Pulsations palpable
Pulsations obliterated by pressure above the
clavicle.Pulsations not obliterated by pressure above
the clavicle
Pulse wave level of reduced during inspiration
and increased on expirationNo effects of respiration on pulse
Usually two pulsations per systole (x and y
descents)One pulsation per systole
Prominent descents Descents not prominent
Pulsations more prominent with abdominal
pressureNo effect of abdominal pressure on pulsations
Changes with position No change with position
More lateral in position in the neck Medial in the neck
Has a definite upper level No upper level
More superficial Deeper in location
Wavy and undulant Brisk and jerky
Descents are more prominent Only positive waves
Measurement of JVP: Measure the vertical distance (in cm) between the
horizontal lines drawn from the upper level of venous pulsation and the
sternal angle.
–   This can be done by using two rulers—one placed horizontal to the
upper level of pulsation and another taking the vertical distance of that
ruler from the sternal angle.
Q. Method of calculation of central venous pressure from jugular

venous pressure.
Calculate the right atrial pressure (RAP) or central venous pressure
(CVP)
–   Normally, the center of right atrium is 5 cm below the sternal angle at
any position of the patient. Hence, 5 cm is added to the above value to
obtain the right atrial pressure.
–   Conversion: 1.3 cm of H2O or blood = 1 mm Hg
Evaluation/Interpretation of JVP (Box 7.4)
Box 7.4: Evaluation of jugular venous pulse (JVP).
(1) Level, (2) waveform, (3) venous hum, (4) respiratory variation in level and wave pattern, (5)
abdomino-jugular reflux, and (6) liver size and pulsations.
Level
Normal level of JVP: (1) From sternal angle <4 cm, (2) from center of
right atrium <9 cm. In mm Hg <7 mm Hg.
Causes of elevated and lowered JVP (Table 7.12).
Table 7.12: Causes of raised and lowered JVP.
Causes of elevated JVP (jugular venous distension)
Right ventricular failure
Pericardial compression
(constriction/tamponade): little or no
pulsations when severe
Tricuspid stenosis
Superior vena cava (SVC) obstruction—no
pulsationsCirculatory overload
Renal failure
Excessive fluid administration
Atrial septal defect with mitral valve disease
Causes of lowered JVP:  Dehydration, hypovolemia
Q. Write short essay/note on normal wave patterns of JVP and their
variations.
Wave pattern (Figs. 7.5A and B)

Figs. 7.5A and B:  (A) Wave patterns in jugular venous pressure (JVP); (B) Abnormalities of JVP.
The normal JVP consists of three ascents or positive waves (a, c and v)
and two descents or negative waves (x, x’ and y):
–   a wave (ascent):  Due to a ctive atrial contraction leading to retrograde blood flow into neck veins.
–   x wave (descent):  Due to continued atrial relaxation.
–   c wave:  Due to impact of the carotid artery adjacent to the jugular vein and retrograde
transmission of a positive wave in the right atrium. It is produced by the right ventricular systole
and the bulging of the tricuspid valve into the right atrium. Not usually seen in humans.
–   x’ wave (descent):  Due to descent of floor of right atrium (tricuspid valve) during right
ventricular systole and continued atrial relaxation.
–   v wave (ascent):  Due to passive atrial filling (v enous filling).
–   y wave (descent):  Due to opening of tricuspid valve and subsequent rapid inflow of blood from
right atrium into the right ventricle leading to a sudden fall in right atrial pressure.
Wave patterns in jugular venous pressure are presented in Figure 7.5.
Best way to identify the waves (ascents and descents): Simultaneously auscultate and observe the
wave pattern.
‘a’ ascent:  Clinically corresponds to S 1 (though it actually occurs before S 1); sharper and more
prominent than ‘v’ wave.
‘x’ descent:  Follows S 1; less prominent than ‘y’ descent.
‘c’ ascent:  Occurs simultaneously with carotid pulse; but never seen normally.
‘v’ ascent:  Coincides with S 2; less prominent than ‘a’ ascent.
‘y’ descent:  Follows S 2; more prominent than ‘x’ ascent.
Note: h wave —between the bottom of ‘y’ descent and beginning of ‘a’
ascent, during the period of diastasis (relatively slow ventricular filling).
Patient with prominent jugular veins is depicted in Figure 7.6.
Abnormalities of wave patterns of JVP

Fig. 7.6:  Prominent jugular veins.
Prominent ‘a’ waves (giant a-wave or Venous Corrigan):  Due to resistance to atrial emptying
at:
–   Tricuspid level:  Tricuspid stenosis, right atrial tumors.
–   Right ventricular level:  Concentric hypertrophy due to severe pulmonary hypertension, right
ventricular cardiomyopathy, severe aortic stenosis, acute pulmonary embolism, acute tricuspid
regurgitation.
Cannon waves:  Very prominent ‘a’ waves due to atrial contraction against closed tricuspid valve.
–   Regular cannon waves:  Junctional rhythm, ventricular tachycardia 1:1 retrograde conduction,
isorhythmic AV dissociation.
–   Irregular cannon waves:  Complete heart block, ventricular tachycardia, ventricular ectopy,
ventricular pacing, and classic AV dissociation.
Rapid and regular neck pulsations, which are due to prominent and regular A waves, may be seen
as a bulging in the neck, sometimes termed as “frog sign” and is most typical of re-entrant
supraventricular arrhythmias, particularly AVNRT or atrioventricular re-entrant tachycardia due to
a pre-excitation syndrome.Absent ‘a’ waves:  Atrial fibrillation (AF), post DC conversion of AF, sinoventricular conduction
in hyperkalemia.
Single wave
–   ‘a’ and ‘v’ wave merge: Heart rate >120/min
–   Early ‘v’ wave with obliterated ‘x’ wave:  Severe chronic tricuspid regurgitation, acute

tricuspid regurgitation
Absent ‘x’ wave (failure of atrial pressure to fall): Atrial fibrillation, severe chronic tricuspid
regurgitation, acute tricuspid regurgitation, constrictive pericarditis.
Prominent ‘x’ wave:  Cardiac tamponade.
Prominent ‘v’ wave:  Right ventricular failure, tricuspid regurgitation, atrial septal defect with or
without mitral regurgitation.
Diminished ‘v’ wave:  Hypovolemia, venodilators.
Rapid ‘y’ descent:  Causes of prominent ‘v’ wave, constrictive pericarditis (Friedrich’s sign).
Slow ‘y’ descent:  Tricuspid stenosis, pericardial tamponade, tension pneumothorax.
c-v wave with prominent “y” descent: Tricuspid regurgitation (lateral ear lobe pulsations—
Lancisi’s sign).
Steeply rising “h” wave:  Restrictive cardiomyopathy, constrictive pericarditis, right ventricular
infarction.
Equal ‘a’ and ‘v’ wave ( M Pattern): Atrial septal defect.
Venous hum (Pontain’s murmur)
Continuous bruit over neck veins (normally noiseless) due to increased
velocity of blood flow or decreased viscosity of blood.
Best heard with the bell of the stethoscope over the right supraclavicular
fossa/root of neck, patient in standing position.
Causes:
–   Physiological: Children, pregnancy
–   Pathological: Hyperkinetic states, anemia (indicates chronic
compensated severe anemia), thyrotoxicosis, beriberi, intracranial
AV fistula. Indicates chronic compensated severe anemia.
Respiratory variation of JVP
Normal: Venous column in IJV rises during expiration and falls during
inspiration.
Reason:
–   During inspiration venous return to the right side of the heart increases
due to increased negative thoracic pressure. However, this is
accommodated by the inspiratory decrease in pulmonary vascular
resistance. As a result, pulmonary artery, right ventricle and right atrial
pressures fall in spite of increased venous return.
–   During expiration, due to increased positive intrathoracic pressure,
pulmonary circulation is compressed by the thoracic cage resulting in
increased pulmonary resistance and pressure. Kussmaul’s sign

Q. Write short essay/note on Kussmaul’s sign.
Normally, during inspiration there will be decrease in the height of jugular
venous pulsation and drop in jugular venous pressure (respirophasic
changes).
Kussmaul’s sign is paradoxical rise in JVP during inspiration.
Causes: Constrictive pericarditis, right ventricular infarction, restrictive
cardiomyopathy, severe right-sided heart failure, acute severe asthma.
Rarely can be seen in cardiac tamponade, tricuspid stenosis, severe
tricuspid regurgitation.Reason: Increased venous return in inspiration cannot be accommodated
by the heart in the above-mentioned conditions leading to a translation of
the venous blood back through the SVC and presents as distended jugular
veins even during inspiration.
Abdominojugular/hepatojugular refluxQ. Write a short note on abdominojugular/hepatojugular reflux test
and its clinical significance.
Technique: When pressure is applied over the liver by pressing firmly (40
mm Hg) over the abdomen for around 30 seconds, the venous pressure
gets exaggerated initially due to increased venous return. Later the
myocardium accommodates the extravenous return and the level falls.
Normally within 2–3 cardiac cycles, i.e. within 3 seconds.Normal response: Upper level of jugular venous pulsation moves
upwards by less than 3 cm and then falls down within 5 seconds even
when the pressure is continued.
SignificancePositive test: Rise in JVP (more than 3 cm) for >10 seconds of firm mid-
abdominal compression.
–   Early cardiac failure: First sign of right heart failure (RHF).
–   False positive: Valsalva (abdominal guarding), fluid overload
False negative: SVC/IVC obstruction, Budd Chiari syndrome where there
is no rise in JVP.
This test also helps to differentiate venous pulsation from the arterial
pulsation.

Square root sign
Found in constrictive pericarditis on cardiac catheterization to note pressure
tracings. A rapid halt of ventricular filling occurs as the ventricular wall is
impeded by the abnormal pericardium causing an abrupt rise in LV pressure
(Fig. 7.7). This has been described as the square root sign.
Fig. 7.7: Ventricular pressure curve in constrictive pericarditis.
APICAL IMPULSE
Q. Write a short note on apical impulse.
Definition: It is the outermost and lowermost point of maximum impulse
(PMI) in early systole, which imparts a perpendicular gentle thrust to a
palpating finger, followed by a slight medial retraction in the late systole.
Cause of normal apical impulse: Anterior and counter clock-wise rotation of
LV due to isovolumic contraction during early systole and medical retraction
due to clock-wise rotation of the LV during late systole.
Characteristics of normal apical impulse are listed in Box 7.5.
Box 7.5: Characteristics of normal apical impulse.

Location:  Left 5th ICS at or around half an inch medial to mid-clavicular line and <10 cm from
mid-sternal line.
Extent:  <2.5 cm in diameter which is one ICS.
Duration: <50% of systole.
Mildly tapping in character.
Abnormal Apical Impulse
Absent:  Dilated cardiomyopathy, pericardial effusion, behind the rib, dextrocardia, obesity,
COPD, left pleural effusion
Tapping:  Mitral stenosis (palpable S 1—closing snap )
Hyperdynamic:  Increased in amplitude, duration is >1/3 to <2/3 of systole, occupies more than
one intercostal space. Occurs in LV volume overload [AR (aortic regurgitation), MR (mitral
regurgitation), VSD (ventricular septal defect), PDA (patent ductus arteriosus), high output states]
Heaving:  Increase in amplitude, duration is >2/3 of systole and occupies more than one intercostal
space. Occurs in LV pressure overload [AS (aortic stenosis), HTN (hypertension), coarctation of
aorta]
Diffuse:  Occupying more than 1 ICS. Occurs in LV aneurysm, LV dilatation as in AR
Double:  Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM), AS with AR, left dyssynergy
(LBBB), LV aneurysm
Triple or quadruple:  HOCM
Retractile:  Severe TR (tricuspid regurgitation).
Medial apical retraction:  Left ventricular enlargement
Lateral apical retraction:  Right ventricular enlargement.
Cheyne-Stokes Breathing
Q. Write short essay on mechanism, causes, consequences and
management of Cheyne-Stokes breathing.
Definition: This is a cyclical pattern of respiration due to impaired
responsiveness of the respiratory center to carbon dioxide. It is characterized
by gradual increases and decreases in respiration. It has two alternative
periods namely (1) rapid deep respiration called hyperpnea and (2) complete
stoppage of respiration called apnea.
Mechanism (Fig. 7.8)
Spontaneous rhythmic activity of breathing is abolished when there is
anoxemia. Consequent apnea causes accumulation of carbon dioxide.
Hypercapnia stimulates respiratory centers → produces hyperventilation
→ leads to reduced carbon dioxide → causes depression of the respiratory
center → resulting in apnea. The cycle is repeated.

Fig. 7.8:  Cheyne-Stokes breathing and levels of carbon dioxide (CO 2).
Conditions Associated with Cheyne-Stokes Breathing
Physiological conditions: During deep sleep, high altitude, newborn
babies
Pathological conditions: Severe heart (left ventricular) failure, uremia,
chronic hypoxia, diffuse cerebral atherosclerosis, stroke, head injury and
hemorrhage, increased intracranial pressure, severe pneumonia, narcotic
drug (e.g. barbiturates, opiates) poisoning.
HEART SOUNDS
Relative, brief, auditory vibrations of variable intensity, frequency and
quality.
First Heart Sound (S 1)
Q. What is the mechanism of first heart sound? Write short note on the
variations in first heart sound.
Mechanism
During systole the atrioventricular (AV), i.e. mitral and tricuspid valves
closes and blood tries to enter the atrium and lead to back bulging of the AV
valves into the respective atria. But the taut (stretched or pulled tight)
chordate tendinae stop the back bulging and causes the blood to flow
forward. This will cause vibration of the valves, blood and the walls of the
ventricles.
TimingJust precedes carotid upstroke.
S1 will appear to initiate the outward LV thrust of apex beat.

Characteristics
Medium to high frequency but lower pitch than S2
Q-M1 60 ms, Q-T1 90 ms, M1-T1 30 ms.
First heart sound has two components: (1) Mitral component (M1) due to
mitral valve closure followed by (2) tricuspid component (T1) due to
tricuspid valve closure.
S1 is best heard at the apex. It is best heard with the diaphragm of
stethoscope.
Intensity
Determined by structural integrity of mitral valve, position of AV valves at
time of ventricular contraction, integrity of isovolumetric systole, heart
rate, P-R interval, myocardial contractility.
Abnormalities of S 1
Table 7.13 lists the causes of variations in the intensity of first heart sound.
Table 7.13: Causes of variations in the intensity of first heart sound.
Loud first heart sound (S 1) Soft first heart sound (S 1)
Mitral stenosis (mild to moderate)
Tachycardia
Hyperdynamic circulation: Exercise, anemia,
fever, thyrotoxicosis, Paget’s disease,
pregnancy, beriberi, increased cardiac output
Short P-R interval
Left atrial myxoma
Tricuspid stenosis
Thin peopleMitral or tricuspid regurgitation
Obesity
Emphysema
Pericardial effusion
Severe calcified mitral stenosis
Left ventricular failure
Shock
Bradycardia
First degree block
Long P-R interval
Variation in the intensity of first heart sound: Atrial fibrillation,
complete heart block (CHB), ventricular tachycardia, atrial flutter with
varying block, atrial tachycardia with varying block, ventricular ectopics.
Splitting of S1: Abnormalities in splitting of first heart sound are
presented in Table 7.14.

Table 7.14: Abnormalities in splitting of first heart sound.
Wide splitting of first heart sound Reversed splitting of first heart sound
Ebstein’s anomaly T1 delayed
Atrial septal defect (ASD)
Complete right bundle branch block (RBBB)
Left ventricular pacingComplete left bundle branch block
Severe mitral stenosis
Myxoma of left atrium
Right ventricular pacing
Ectopic beats from right ventricle
Second Heart Sound (S 2)
Q. What is the mechanism of second heart sound? Write short note on
the variations in second heart sound.
It is due to the closure of aortic and pulmonary valve.
Characteristics
It has two components: (1) aortic component (A2) due to aortic valve
closure, followed by the (2) pulmonary component (P2) due to pulmonary
valve closure.
Loudness of A2 or P2 is directly proportional to the pressures in aorta or
pulmonary artery at the beginning of diastole respectively.
The 2nd heart sound is medium to high pitched (higher frequency)
because:
–   The semilunar valves are more taut
–   The great elastic coefficient of the taut arteries provide the principle
vibrations of the 2nd heart sound.
P2 only heard at second left intercostal space. Loudest sound in pulmonary
area is A2.
A2 is audible at region of right second intercostal space, left parasternal
space and apex.
Normal splitting
–   Splitting during inspiration: During inspiration, the aortic valve
closes early than pulmonary valve and produces a physiological
inspiratory splitting of second heart sound . Split is audible in
second and third intercostal space and amplitude of A2 > P2.

–   Normally, during expiration both aortic and pulmonary valves close
almost simultaneously and produce a single expiratory second heart
sound .
–   Frequency of both A2 and P2 components are same.
Hangout time/interval: The interval between the pressure crossover point
and the incisura (the onset of A2 or P2) has been termed “hangout time”.
During inspiration, pulmonary vascular impedance declines with a further
increase in the pulmonary hangout time, which is the mechanism for
inspiratory splitting of S2.
Abnormalities of Second Heart Sound (S 2)
Absent S2: Old age as in calcific aortic stenosis (due to absence of A2) or
chronic emphysema.
Single second heart sound (S2): May be either due to absent A2 (e.g.
severe aortic stenosis or atresia) or absent P2 (e.g. severe pulmonary
stenosis or atresia)and tetralogy of Fallot.
Variation in the intensity S2 (Table 7.15).
Table 7.15: Variations in the intensity of second heart sound.
Aortic component (A 2)
Loud A 2: Essential hypertension, hyperhemodynamic circulatory states, syphilitic aortic
regurgitation, aortic aneurysm
Soft A 2: Aortic stenosis and regurgitation
Pulmonary component (P 2)
Causes of loud P 2 Diminished (soft) P 2 Absent P 2
Normal in infants and
children
Adults with chest deformity
or thin chests
Pulmonary arterial
hypertension
Left to right shunts
Hyperkinetic circulatory
statesNormal in elderly
Thick chested adults
Pulmonary stenosis
Dysplastic valveTetralogy of Fallot
Transposition of great
arteries
Truncus arteriosus
Pulmonary atresia
Absent pulmonary valve

Splitting of S2: Physiological splitting of S2 is normally found in children
and young adults during inspiration. Normal interval is A2-P2 30 ms and
A2-OS 30–150 ms.
Wide split S2: It may be variable or fixed (Table 7.16).
Table 7.16: Causes of wide split of second heart sound.
Wide split S 2 Wide fixed split
Due to early A 2
–   Mitral regurgitation
–   Ventricular septal defect
–   Constrictive pericarditisDue to late P 2
–   Right bundle branch
block
–   Ectopic from left
ventricle
–   Left ventricular
pacemakersAtrial septal defect
Severe right ventricular
failure
Massive acute pulmonary
embolism
ASD with variable split S2: Sinus venosus type of ASD or ASD with
atrial fibrillation.
Reversed (paradoxical) splitting S2: May be due to early P2 or delayed
A2 (Table 7.17).
Table 7.17: Causes of reversed or paradoxical split.
Early P 2 Delayed A 2
Left bundle branch block
Right ventricular pacing
PVCs of right ventricular
origin
Wolff-Parkinson-White
(WPW) syndrome (type B)Severe aortic stenosis
Severe systemic
hypertension
Acute myocardial infarction
Hypertrophic
cardiomyopathySevere aortic regurgitation
Large patent ductus arteriosus
Aneurysm of ascending aorta
Post-stenotic dilatation in
aortic stenosis
Pseudo-paradoxical split: Normally S2 split in expiration and inspiration.
But during inspiration patients with muffled P2, so that single S2 will be
heard in inspiration.
Narrow splitting: Ageing, artifactual muffling of P2, severe pulmonary
arterial hypertension and murmur obscuration.
Third Heart Sound

Q. Write short note on the significance of third heart sound.
Third heart sound (S3) is also called as protodiastolic sound /ventricular
gallop.
S3 is a low-pitched early diastolic sound produced due to rapid ventricular
filling immediately after opening of the atrioventricular valves.
S3 best heard with the bell of stethoscope at the apex. It coincides with
rapid ventricular filling. It occurs 0.12–0.18 seconds after S2 and has low
frequency and low intensity.
Causes of Third Heart Sound (Table 7.18)
A third heart sound is a normal finding in children, in young adults and
during pregnancy.
A third heart sound is usually pathological after the age of 40 years. In
heart failure S3 occurs with a tachycardia and S1 and S2 are quiet (lub-da-
dub).
Table 7.18: Causes of third heart sound.
Physiological S 2: Children, young adults under 40 years, athletes, pregnancy
Pathological
Hyperdynamic/high output states:  AV fistula, thyrotoxicosis
Left-sided S 2 (arising from the left ventricle):  Left ventricular failure (most common cause),
aortic regurgitation, mitral regurgitation, ischemic heart disease, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Right-sided S 2 (arising from right ventricle) : Right ventricular failure, tricuspid regurgitation,
pulmonary hypertension
Fourth Heart Sound
Q. Write short note on significance of fourth heart sound.
Fourth heart sound (S4) is less common and is also called
presystolic/atrial gallop. It occurs just before the first sound (da-lub-
dub). It occurs 0.11 seconds prior to S1.
It is soft and low-pitched, best heard with the bell of the stethoscope at the
apex.
It is always pathological and is produced by a rapid (forceful) empting of

the atrium into the non-compliant or stiff ventricle. It cannot occur when
there is atrial fibrillation.
Third and a fourth heart sound causes a ‘triple’ or ‘gallop’ rhythm. S4 may
be confused with spilt S4. Firm pressure by the diaphragm of stethoscope
eliminates S4 but not split S1.
Causes of Fourth Heart Sound (Box 7.6)
Box 7.6: Causes of fourth heart sound.
Left sided S 4
Systemic hypertension with left ventricular hypertrophy
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Ischemic heart disease (especially acute myocardial infarction)
Acute mitral regurgitation
Anemia, thyrotoxicosis and AV fistula
Right sided S 4
Right ventricular hypertrophy due to pulmonary hypertension, pulmonary stenosis
Summation gallop
Q. Write short note on summation gallop.
Summation is the presence of S1, S2 merging with S3 and S4. It occurs
when both S3 and S4 are present in a patient with tachycardia.
Shortening of diastole causes joining of the two sounds (S3 and S4) and
produce a single loud sound.
Pericardial Friction Rub
Q. Write short note on pericardial rub.
It is the sound produced due to sliding (apposition) of the two inflamed
layers (visceral and parietal pericardium) of the pericardium.
Phases: It is triphasic (1) mid-systolic, (2) mid-diastolic and (3) pre-
systolic.
Character: It is scratchy, grating, leathery or creaking in character. Its
intensity vary over time, and with the position of the patient.
Best heard: With diaphragm of stethoscope on the left sternal boarder
(3rd and 4th space) leaning over at the end of expiration. It may be audible

over any part of the precordium but is often localized.
Confused with Hamman’s sign in post-open heart surgery (crunch sound
from mediastinal air).
A pleuropericardial rub is a similar sound that occurs in time with the
cardiac cycle but is also influenced by respiration and is pleural in origin.
Occasionally a ‘crunching’ noise can be heard caused by air in the
pericardium (pneumopericardium).
Cardiac Sounds on Auscultation
Q. Write short note on other cardiac sounds on auscultation.
Ejection sound/click: Usually sharp, high frequency sound audible
immediately after S1. Its causes are listed in Box 7.7.
Box 7.7: Causes of ejection sound/click.
Aortic valve:  Aortic stenosis, bicuspid aortic valve
Pulmonary valve: Pulmonic stenosis, vary with respirations
Prosthetic valves:  Mechanical, not bioprosthetic
Mid-Late Systolic Sounds
Click, high frequency sound found in mitral valve prolapse.
Occurs earlier with Valsalva maneuver or squatting to standing.
Early Diastolic Sounds
Q. Write short note on opening snap.
Opening snap of mitral stenosis (MS)
It is caused by the opening of atrioventricular valve.
Characteristics: High pitched sound audible at the apex in left lateral
decubitus position. 0.04–0.12 sec after A2 (S3 occurs 0.12 sec after A2).
Occurs after S2, before S3.
Severe mitral stenosis is associated with short A2-OS interval and softer
OS or absent OS.
Mechanism of opening snap (OS)
Stenotic anterior mitral valve leaflet suddenly bulging download into the

left ventricular cavity like a dome, with a snapping sound when the mitral
valve is rapidly opened during diastole. So, OS is audible only if anterior
mitral leaflet of mitral valve is mobile.
OS occurs when movement of AMV suddenly stops, at point when LVP
drops below that of LAP.
Differences between opening snap second and third heart sound are listed in
Table 7.19.
Table 7.19: Differences between opening snap second and third heart
sound.
Opening snap (OS) S 2 (second heart
sound)S3 (third heart sound)
Area Just inside apex/entire
chest wall2nd and 3rd left
intercostal spaceOnly apex
Relation to posture A 2-OS interval widens
on standingA2-P2 interval narrows
on standingDisappear of sitting
Intensity on standing Remain
same/intensifiedDecreases -
Relation to respiration A 2-OS interval
constant throughout
respirationSplit increase on
respirationNone
Intensity on respiration Same - RVS 3 load during
inspiration
A2-OS/A 2-P2/A2-S3
interval- A2-P2 interval shorter
than A 2-OS intervalA2-S3 interval is
longer than A 2-OS
interval
Pitch High (Best heard with
diaphragm)High Low (Best heard with
bell)
MURMURSSudden deceleration of blood produces heart sounds. Heart murmurs are
produced by turbulent flow (Raynold’s number >2000) across an
abnormal valve, septal defect or outflow obstruction, or by increased
volume or velocity of flow through a normal valve.Murmurs may occur in a healthy heart. These ‘innocent’ murmurs occur
when stroke volume is increased, e.g. during pregnancy, and in athletes

with resting bradycardia or children with fever (Box 7.8).
Box 7.8: Mechanism of murmurs.
Blood viscosity:  Increased or decreased blood velocity
Valve:  Narrowed or incompetent, organic or relative
Abnormal connection
Vibration of loose structure
Diameter of vessel increased or decreased.
Features to be Observed in Murmur
Timing: By simultaneous palpation of the carotid arterial pulse and note
whether systolic, diastolic, continuous.
Shape: Crescendo (grows louder), decrescendo, crescendo-decrescendo,
plateau
Intensity
–   Systolic murmurs are graded on a 6 point scale (Levine and Freeman)
(Box 7.9)
–   Diastolic murmurs are usually not graded but can be described as (1)
very soft (2) soft, and (3) loud with or without thrill.
Duration
Location of maximum intensity depends on the site where the murmur
originates.
Character blowing, harsh, rumbling, and musical
Pitch  high, medium, low depending on the velocity of the jet
Radiation/conduction
–   Reflects the intensity of the murmur and the direction of blood flow
–   Mitral regurgitation murmur (PSM) radiates to axilla
–   Aortic stenosis murmur (ESM) conducts to the carotid.
Variation  with respiration/position/other maneuvers
Best heard  with bell or diaphragm of the stethoscope.
Box 7.9: Grading of systolic murmurs (Freemann and Levine).
Grade 1 = very faint
Grade 2 = quiet but heard immediately
Grade 3 = moderately loud
Grade 4 = loud with thrill

Grade 5 = heard with stethoscope partly off the chest, thrill present
Grade 6 = no stethoscope needed, thrill present
Note:
Thrills are associated with murmurs of grades 4–6
Diastolic murmurs are only graded till 4.
Systolic Murmurs
Q. Write short essay/note on differential diagnosis of ejection systolic
murmurs (ESM). List the causes of systolic murmurs.
Ejection Systolic (Mid-systolic) Murmurs
Ejection systolic (mid-systole) murmurs occur when there is ventricular
outflow tract obstruction. It begins shortly after the first heart sound (S1) and
ends before the second heart sound with a crescendo–decrescendo or
diamond-shaped pattern, reflecting the changing velocity of blood flow.
Various Systolic Murmurs and its Causes (Table 7.20)
Q. Write short note on causes of pansystolic murmur.
Table 7.20: Various systolic murmurs and its causes.
Early systolic murmurs
VSD (small muscular VSD/large VSD with
pulmonary hypertension)
Acute severe MR
Acute severe TRLate systolic murmurs
Mitral valve prolapse
Tricuspid valve prolapse
Papillary muscle dysfunction
Mid-systolic/ejection systolic murmurs
Aortic stenosis
Pulmonary stenosis
Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy
(HOCM)Pansystolic murmurs
Mitral regurgitation
Tricuspid regurgitation
Ventricular septal defect
Rare: Early PDA/PDA with Eisenmenger
Various Diastolic Murmurs and its Causes (Table 7.21)
Q. Write short note on causes of mid-diastolic murmurs.
Table 7.21: Various diastolic murmurs and its causes.

Early diastolic murmur
Aortic regurgitation
Pulmonary regurgitationMid diastolic murmur
Mitral stenosis
Tricuspid stenosis
Carey Coombs murmur of
acute rheumatic fever
Austin Flint murmur of
chronic aortic regurgitation
Flow MDM
Across mitral valve: MR,
AR, VSD, PDA
Across tricuspid valve:
ASD, TR, TAPVC (total
anomalous pulmonary
venous connection)Atrial myxoma
Ball-valve thrombus
Cor triatriatum
Rytand’s murmur of
complete heart blockLate diastolic
murmurs/presystolic murmurMitral stenosis
Tricuspid stenosis
Myxoma
Continuous Murmurs
Q. Write short note on the common causes of continuous murmurs of
heart.
The continuous murmur is a murmur that begins in systole and continues
without interruption, encompassing the second sound, throughout diastole or
part of diastole.
Causes of Continuous Murmurs (Table 7.22)
Table 7.22: Causes of continuous murmurs.
Systemic to pulmonary communication
–   Patent ductus arteriosus
–   Aortopulmonary window
–   Anomalous origin of left coronary artery
from pulmonary artery (ALCAPA)
–   Tricuspid atresia
–   Truncus arteriosus
–   Shunts for TOF surgery: Waterson, Potts,
or Blalock- Taussig shuntSystemic to right heart connection
–   Coronary AV fistulaArteriovenous fistula
–   Systemic
–   Pulmonary
Normal flow through constricted arteries
–   Coarctation of aorta
–   Peripheral pulmonary stenosis
–   Renal artery stenosisIncreased flow through normal vessels
–   Venous: Cervical venous hum,
Cruveilhier-Baumgarten murmur

–   Rupture sinus of Valsalva
Left atrium to right atrium connection
–   Lutembacher syndrome–   Arterial: Mammary soufflé, uterine soufflé,
thyrotoxicosis, tumors (e.g. hepatocellular
carcinoma, renal cell carcinoma)
Systolic-Diastolic Murmur/To-and-Fro Murmur
The presence of a systolic-diastolic murmur (systolic murmur and
diastolic murmur) so called a to-and-fro murmur, is not a continuous
murmur.
It is separating the two murmurs through a small ‘silence’.
It involves two components: A systolic one, in which the blood flows in
one direction, and a diastolic one in which the blood flows in the opposite
direction.In contrast to true continuous murmur, the blood flows in the same
direction in both systole and diastole.
To-and-fro murmurs are two murmurs that occur through a single channel.
Causes of systolic-diastolic murmur are presented in Table 7.23.
Table 7.23: Causes of systolic-diastolic and to-and-fro murmur.
Systolic-diastolic murmur
VSD with ARTo-and-fro murmur
AS with AR
Pulmonary hypertension with pulmonary
regurgitation
Innocent Murmurs
Q. Write short note on innocent murmurs.
Characteristics: Short, systolic (rarely continuous) soft murmur. Normal
heart sounds and no hemodynamic abnormalities.
Examples of innocent murmurs are listed in Box 7.10.
Venous hum (jugular venous hum; cervical venous hum, Pontian’s murmur).
Named murmurs and its causes are listed in Table 7.24.
Box 7.10: Examples of innocent murmurs.
SystolicVibratory systolic murmur (Still’s murmur)

Pulmonic systolic murmur (pulmonary trunk)
Mammary soufflé
Peripheral pulmonic systolic murmur (pulmonary branches)
Supraclavicular or brachiocephalic systolic murmur
Aortic systolic murmur
Still’s murmur: Medium frequency, vibratory, originating from leaflets of pulmonary valve
Continuous
Venous hum
Continuous mammary soufflé
Q. Write short note on mammary soufflé.
Mammary soufflé is an innocent systolic or continuous cardiac murmur
(probably of arterial origin) heard during late pregnancy or in the early
postpartum period. It is to be differentiated from pathologic lesions and is
unaffected by the Valsalva maneuver.
Table 7.24: Named murmurs.
Name of the murmur Cause/lesion
Carey Coombs murmur: Mid-diastolic murmur Rheumatic fever
Austin Flint murmur: Mid-late diastolic murmur Aortic regurgitation
Graham-Steel murmur: High pitched, diastolic
murmurPulmonary regurgitation
Rytand’s murmur: Mid-diastolic atypical murmur Complete heart block
Dock’s murmur: Diastolic murmur Left anterior descending (LAD) artery stenosis
Mill wheel murmur due to air in RV cavity Following cardiac catheterization
Still’s murmur: Inferior aspect of lower left
sternal border, systolic ejection sound,
vibratory/musical qualitySubaortic stenosis, small VSD
Gibson’s murmur: Continuous machinery
murmurPatent ductus arteriosus (PDA)
Key–Hodgkin murmur: Diastolic murmur Aortic regurgitation, e.g. syphilitic
Cabot–Locke murmur: Diastolic murmur heard
best at the left sternal borderAnemic patients and the murmur resolves with
treatment of anemia
Roger’s murmur: Loud pansystolic murmur heard
maximally at the left sternal borderSmall VSD
Pontain’s murmur: Cervical venous hum Severe anemia
Cole-Cecil murmur AR murmur in left axilla due to higher position
of apex
Cruveilhier-Baumgarten murmur Venous hum diagnostic of portal vein

hypertension
Changing Murmurs
Murmurs which change in character or intensity from moment to moment
(Box 7.11).
Box 7.11: Changing murmurs.
Carey-Coombs’ murmur
Infective endocarditis
Atrial thrombus
Atrial myxomas
Dynamic Auscultation
Q. Write short essay/note on dynamic auscultation in cardiac diseases.
This is a technique of altering circulatory dynamics by means of a variety of
physiological and pharmacological maneuvers and determining their effects
on heart sounds and murmurs.
Q. Write short essay/note on maneuvers useful in differentiating
murmurs due to various cardiac diseases.
Interventions most commonly employed are:
–   Respiration
–   Postural changes
–   Valsalva maneuver
–   Isometric exercise
–   Post-premature ventricular contractions (PVC)
–   Vasoactive agents, e.g. amyl nitrite, methoxamine, phenylephrine.
Various valvular lesions and dynamic auscultation findings are presented in
Table 7.25.
Table 7.25: Various valvular lesions and dynamic auscultation findings.
Valvular lesion Features that
augmenting/increasing the
murmur intensityFeatures that decrease/reduce
the murmur intensity
Mitral stenosis (MS) MDM accentuated by: Reduced mid-diastolic murmur

Exercise, squatting, amyl
nitrate, isometric hand grip, left
lateral position(MDM), softening of opening
snap (OS) and A 2-OS gap
widening by: Inspiration, sudden
standing
Mitral regurgitation (MR) Augmentation of the murmur
by: Squatting, isometric
exercise and left lateral positionDecrease murmur by: Sudden
standing, Valsalva and amyl
nitrate
Aortic stenosis (AS) Murmur increases on: Post
PVC beat, squatting and lying
flat from standingReduces AS murmur by:
Valsalva, standing and handgrip
Aortic regurgitation (AR) Early diastolic murmur (EDM)
increases on:
Expiration, sitting up and
leaning forward, squatting,
isometric exercise and
vasopressorsDecreases with: Amyl nitrate
and Valsalva
Mitral valve prolapse (MVP) Murmur and click later, LV
volume increase by:
Squatting, post-ectopic,
isometric exercise (intensity
increases)Murmur and click earlier
(intensity decreases) and left
ventricle (LV) volume decrease
by: Standing and Valsalva
Hypertrophic obstructive
cardiomyopathy (HOCM)Increase murmur by:
Expiration, Valsalva strain,
standing, post-ectopic and amyl
nitrateDecrease murmur by:
Inspiration, sustained handgrip,
squatting and methoxamine
Usefulness of dynamic auscultation in differential diagnosis of valvular
lesions (Table 7.26).
Table 7.26: Usefulness of dynamic auscultation in differential diagnosis of
valvular lesions.
Differential diagnosis
Aortic stenosis (AS) versus hypertrophic
obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM)Squatting: Increases in AS, decreases in HOCM
Valsalva/standing: Decreases in AS, increases in
HOCM
Aortic stenosis (AS) versus mitral regurgitation
(MR)Handgrip and phenylephrine: Decreases in AS,
increases in MR
Post-PVC and amyl nitrate: Increases in AS,
decreases in MR
Mitral stenosis (MS) versus Austin Flint murmur Amyl nitrate: Increases in MS, decreases in
Austin Flint murmur
Pulmonary stenosis (PS) versus aortic stenosis
(AS)Respiration: Increases with inspiration in PS,
increases with expiration in AS

Mitral stenosis (MS) versus tricuspid stenosis
(TS)Respiration: Increases with expiration (MS) and
increases with inspiration (TS)
Mitral regurgitation (MR) versus tricuspid
regurgitation (TR)Respiration: Increases with expiration (MR) and
increases with inspiration (TR)
Pulmonary stenosis (PS) versus small ventricular
septal defect (VSD)Amyl nitrate: Increases in PS, decreases in VSD
Phenylephrine: Decreases in PS and increases in
VSD
Respiration: Increases with inspiration in PS, no
variation with respiration in VSD
Pulmonary regurgitation (PR) versus aortic
regurgitation (AR)Squatting and sustained handgrip: No change in
PR, increased in AR
Usefulness of amyl nitrate in differential diagnosis of murmurs (Table 7.27).
Table 7.27: Usefulness of amyl nitrate in differential diagnosis of murmurs.
Valvular lesions Amyl nitrate response
Systolic murmur
Aortic stenosis (AS) versus mitral regurgitation
(MR)Increased in AS and decreased in MR
Tricuspid regurgitation (TR) versus mitral
regurgitation (MR)Increased in TR and decreased in MR
Pulmonary stenosis (PS) versus tetralogy of
Fallot (TOF)Increased in PS and decreased in TOF
Pulmonary stenosis (PS) versus ventricular septal
defect (VSD)Increased in PS and decreased in VSD
Diastolic murmur
Mitral stenosis (MS) versus Austin Flint murmur Increased in MS and decreased in Austin Flint
murmur
End-diastolic murmur of pulmonary regurgitation
(PR) with aortic regurgitation (AR)Increased in PR and decreased in AR
CONDUCTION SYSTEM OF THE HEART (FIG.
7.9)Q. Write short essay/note on the conduction system of the heart.
An electrical discharge from the sinoatrial (sinus) node initiates the normal
heart beat. It is then sequentially depolarized in the atria followed by
ventricles as it passes through specialized conducting tissue.

Sinus node (SA node): It is located in the lateral and epicardial aspect
where the superior vena cava joins the right atrium. It is a natural
pacemaker of the heart and controls the rate and rhythm of the heart (rate
of 60–100 beats/minute). It has the fastest inherent discharge.Atrioventricular (AV) node: The impulse from the SA node spreads
through the atrial musculature and down to the atrioventricular (AV) node
that is situated above the tricuspid valve. Passage via the AV node is
relatively slow, and is responsible for the normal physiological delay in
ventricular depolarization. AV node functions as a back-up pacemaker
with an intrinsic rate of 40–60 beats/minute.
Fig. 7.9:  Conduction system of heart.
His bundle and Purkinje fibers: The impulse then travels downwards to
the bundle of His and through its branches (right bundle branch and left
bundle branch) to the Purkinje network of fibers that convey the impulse
to the ventricular endocardium and then epicardium. Potential pacemaking
properties also exist in the cells of the AV node, bundle of His and
Purkinje fibers. Ventricular cells also act a back-up pacemaker with an
intrinsic rate of 20–45 betas/minute.

ELECTROCARDIOGRAM
Q. Write short essay on analysis of an electrocardiogram (ECG).
Sinus Rhythm: Waveforms and Intervals (Fig. 7.10)
ECG is the recording of sequential sum of depolarization and repolarization
of all myocardial cells. The electrical depolarization of myocardial tissue
produces a small dipole current. It can be detected by electrode pairs on the
body surface. These signals are amplified and either printed on special graph
paper or displayed on a monitor.
Fig. 7.10: Electrocardiograph showing various components.
Depolarization is the sudden change within myocardium, during which it
undergoes a dramatic electrical change. Entire myocardium is depolarized
in a coordinated manner.
–   P wave: The ECG waveforms are labeled alphabetically beginning
with the P wave (represents atrial depolarization). The SA node
triggers atrial depolarization, producing a beginning P wave.
–   QRS complex: Depolarization slowly spreads through the AV node,
which produces a depolarization wave which is too small to be

detected from the body surface. The bundle of His, bundle branches
and Purkinje system are then activated, initiating ventricular
myocardial depolarization. During this, QRS complex is produced that
represents the duration of ventricular depolarization. Because of the
larger size of the ventricular muscle mass than that of the atria, the
QRS complex is larger than the P wave. Normal value is 100–110 ms
or less. The QRS complex is subdivided into specific deflections or
waves.
♦   Q wave: If the initial QRS depletion in a particular lead is negative,
it is termed a Q wave, indicates septal depolarization.
♦   R wave: The first positive deflection is termed an R wave.
♦   S wave: A negative deflection after an R wave is an S wave.
♦   Subsequent positive or negative waves are labeled R′ (R prime)
and S′ (S prime) respectively.
♦   Lowercase letters (qrs) are used for waves of relatively small
amplitude. An entirely negative QRS complex is termed a QS wave.
–   PR interval: It is the interval between the onset of the P wave and the
onset of the QRS complex. Normal value is 120–200 ms. It largely
reflects the duration of AV nodal conduction between atrial and
ventricular depolarization.Repolarization is the restoration of the electrical polarity of myocardial
muscle.
–   Repolarization is slower process and spreads from the epicardium to
the endocardium.
–   Atrial repolarization does not produce a detectable signal (too low in
amplitude) whereas ventricular repolarization produces the T wave.
However, atrial repolarization may become apparent in conditions such
as acute pericarditis and atrial infarction.
–   QT interval: It represents the total duration of both ventricular
depolarization and repolarization. It varies inversely with the heart
rate.
–   ST-T-U complex: It consists of ST segment, T wave, and U wave and
is due to ventricular repolarization. The J point represents the junction
between the end of the QRS complex and the beginning of the ST
segment.

–   U wave: Small, rounded, upright wave following T wave. Most easily
seen with a slow heart rate. Indicates repolarization of Purkinje fibers.
ECG Leads
The standard 12–lead ECG record the difference in potential between ten
physical electrodes placed on the surface of the body. The term twelve ‘leads’
of the ECG is for twelve number of recordings made from pairs or sets of
these electrodes.
Type of Leads (Fig. 7.11)
Fig. 7.11:  Diagrammatic representation of the connections or directions, net axis of each lead in a 12-
lead electrocardiogram.
ECG leads are divided into two groups: (1) six limb (extremity) leads and (2)
six chest (precordial) leads. The limb leads record potentials transmitted onto
the frontal plane, and the chest leads record potentials transmitted onto the
horizontal plane.
Reading 12-lead ECGs
The best way to read 12-lead ECGs is to develop a step-by-step approach
(Box 7.12).

Fig. 7.12:  Determination of heart rate by ECG.
Table 7.28: Variations of heart rate and its causes.
Normal:  60-99 beats per minute (bpm)
Bradycardia <60 bpm:  Hypothermia, increased vagal tone (due to vagal stimulation or e.g. drugs),
athletes, hypothyroidism, beta blockade, marked intracranial hypertension, obstructive jaundice,
uremia, structural SA node disease, or ischemia
Tachycardia >100 bpm:  Any cause of adrenergic stimulation (including pain); thyrotoxicosis;
hypovolemia; vagolytic drugs (e.g. atropine) anemia, pregnancy; vasodilator drugs, including many
hypotensive agents; fever, myocarditis
Step 1: Determining the heart rate (Fig. 7.12)
The ECG is normally recorded at a speed of 25 mm/second. Each small,
square, in the graph is 1 mm and represents 0.04 seconds and big boxes
with heavier lines represents 0.20 s (200 ms).
Rule of 300/1500: For regular rhythms, count the number of ‘big boxes’
between two QRS complexes, and divide this into 300. The heart rate
(beats per minute) can also be computed readily from the interbeat (R-
number of small (0.04 s) units into 1500.6-second rule: For irregular rhythms, ECGs record 6 seconds of rhythm
per page, count the number of beats present on the ECG, multiply by 10
Variations of heart rate and its causes are listed in Table 7.28.
Box 7.12: Steps in reading ECG.

Calculate rate
Determine rhythm
Determine QRS axis
Check individual waves
Calculate intervals
Assess for hypertrophy
Look for evidence of infarction/ dyselectrolytemia drug effects
Q. Write short note on sinus tachycardia.
Step 2: Determine regularity (Figs. 7.13 to 7.25)
Look at the R-R distances (using a caliper or markings on a paper).
Regular (are they equidistant apart)? Occasionally irregular? Regularly
irregular?
Irregularly irregular-atrial fibrillation.
Step 3: Determining the axis (Fig. 7.26)
Normal QRS axis from –30° to +110°, –30° to –90° is referred to as a left
axis deviation (LAD), +110° to +180° is referred to as a right axis
deviation (RAD) and –180° to –90° is referred as north-west axis/extreme
axis/axis in no man’s land/indeterminate axis.QRS complex in leads I and aVF determine if they are predominantly
positive or negative. The combination should place the axis into one of the
4 quadrants above.Various causes of axis deviation are listed in Table 7.29.
Fig. 7.13:  Sinus rhythm: Cardiac impulse originates from the sinus node. Every QRS must be sinus
node. Every QRS must be preceded by a P wave.

Fig. 7.14:  Sinus bradycardia: Rhythm originates in the sinus node. Rate of less than 60 beats per
minute.
Fig. 7.15:  Sinus tachycardia: Rate >100 bpm, otherwise, normal.
Fig. 7.16:  Sinus pause. In disease (e.g. sick sinus syndrome) the SA node can fail in its pacing function.
If failure is brief and recovery is prompt, the result is only a missed beat (sinus pause). If recovery is
delayed and no other focus assumes pacing function, cardiac arrest follows.
Fig. 7.17:  Atrial fibrillation. Rate = ~150 bpm, irregularly irregular, baseline irregularity, no visible p
waves, QRS occur irregularly with its length usually <0.12 s, fibrillary waves.
Fig. 7.18: Atrial flutter. Atrial rate = ~300 bpm, P waves absent but have flutter waves, ECG baseline
adapts ‘saw-toothed’ appearance’.

Fig. 7.19:  Ventricular fibrillation. Rate cannot be discerned, rhythm unorganized, QRS broad >0.12 s.
Fig. 7.20: Ventricular tachycardia. Rate = 100–250 bpm, broad QRS, regular.
Fig. 7.21: Torsades de pointes (literally means twisting of points) is a distinctive form of polymorphic
ventricular tachycardia characterized by a gradual change in the amplitude and twisting of the QRS
complexes around the isoelectric lines.
Fig. 7.22: Supraventricular tachycardia. Tachycardiac rhythm originating above the ventricular tissue.
Atrial and ventricular rate = 150–250 bpm regular rhythm, p is usually not discernable.
Fig. 7.23:  Atrial premature beat (APB). Arises from an irritable focus in one of the atria. APB produces

different looking P wave, because depolarization vector is abnormal. QRS complex has normal
duration and same morphology.
Fig. 7.24: Premature ventricular complexes (PVCs). Occasionally irregular rhythm, broad QRS arising
from ventricles no p-wave associated with PVCs. Can be monomorphic/polymorphic.
Fig. 7.25: Artificial pacemaker. Sharp, thin spike before each complex, ventricular paced rhythm shows
wide ventricular pacemaker spikes.

Fig. 7.26:  Axis of ECG.
Table 7.29: Causes of axis deviation.
Cardiac axis Causes
Left axis deviation Left anterior hemiblock, left ventricular
hypertrophy, Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome,
inferior MI, ostium primum ASD, ventricular
tachycardia
Normal variation in pregnancy, obesity; ascites,
abdominal distention
Right axis deviation Normal finding in children and tall thin adults,
chronic lung disease (COPD), left posterior
hemiblock, Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome,
anterolateral MI
North West Dextrocardia, severe emphysema, hyperkalemia,
lead transposition, artificial cardiac pacing,
ventricular tachycardia

Step 4: Check individual waves
Assess P waves (Box 7.13)
Normal: Always positive in lead I and II, always negative in lead aVR.
Commonly biphasic in lead V1 and best seen in leads II. <2.5 small
squares in duration and <2.5 small squares in amplitude.
Box 7.13: Abnormal P waves and its causes.
Tall (> 2.5 mm), pointed P waves (P pulmonale):  Suggests right atrial enlargement. Seen in COPD,
ASD, TS, Ebstein anomaly (Himalayan P waves)
Notched/bifid (‘M’ shaped) P wave (P ‘mitrale’) in limb leads:  Suggests left atrial enlargement.
Seen in MS, MR, and systemic hypertension. Coarse atrial fibrillation suggests LAE
Absent P waves: Atrial fibrillation/flutter
Inverted P waves in lead II:  Dextrocardia
Step 5: Calculate intervals
PR interval: Normal is 0.12–0.20 seconds.Long PR interval  may indicate heart block (Figs. 7.27 to 7.30)
Short PR interval: Tachycardia and pre-excitation syndromes (e.g.
Lown-Ganong-Levine syndrome, Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome).
QRS-complex
Normal characteristics:  Duration is 0.04–0.11 seconds.
Broad/wide QRS  (>0.12s): Ventricular hypertrophy, intraventricular conduction disturbance,
bundle branch blocks, aberrant ventricular conduction, ventricular preexcitation, ventricular
ectopic or escape pacemaker, ventricular pacing by cardiac pacemaker
Height of QRS–Sokolow index (SV2 + RV5) <35 mm (<45 mm for young)
Increased height: In RV/LV hypertrophy
Decreased height:  Low voltage QRS (<5 mV in limb leads/<10 mV in chest leads): Obese
patient, restrictive cardiomyopathy, pericardial effusion, hypothyroidism, hypothermia, and
myocarditis.
Q Waves
The normal Q wave in lead I is due to septal depolarization. It is small in amplitude (less than 25%
of the succeeding R wave, or less than 3 mm). Its duration is <0.04 sec or one small box. It is seen
in L1 and sometimes in V5, V6.Pathological Q wave  of infarction in the respective leads is due to dead muscle. May also be seen
in cardiomyopathies i.e. hypertrophic (HOCM), infiltrative myocardial disease.
Absent Q waves  in V5-6 is most commonly due to LBBB.

Fig. 7.27: First degree heart block. P wave precedes QRS complex but P-R intervals prolong (>5 small
squares) and remain constant from beat to beat.
Fig. 7.28: Second degree heart block—Mobitz type I or Wenckenbach. Runs in cycle, first P-R interval
is often normal. With successive beat, P-R interval lengthens until there will be a P wave with no
following QRS complex. The block is at AV node, often transient, may be asymptomatic.
Fig. 7.29: Second degree heart block-Mobitz type 2. P-R interval is constant, duration is
normal/prolonged. Periodically, no conduction between atria and ventricles—producing a p wave with
no associated QRS complex (blocked p wave). The block is most often below AV node, at bundle of
His or BB, may progress to third degree heart block.

Fig. 7.30: Third degree heart block (complete heart block). No relationship between P waves and QRS
complexes. An accessory pacemaker in the lower chambers will typically activate the ventricles-escape
rhythm. Atrial rate = 60–100 bpm. Ventricular rate based on site of escape pacemaker. Atrial and
ventricular rhythms both are regular.
Bundle branch blocks (Fig. 7.31)Left bundle branch block (LBBB): Indirect activation causes left
ventricle to contract later than the right ventricle.
Right bundle branch block (RBBB): Indirect activation causes right
ventricle to contract later than the left ventricle.
ST Segment
ST segment is isoelectric and at the same level as subsequent PR-interval.
The length between the end of the S wave (end of ventricular
depolarization) and the beginning of repolarization. From J point on the
end of QRS complex, to inclination of T wave.Causes of ST segment elevation (Box 7.14 and Fig. 7.32) and causes of ST
segment depression (Box 7.15).
Figs. 7.31A and B: (A) Left bundle branch block: QS or rS complex in V 1 - W-shaped RsR’ wave in
V6- M-shaped. Mnemonic: WILLIAM; (B) Terminal R wave (rSR’) in V 1 - M-shaped. Slurred S wave
in V6 - W-shaped. Mnemonic: MARROW.

Box 7.14:  Causes of ST segment elevation.
Ischemia
Early repolarization
Acute pericarditis: ST elevation in all leads except aVR
Pulmonary embolism
Hypothermia
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
High potassium
Cerebrovascular accident (CVA)
Acute sympathetic stress
Brugada syndrome
Cardiac aneurysm
Left ventricular hypertrophy
Idioventricular rhythm including paced rhythm
T Wave
Normally, a repolarization directs from epicardium to endocardium = T
wave is concordant with QRS complex
Causes of T wave inversions (Box 7.16)
Tall T waves (height more than 2/3 of neighboring QRS): Hyperkalemia
(steeple T waves), hyperacute MI.
QT-interval
Represents the time taken for ventricular depolarization and
repolarization. The duration of the QT interval is proportionate to the heart
rate. The faster the heart beats, the faster the ventricles repolarize so the
shorter the QT interval. Therefore, what is a ‘normal’ QT varies with the
heart rate. QT interval should be 0.35–0.45 seconds.For each heart rate you need to calculate an adjusted QT interval, called
the ‘corrected QT’ (QTc):
QTc = QT/square root of RR interval—Bazett’s formula
Prolonged QTc (>440 ms) (Box 7.17): A prolonged QT can be very
dangerous. It can predispose an individual to a type of ventricular
tachycardia—Torsades de pointes.Short QTc (<350 ms): Hypercalcemia, digoxin effect.

Fig. 7.32:  ECG showing ST segment elevation.
U Waves
U wave need not be always seen on an electrocardiogram. It is small,
round, symmetrical and follows the T wave and seen positive in lead II. U
waves are due to repolarization of the papillary muscles or Purkinje fibers.
It is the same direction as T wave in that lead.Prominent U waves: Seen in hypokalemia, hypercalcemia,
thyrotoxicosis, or exposure to digitalis, epinephrine, and Class 1A and 3
antiarrhythmics.An inverted U wave may represent myocardial ischemia or left ventricular
volume overload.
Box 7.15:  Causes of ST segment depression.
Myocardial ischemia/NSTEMI
Reciprocal change in STEMI
Posterior MI
Digoxin effect (Reverse tick mark/‘sagging’ morphology, resembling Salvador Dali’s moustache)
Hypokalemia
Bundle branch block
Ventricular hypertrophy
Ventricular pacing
Step 6: Assess for hypertrophy
Left ventricular hypertrophy (LVH)
Q. Write short note on causes of left ventricular hypertrophy and left
ventricular dilatation.
Criteria of LVH
–   High QRS voltages in limb leads: Sokolow-Lyon index: S in V1 or V2

+ R in V5 or V6 (whichever is larger) ≥35 mm OR R in aVL ≥11 mm
–   Deep symmetric T inversion in V4, V5 and V6
–   QRS duration >0.09 sec, associated left axis deviation
Romhilt-Estes scoring system is used for diagnosing LVH.
Box 7.16:  Causes of T wave inversions.
CAD/ischemia
Cardiomyopathies (hypertrophic)
Myocarditis, pericarditis
Pulmonary embolism
Valvular disorders
Raised intracranial tension, CNS bleed
Ventricular hypertrophyBundle branch block
Pacing
Romhilt-Estes point score system (≥5 points definite LVH)
i.   Any limb lead R or S ≥20 mm/SV 1 + SV 2 ≥30 mm or RV 5+ RV 6 ≥30 mm—3 points
ii.   ST-T changes with digitalis—1 point, without digitalis—3 points
iii.   LAE—3 points
iv.   Left axis deviation (≤30)—2 points
v.   QRS duration ≥90 ms—1 point
vi.   Delayed intrinsicoid deflection in V 5/V6 ≥50 ms—1 point
Box 7.17:  Causes of prolonged QTc.
Hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, hypocalcemia
Hypothermia
Myocardial ischemia
Raised intracranial pressure
Congenital long QT syndrome, e.g. Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome, Romano-Ward syndrome
Drugs, e.g. chlorpromazine, haloperidol, quetiapine, quinidine, procainamide
Common causes of left ventricular hypertrophy and left ventricular
dilatation  are listed in Table 7.30.
Table 7.30: Common causes of left ventricular hypertrophy and dilatation.
Common causes of left ventricular hypertrophy Common causes of left ventricular dilatation
Pressure overload: Systemic hypertension,
aortic stenosis, IHD, coarctation of aortaAortic regurgitation (AR)

(COA)
Volume overload: Mitral or aortic
regurgitation, dilated cardiomyopathy
Both right and left ventricular volume
overload: Ventricular septal defect (VSD)
No pressure or volume overload: Hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (HCM) systemicMitral regurgitation (MR)
Ventricular septal defect (VSD)
Persistent ductus arteriosus (PDA)
Ischemic heart disease (IHD)
Hyperkinetic circulatory states, e.g. anemia,
thyrotoxicosis and beriberi
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH)
Criteria of right ventricular hypertrophy and its causes are listed in Table
7.31.
Table 7.31: Criteria of right ventricular hypertrophy and its causes.
Criteria of right ventricular hypertrophy Causes of right ventricular hypertrophy (RVH)
Tall R in V 1 with R >> S, or R/S ratio >1
Deep S waves in V 4, V5 and V 6
Associated right axis deviation, RAE
Deep T inversion in V 1, V2 and V 3Long standing mitral stenosis
Pulmonary hypertension of any cause
VSD or ASD with initial left to right shunt
Congenital heart with RV overload
Tricuspid regurgitation, pulmonary stenosis
Step 7: Look for evidence of infarction/dyselectrolytemia
ECG in myocardial infarction (MI): There are two types of MI. STEMI
and NSTEMI
–   STEMI Criteria
♦   ST elevation in >2 chest leads >2 mm elevation
♦   ST elevation in >2 limb leads >1 mm elevation
♦   Q wave > 0.04s (1 small square).
ECG findings depending on the location of myocardial infarct are presented
in Table 7.32. Sequential ECG Changes in STEMI are presented in Figures
7.33A to F.
Table 7.32: ECG findings depending on the location of myocardial infarct.
Location of MI Lead with ST changes Affected coronary artery
Anterior V1, V2, V3, V4 Left anterior descending artery
(LAD)Septum V1, V2

Left lateral I, aVL, V 5, V6 Left circumflex
Inferior II, III, aVF Right coronary artery (RCA)
Right atrium aVR, V1
Posterior Posterior chest leads
Right ventricle Right sided leads
Figs. 7.33A to F:  Sequential ECG changes in STEMI: (A) Normal ECG; (B) 0 hour: pronounced/hyper
acute tall T wave initially, ST elevation (convex type); (C) 1–24 hours: depressed R wave, and
pronounced T wave. Pathological Q waves may appear within hours or may take greater than 24 hr.-
indicating full-thickness MI. Q wave is pathological if it is wider than 40 ms or deeper than a third of
the height of the entire QRS complex; (D) Day 1–2: exaggeration of T wave continues for 24 hours; (E)
Days later: T wave inverts as the ST elevation begins to resolve. Persistent ST elevation is rare except
in the presence of a ventricular aneurysm; (F) Weeks later: ECG returns to normal T wave, but retains
pronounced Q wave.Non ST-elevation MI (NSTEMI)
–   NSTEMI is also known as subendocardial or non Q-wave MI. In a
patient with acute coronary syndrome (ACS) in which the ECG does
not show ST elevation, NSTEMI (subendocardial MI) is suspected if
ECG shows T wave inversion (symmetrical, arrowhead) with or
without ST depression.
–   An ST depression is more suggestive of myocardial ischemia than

infarction.
Usefulness of electrocardiogram are inlisted in Box 7.18.
Box 7.18:  Usefulness of electrocardiogram.
Cardiac arrhythmias
Conduction defects
Hypertrophy of cardiac chamber (atrium or ventricle)
Electrolyte abnormalities (hypokalemia, hyperkalemia, hypocalcemia, hypercalcemia)
Effects of drugs (digitals)
Hypothermia
Pericarditis
ISCHEMIC HEART DISEASE
Q. Discuss the etiology, risk factors, clinical features, investigation and
treatment of ischemic heart disease (IHD).
Definition: Ischemic heart disease is a group of heart diseases in which there
is an imbalance between myocardial blood supply and its oxygen demand.
IHD is the leading cause of death in both males and females.
Etiology
Coronary arterial occlusion is the main cause of myocardial ischemia.
–   Mostly due to coronary atherosclerosis and its complications. Coronary
atherosclerosis narrows one or more of the epicardial coronary arteries
→ decreases the coronary blood flow in about 90% of cases. Hence,
IHD is often known as coronary artery disease (CAD) or coronary
heart disease.Other rare causes: Emboli, vasculitis, coronary vasospasm, hematologic
disorders like sickle cell disease, diminished availability of blood or
oxygen (lowered systemic blood pressure as in shock).
Risk Factors for Atherosclerosis
Q. Write short essay/note on:
Risk factors for coronary arterial disease (CAD).
Risk factors for atherosclerosis.

They were identified through several studies most important being the
Framingham heart study and atherosclerosis risk in communities study.
Classification of risk factors
The risk factors may be broadly classified as modifiable, non-modifiable and
additional (Table 7.33).
Table 7.33: Risk factors for atherosclerosis.
A. Modifiable major risk factors
Hyperlipidemia, hypertension, cigarette smoking, diabetes mellitus
B. Nonmodifiable risk factors
Increasing age (men ≥45 years and females ≥55 years), male gender, family history, genetic
abnormalities (e.g. familial hypercholesterolemia)
C. Additional risk factors
Inflammation, raised CRP level, hyperhomocystinemia, metabolic syndrome, lipoprotein (a),
raised procoagulant levels, inadequate physical activity, stressful lifestyle, obesity, alcohol
Pathogenesis of Atherosclerosis
Q. Discuss pathogenesis of atherosclerosis.
Atherosclerosis is a progressive inflammatory disorder of the arteries
characterized by focal deposits of lipids in the intima. It may be clinically
silent until they become large enough to reduce tissue perfusion, or until
ulceration and disruption of the atheromatous lesion lead to thrombotic
occlusion or distal embolization of the vessel.
Early Atherosclerosis
Fatty streaks may be the earliest or precursor lesions of atherosclerosis.
Endothelial injury and dysfunction leads to adhesion of leukocyte (mainly
monocyte) to endothelium, increased vascular permeability, platelet
adhesion and movement of low-density lipoproteins (LDL) across the
endothelium into the intima. This initiates the atheroma formation. Lipid
accumulated in the intima is engulfed by the macrophages and form foam
cells. This is followed by migration and proliferation of smooth muscle
cells into the intima. Lipids accumulate both intracellularly (within
macrophages and smooth muscle cells) and extracellularly. This results in
formation of atheromatous plaque.

Atheromatous plaque (Figs. 7.34A to F): It consists of three regions: (1)
Superficial fibrous cap (formed by fibrous tissue synthesized by smooth
muscle cells around the lipid core), (2) lipid–rich necrotic core (formed by
lipid-laden foam cells that have undergone apoptosis) and (3) shoulder.
Some atheromatous plaques bulge into the lumen of the coronary artery
and narrow its lumen. This may limit the blood flow, particularly during
increased myocardial demand leading to ischemic symptoms. Depending
on the structure of plaque, they can be divided into stable and vulnerable
(unstable) plaques:
–   Stable plaques:  They have dense collagenous and thick fibrous caps
with minimal inflammation and negligible underlying atheromatous
necrotic core. These are less likely to undergo rupture.
–   High-risk or vulnerable plaque: They have core with many foam
cells and abundant extracellular lipid (large lipid core). The fibrous cap
is thin with few smooth muscle cells or groups of inflammatory cells
(high density of macrophages and T lymphocytes) and increased
inflammation. These are likely to undergo rupture.
Sequential changes in coronary artery atherosclerosis causing occlusion of
lumen in ischemic heart disease (Fig. 7.34).
Figs. 7.34A to E:  Sequential changes in coronary artery atherosclerosis causing occlusion of lumen in
ischemic heart disease.

Advanced atherosclerosis/complicated plaques: Atherosclerotic plaques
can undergo clinically important changes (Box 7.19)
Rupture, ulceration, or erosion:  Plaque protrudes into the lumen and can
disturb the blood flow → resulting in turbulent flow of blood → which
can damage the endothelium → cause rupture, ulceration or erosion of the
intimal surface of plaques.Hemorrhage into a plaque: It may occur due to rupture of the fibrous
cap of the plaque or of the thin-walled vessels formed due to
neovascularization.Thrombosis and embolism: Ulceration/erosion/rupture of endothelial
surface → exposes the blood to highly thrombogenic subendothelial
collagen → favors thrombus formation  → can partially or completely
occlude the lumen (depending on the size of the lumen) → lead to
ischemia. The thrombus may become organized or fragment to form
thromboemboli.Atheroembolism: Plaque rupture → discharge atherosclerotic debris into
the bloodstream → results in atheroemboli.
Aneurysm formation: Atherosclerosis even though an intimal disease
may cause pressure or ischemic atrophy of the underlying media. It may
also damage the elastic tissue and cause weakening the wall → result in
aneurysmal dilation → which may rupture.Calcification: It may occur in the central necrotic area of the plaque
(dystrophic calcification) .
Box 7.19:  Complications of atheromatous plaque.
Rupture, ulceration, or erosion
Hemorrhage into a plaque
Thrombosis and embolism
Atheroembolism
Aneurysm formation
Calcification
CORONARY ARTERY DISEASE
Q. Discuss etiology, clinical manifestations, investigations, diagnosis and
management of angina pectoris.

Angina Pectoris
Definition: Angina pectoris is a clinical syndrome that presents as
paroxysmal  and recurrent attacks of substernal or precordial chest
discomfort due to transient myocardial ischemia, which falls short of
inducing necrosis of myocardial cell.
Cause: Transient myocardial ischemia is due to: (1) obstruction of
coronary flow by atherosclerosis, (2) coronary arterial spasm or (3)
thrombosis of coronary artery. Others include embolus, coronary ostial
stenosis, and coronary arteritis (e.g. in SLE).Precipitate factors for angina: These include factors that either increase
the oxygen requirement of myocardium or reduce blood supply to the
myocardium (Table 7.34).
Stable Angina Pectoris
Q. Discuss the clinical features, investigations and treatment of chronic
stable angina.
Coronary autoregulation is modified by coronary atherosclerosis, left
ventricular hypertrophy, and alterations in autonomic nerve function and
endothelial function.Coronary atherosclerosis reduces the lumen of the coronary arteries. It
cannot increases in perfusion when the demand for flow is increased (e.g.
during exertion or excitement). This leads to a situation where when the
demand for blood flow is increased (e.g. during exertion or excitement),
there cannot be a corresponding increase in perfusion due to the atheroma.In stable angina is due to transient myocardial ischemia. Stable angina
shows a fixed reduction of at least 70% in the diameter of coronary
arteries which causes reduction in coronary blood flow. Inability to
increase oxygen extraction or reduced coronary blood flow, together with
increased myocardial demand, leads to angina.
Table 7.34: Factors precipitating angina.
Factors that increase oxygen demand or cardiac
workFactors that decrease oxygen supply or
coronary blood flowExercise, tachycardia
Hypertension, anemia, pregnancyDecreased oxygenation due to anemia or
reduced oxygen saturation

Left ventricular hypertrophy
Emotional stress (anger, fright, excitement)
Hyperthyroidism, arrhythmias
Aortic stenosis or regurgitationDuration of diastole (coronary blood flow
occurs mainly in diastole)
Coronary perfusion pressure (aortic diastolic
pressure minus coronary sinus or right atrial
diastolic pressure)

Clinical Features
History
Diagnosis of angina is mainly depends on the clinical history.
Classical or stable or exertional angina pectoris
It is characterized by:Chest pain: Constricting
discomfort/squeezing/tightening/heaviness/aching in the front of the chest.
Pain may radiate to left arm, neck (throat), jaw (chin) or less commonly to
right arm, back, and epigastrium. Typical chest pain lasting 2–5 minutes.
Levine’s sign  (clenched fist held over the chest) may be positive.Brought on by physical exertion , such as after meals and in cold, windy
weather or by anger or excitement/emotion.
Relieved  (usually within minutes) with rest or sublingual glyceryl
trinitrate. Occasionally, it may disappear with continued exertion
(‘walking through the pain’). Pain seldom lasts more than 20 minutes.
Typical angina has all the three features mentioned above. Atypical
angina has two out of the three, and non-anginal chest pain (Table 7.35) one
or less of these features. Many patients with angina may have silent episodes
of angina, i.e. without any symptoms.
Table 7.35: Differentiating features of chest pain of ischemic and non-
ischemic origin.
Favors ischemic origin Against ischemic origin
Character Constricting, squeezing,
burning, heavinessDull ache, knife-like, sharp, jabs,
pleuritic
Location Substernal, anterior thorax,
arms, shoulders, neck, teeth,
interscapularLeft submammary area, left
hemithorax
Provoking factors Exertion, excitement, cold,
meals, stressPain after completion of
exercise, pain with movement
Types of AnginaStable angina (described above)
Unstable angina (refer pages 431-2)

Refractory angina:  Patients with severe coronary disease in whom revascularization is not
possible and angina is not controlled by medical therapy.
Variant (Prinzmetal’s/vasospastic) angina (refer pages 432-3): Pain occurs without exertion and
usually at rest. It is due to spasm of coronary artery and more frequent in women.
Characteristically, it is associated with transient ST segment elevation on the ECG during the pain.
Provocation tests (e.g. hyperventilation, cold pressure testing or ergometrine challenge) may be
needed for establishing the diagnosis. Prognosis is usually better than those with fixed, significant
obstructive lesions. Usually the response to β-blockers may be poor. Calcium channel blockers are
used for the treatment.Q. Write short note on angina decubitus.
Angina decubitus:  Pain develops while lying flat (raises end-diastolic left ventricular volume,
myocardial wall tension and hence oxygen demand).
Q. Write short note on nocturnal angina.
Nocturnal angina:  Unusual form of angina that develops in aortic regurgitation especially
syphilitic. It is characterized by paroxysmal, nocturnal angina pains accompanied by nightmares,
dyspnea, palpitations, skin flushing, profuse sweating and wide pulse pressure. It does not relieved
by sublingual nitroglycerine.
Q. Write short note on microvascular angina.
Cardiac syndrome X (microvascular angina):  These patients have angina-like pain, a positive
exercise test and angiographically normal coronary arteries. They form a heterogeneous group. It
occurs in patients with metabolic syndrome and is more common in women. This type has a good
prognosis. Response to nitrates is less reliable and they are difficult to treat. The myocardium
shows an abnormal metabolic response to stress, indicating that the myocardial ischemia probably
results from abnormal dilator responses of the coronary microvasculature to stress. About 1% die
and 0.6% suffer a stroke within 1 year after their first hospital admission.
OthersStatus anginosus: Frequent, recurrent, sustained angina refractory to
usual treatment.
Walk-through angina: Angina with effort that disappears gradually
during activity that is sustained (although usually at reduced intensity) and
after which improved exercise tolerance results.Second-wind angina: A brief rest after an initial attack results in a
markedly improved threshold free from angina. A synonym is “warm-up”
angina.Caudal angina: Angina symptoms occurring in the scalp or head via
referred pain.
Angina equivalents: Symptoms other than pain or discomfort that are
ischemic related and serve as angina surrogates, e.g. dyspnea, diaphoresis,
fatigue, or light-headedness.

Silent angina: Objective manifestations of ischemia without symptoms.
Table 7.36: Canadian cardiovascular society (CCS) functional classification
of angina.
Class Features
I Ordinary physical activity does not cause angina, such as walking and climbing
stairs. Angina with strenuous or rapid or prolonged exertion at work or
recreation
II Slight limitation of ordinary activity. Walking or climbing stairs rapidly,
walking uphill, walking or stair climbing after meals, or in cold, or in wind, or
under emotional stress, or only during the few hours after awakening. Walking
more than two blocks on the level and climbing more than one flight of ordinary
stairs at a normal pace and in normal conditions
III Marked limitation of ordinary physical activity: Walking less than two blocks,
climbing less than one flight of stairs
IV Any physical activity brings on angina; angina at rest
Classification of AnginaSeverity of angina is classified by New York Heart Association
Classification in class I to class IV (described earlier).
Canadian Cardiovascular Society functional classification of angina
(Table 7.36).
Physical Examination
Usually no abnormal findings in angina. Occasionally a third/fourth heart
sound may be detected during an angina episode, dyskinetic cardiac apex,
mitral regurgitation and even pulmonary edema may be appreciated.Physical examination should include a careful search for evidence
hyperlipidemia (e.g. xanthelasma, tendon xanthoma) valve disease
(particularly aortic stenosis characterized by slow rising carotid impulse
and ejection systolic murmur radiating to the neck), important risk factors
(e.g. hypertension, diabetes mellitus), left ventricular dysfunction
(cardiomegaly, gallop rhythm), manifestations of arterial disease (carotid
bruits, peripheral vascular disease) and unrelated conditions that may
exacerbate angina (anemia, thyrotoxicosis), and obestity. Check the blood
pressure to identify coexistent hypertension.Physical signs of myocardial ischemia: The presence of one or more of
these during an attack of pain may be suggestive of myocardial ischemia.

Investigations
Electrocardiography (ECG)
Q. Write a short essay/note on the investigations in a case of suspected
angina pectoris.
Resting ECG  and ECG in between attacks is normal in most patents (even in
patients with severe coronary artery). ECG may show evidence of previous
MI and there may be T-wave flattening or inversion in some leads, due to
myocardial ischemia or damage. The most convincing ECG evidence of
myocardial ischemia is the demonstration of reversible ST segment
depression or elevation, with or without T-wave inversion, during the attack
of pain (whether spontaneous or induced by exercise testing such as treadmill
testing or bicycle ergometry).
Exercise ECG:  An exercise tolerance test (ETT) is usually done by using a standard treadmill or
bicycle ergometer protocol (recording of ECG before, during and after exercise). During this process,
patient’s ECG, BP and general condition are monitored.Indications
–   Two sets of cardiac enzymes at 4-hour intervals should be normal.
–   No significant abnormality in 12-lead ECG at the time of arrival and pre-exercise.
–   Absence of ischemic chest pain at the time of exercise testing.
Contraindications for exercise testing (Box 7.20)
Indications for terminating exercise testing of ECG (Box 7.21)
Interpretation:  Planar or down-sloping ST segment depression of 1 mm or more indicates
ischemia. Up-sloping ST depression is less specific and often found in normal individuals
(modified Bruce protocol is followed).
Advantages:  Exercise testing is useful means of assessing the severity of coronary disease and
identifying high-risk individuals (i.e. post-infarct angina, poor effort tolerance, ischemia at low
workload, left main or three-vessel disease, poor LV function).
Disadvantages:  It may produce false-positive results in the presence of digoxin therapy, left
ventricular hypertrophy, bundle branch block or Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome. The
accuracy is lower in women than in men. The test is considered inconclusive (rather than negative)
if the patient cannot achieve an adequate level of exercise because of locomotor or other non-
cardiac problems.
Box 7.20: Contraindications for exercise testing.
AbsoluteAcute myocardial infarction (within 2 days)
High-risk unstable angina
Uncontrolled cardiac arrhythmias causing symptoms or hemodynamic compromise
Symptomatic severe aortic stenosis

Uncontrolled symptomatic heart failure
Acute pulmonary embolus or pulmonary infarction
Acute pericarditis or myocarditis
Acute aortic dissection
Relative
Left main coronary stenosis
Moderate stenotic valvular heart disease
Electrolyte abnormalities
Severe arterial hypertension
Bradyarrhythmias or tachyarrhythmias
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and other forms of outflow tract obstruction
Mental or physical impairment leading to inability to exercise adequately
High-degree atrioventricular block
Other forms of stress testing
Box 7.21: Indications for terminating exercise testing.
Drop in systolic BP of >10 mm Hg from baseline BP despite an increase in workload, when
accompanied by other evidence of ischemia
Moderate to severe angina
Increasing nervous system symptoms (e.g. ataxia, dizziness, or near-syncope)
Signs of poor perfusion (cyanosis or pallor)
Sustained ventricular tachycardia
ST elevation (>1.0 mm) in leads without diagnostic Q-waves (other than V 1 or aVR)
Myocardial perfusion scanning: It is performed using radioactive
isotopes. It may be helpful in the (1) evaluation of patients with an
equivocal or uninterpretable exercise test and (2) patients who cannot
perform exercise. The scintiscans of the myocardium are obtained at rest
and during stress (either exercise testing or pharmacological stress, such as
a controlled infusion of dipyridamole, adenosine ordobutamine), after the
administration of an intravenous radioactive isotope, such as thallium (201
thallium) or technetium (99 technetium sestamibi). The radioactive
isotopes are taken up by viable perfused myocardium. If there is a
perfusion defect during stress but not at rest, it indicates evidence of
reversible myocardial ischemia, whereas a persistent perfusion defect seen
during both phases is usually indicative of previous MI.Stress echocardiography: It is an alternative to myocardial perfusion
scanning and has similar predictive accuracy. On transthoracic
echocardiography the ischemic segments show reversible defects in

contractility during exercise or pharmacological stress, whereas infarcted
regions do not contract at rest or during stress.
Table 7.37: Indications for coronary angiography.
Strongly positive stress test Noninvasive tests have failed to establish the
cause of atypical chest pain
Indeterminate stress tests but clinical features
of IHDPrevious re-vascularization procedure
Strong suspicion of left main coronary artery
or three vessel diseasePresence of heart failure
Patients with known or possible angina
pectoris who have survived cardiac arrestNon-atherosclerotic cause of ischemia (e.g.
coronary arterial anomaly)
Patients considered for revascularization, i.e. a
percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) or
coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG)Frequent re-admission for chest pain.
Occupation demands a definitive diagnosis
Unable to perform non- invasive tests Chronic stable angina pectoris with severely
symptomatic despite medical therapy
Coronary arteriography: It gives detailed anatomical information about the
extent and nature of coronary artery disease. It usually done with a view to
coronary artery bypass graft (CABG) surgery or percutaneous coronary
intervention (PCI). It is done under local anesthesia and requires specialized
radiological equipment, cardiac monitoring and an experienced team.
Indications for coronary angiography are listed in Table 7.37.Newer modalities
These include multiple-slice spiral computed tomographic coronary
angiography (CTCA), intravascular ultrasound, magnetic resonance coronary
angiography (MRCA) and positron emission tomography (myocardial
viability is assessed using glucose metabolism).
Laboratory Tests
Fasting lipid profile
Fasting glucose and/or glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) level if available;
additional oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) if both are inconclusive.
Complete blood count (CBC) and hematocrit.
Creatinine level with estimation of glomerular filtration rate (GFR).

Biochemical markers of myocardial injury (Troponin T or I) if clinical
evaluation suggests an acute coronary syndrome (ACS).
Thyroid function teats.
Liver function tests early after beginning statin therapy.
Advice to patients with angina is presented in Table 7.38.
Table 7.38: Advice to patients with angina.
Stop smoking
Reduce/maintain ideal body weight
Exercise
Take regular exercise (may promote collateral
vessels) but avoid unaccustomed strenuous
exercises
Avoid walking or exercise after a heavy meal
or in very cold weather
Take sublingual nitrate before any exertion
that may induce anginaABCDE
A = Aspirin and Antianginal therapy
B = Beta-blocker and Blood pressure
C = Cigarette smoking and Cholesterol
D = Diet and Diabetes
E = Education and Exercise
Q. Write a short essay/note on:
Treatment of angina pectoris.
Management of chronic stable angina.
Drugs used in the treatment of chronic stable angina/anti-anginal
drugs.
Drug treatment of angina pectoris.
Box 7.22: Goals of treatment of angina pectoris.
Assessment of severity and extent of arterial disease
Measures to control symptoms
Identification and control of risk factors (e.g. smoking, hypertension, diabetes and hyperlipidemia)
Identification of high-risk patients for treatment and measures to improve life expectancy
Management of Angina Pectoris
Management can be discussed under three headings: (A) general measures, (B) drug treatment and
(C) surgical treatment.
Goals of treatment of angina pectoris are listed in Box 7.22.
General Measures
Careful explanation about the nature of their condition (disease process).
Evaluate the risk factors and steps to correct them where possible. Advice to be given to the
patient is listed in Table 7.38.

Correction of precipitating underlying conditions, e.g. anemia, hyperthyroidism, valvular disease
and arrhythmias should be treated.
Management of coexistent conditions:  Identification and treatment of aggravating conditions
like aortic stenosis, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, control of hypertension and diabetes (ACE
inhibitors are useful in these patients).
Lipid management:  Identify hypercholesterolemia (hyperlipidemia) and treat with diet and drugs
(with the goal of reducing LDL <100 mg dL; goal of <70 mg/dL in very high-risk patients).
Lifestyle modification.
Q. Write short essay/note on lifestyle modifications in cardiovascular disease.
–   Healthy diet:  Increase polyunsaturated fatty acid consumption, mainly from oily fish: 2 to 3
servings of oily fish per week  may help prevent cardiovascular disease (CVD).
–   Saturated fatty acids must comprise less than 10% of the total energy intake. Protein with low
saturated fats should replace those high in these harmful fats.
–   Limit salt intake to less than 5 grams per day.
–   Consume 30 to 45 grams of fiber/day (e.g. wholegrain products, fruits and vegetables). Avoid
simple carbohydrates with high glycemic load.
–   Consume 200 grams of vegetables and 200 grams of fruits per day.
–   Limit consumption of alcoholic beverages.
Anti-anginal Drug Treatment
Anti-angina drugs can be divided into five groups. They are used to relieve or prevent the symptoms
of angina. These include (1) nitrates, (2) β-blockers, (3) calcium antagonists, (4) potassium channel
activators and (5) I f channel antagonist.
1. Nitrates
Short acting (Glyceryl trinitrate (GTN), nitroglycerine) or long acting (Isosorbide dinitrate,
Isosorbide mononitrate)
Mechanism of action:  Nitrates directly act on smooth muscle in the walls of blood vessels and
produces dilatation of arteries and veins. This lowers blood pressure, reduces venous return to heart
and produces dilatation of coronary blood vessels. Nitrates cause reduction in myocardial oxygen
demand (lower preload and afterload) as well as an increase in myocardial oxygen supply (coronary
vasodilatation) predominantly by perfusing the subendocardial region.
Indications:  Prophylaxis and treatment of angina. Prophylactically to use the drug before taking
exercise that is liable to produce pain. Prophylactic use of glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) should be
encouraged because physical activity promotes the formation of collateral vessels. For predominant
nocturnal angina, long-acting nitrates can be given at the end of the day.
Contraindications:  Nitrates should not be given along with phosphodiesterase type-5 (PDE-5),
inhibitors (e.g. sildenafil, tadalafil, vardenafil) within the same 24 hours period because it may
produce sever hypotension. Other contraindications include obstructive hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy, severe aortic stenosis, constrictive pericarditis, mitral stenosis and closed-angle
glaucoma.Glyceryl trinitrate (GTN):
–   Preparations:  (1) metered-dose aerosol (400 μg per spray) or (2) as a tablet (300 or 500 μg).
–   Action:  Sublingual GTN has a short duration of action will relieve an attack of angina in 2–3
minutes.
Isosorbide dinitrate (10–20 mg 2 to 3 times daily) has prolonged action and is given by mouth.
Headache is a common side effect but tends to diminish if the patient perseveres with the
treatment. Tolerance can develop with continuous nitrate therapy which can be avoided by a 6–8-

hour nitrate-free period. Hence, doses are given in the morning and afternoon.
Isosorbide mononitrate (20–60 mg once or twice daily) also can be given by mouth.
2. β-blockers
Mechanism:  These drugs lower oxygen demand of myocardium by reducing heart rate, blood
pressure and myocardial contractility. They inhibit apoptosis by inhibiting beta adrenoceptors, and
have antioxidant and antiproliferative properties. They also counteract the direct adverse effects of
catecholamines and have antiarrhythmic action. They are useful to control tachycardia, hypertension
and continued angina.Cardioselective β-blockers:  Include slow-release metoprolol  50–200 mg daily, bisoprolol  5–15
mg daily, and atenolol (50–200 mg/day). They have fewer peripheral side effects.
Non-selective β-blockers: Propranolol  is started in a small initial dose (20 mg thrice daily) and
gradually increased to 80–120 mg three times daily. They may aggravate coronary vasospasm by
blocking the coronary artery β2-adrenoceptors.
Carvedilol  (3.125–25 mg twice a day) has additional advantage of having antiarrhythmic effects.
3. Calcium channel antagonists (calcium channel blockers)
Dihydropyridine calcium antagonists [e.g. nifedipine, amlodipine (dihydropyridines),
felodipine, and nicardipine]. They produce coronary and peripheral arterial dilatation, and negative
inotropy. They often cause a reflex tachycardia.
–   Nifedipine:  It is a powerful coronary and systemic arteriolar dilator. This can caused marked
reflex tachycardia. Short-acting nifedipine are not used because it can increase mortality due to
myocardial infarction. Long-acting preparations are given usually along with a β-blocker. Dose
is 5–20 mg 3 times daily.
–   Amlodipine:  Dose is 2.5–10 mg daily. Side effects ankle edema and reflex tachycardia. Non-dihydropyridine calcium antagonists, e.g. verapamil (phenyl alkylamines), diltiazem
(benzothiapines). They produce coronary and peripheral arterial dilatation, and negative inotropy
and also reduce conductivity. Because of its negative inotropic effect, they should be avoided in
patients with impaired ventricular function (uncompensated heart failure).
–   Verapamil:  Dose is 40–80 mg thrice daily. Useful anti-arrhythmic properties. Common
adverse effect is constipation.
–   Diltiazem:  60–120 mg 3 times daily. Similar anti-arrhythmic properties to verapamil.
–   β-blockers reduce mortality after myocardial infarction. Hence, it is reasonable to start a β-
blocker and then add a calcium channel blocker if needed. However, β-blockers should not be
combined with verapamil, because of their synergistic effect on heart rate and myocardial
contractility.
4. Second-line anti-anginal drugsPotassium channel activators/openers: Nicorandil  increases potassium ion conductance by
opening ATP-sensitive potassium channels resulting in smooth muscle relaxation causing arterial
and venous dilatation. It does not develop tolerance as seen with nitrates. They also provide
protection of myocardium during ischemia and prevention of intracellular calcium toxicity. It is
given in the dose of 10–30 mg twice daily orally.If channel antagonist: Ivabradine selectively inhibits inward sodium-potassium current (important
pacemaking current in the cells sinus (SA) node). This slows the rate of diastolic depolarization
and induces bradycardia (‘bradycardic’ drug). In contrast to β-blockers and rate-limiting calcium
antagonists, it does not have other cardiovascular effects. Thus, it does not affect contractility, AV
nodal conduction or hemodynamics. It can be combined with other agents and is safe to use in
patients with heart failure. It may produce brightness in visual fields because it also blocks the
retinal current and is transient side effect. Contraindicated in sick sinus syndrome, AV block.

Ranolazine:  It inhibits late sodium channels in cardiac cells. It does not affect heart rate and blood
pressure. It is the drug of choice in bradycardic and hypertensive patients. It is metabolized by
cytochrome P450 3A4. Dose is 500–1000 mg twice a day. Side-effects include constipation,
dizziness, prolongation of QT interval.
None of these groups is more effective than another group. It is conventional to start therapy with
low-dose aspirin, a statin, sublingual GTN and a β-blocker. If needed later add a calcium channel
antagonist or a long-acting nitrate. The goal is the control of angina with minimum side-effects and
the simplest possible drug regimen. Indications and contraindications of various antianginal drugs are
given in Table 7.39.
Table 7.39: Indications and contraindications of various antianginal drugs.
Drug Indication Contraindication
α-BlockersPost-myocardial infarction
CHF (compensated)
Ventricular tachycardia
Supraventricular tachycardia
(SVT)
Systemic hypertension
HyperthyroidismDecompensated HF
Severe bradycardia or AV
block
Severe depression
Symptomatic PAD
Raynaud’s phenomenon
Severe COPD
DHP-CCB Systemic hypertension
Raynaud’s phenomenon or
Prinzmetal’s angina
Severe bradycardia or AV
blockHypotension
Non DHP-CCB SVT
Systemic hypertensionSevere bradycardia
Significant AV block
LV dysfunction or HF
Nitrates LV dysfunction or HF Severe aortic stenosis
PDE-5 inhibitor use
Ivabrdine Increased resting heart rate Bradycardia
2° AV block
Ranolazine Bradycardia or AV block
Low blood pressure
LV dysfunction
Possible diabetesTreatment with QT
prolonging
agents
Moderate or severe
hepatic dysfunction
Nicorandil Refractory angina Severe aortic stenosis
PDE5 inhibitor use
(AV: atrioventricular; CCBs: calcium channel blockers; COPD: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease;
DHP: dihydropyridine calcium antagonists; LV: left ventricular; PAD: peripheral artery disease; PDE-5

inhibitor: phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor)
Q. Write a short essay/note on antiplatelet drugs and its indications.
5. Antiplatelet therapy
Anti-anginal drugs ameliorate only symptoms but may not reduce mortality. To reduce the risk of
adverse events such as MI, antiplatelet drugs are given.
Aspirin
Aspirin inhibits the synthesis of prostaglandins namely thromboxane A 2 which is a potent
vasoconstrictor and platelet activator.
Dose: Low-dose therapy in the dose of 75–150 mg/day.
P2Y12 antagonists
Clopidogrel
It is a thienopyridine which inhibits ADP dependent activation of the GPIIb/IIIa complex and
prevents platelet aggregation.
It is an equally effective antiplatelet agent that can be used in patients who cannot tolerate aspirin.
It may have a synergistic effect when combined with aspirin in patients following acute coronary
syndrome or implantation of a drug-eluting stent. The benefit of its combination with aspirin was
not found chronic stable angina.Dose: 75 mg daily.
Prasugrel and ticagrelor are new P2Y12 antagonists have higher platelet inhibition compared to
clopidogrel.
6. Statins:  Irrespective of the LDL or cholesterol levels.
Invasive (Surgical) Treatment: Revascularization
Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI)
Percutaneous coronary interventions include angioplasty [percutaneous transluminal coronary
angioplasty (PTCA)] or stent placement in the coronary artery. It is the process to maximize and
maintain dilatation of a stenosed coronary artery. A coronary stent is a piece of coated metallic
‘scaffolding’ (fine guidewire) that can be deployed on a balloon. In this process, a small inflatable
balloon and metallic coronary stent introduced percutaneously into the arterial circulation via an
arterial catheter through the femoral, radial or brachial artery under radiographic control. It is
passed across the coronary stenosis and balloon is inflated to dilate the stenosis. Dilatation can be
repeated if symptoms recur.Types of stents:  Two types namely ( 1) bare-metal stents and (2) drug-eluting stents. The drug-
eluting stents are coated stents lined with substances (e.g. sirolimus and pacliltaxel) that prevent
neo-intimal hyperplasia and reduce the risk of coronary artery re-occlusion. Recent data suggest
both types of stents to be equally effective over long-term follow-up.Indications for percutaneous coronary interventions (PCI)
–   Ideal for single-vessel or two vessel coronary disease without significant lesions in the
proximal left anterior descending artery (LAD), with normal LV function, with high risk on
noninvasive testing and a large area of viable myocardium.
–   Undergone prior PCI with either recurrence of stenosis or high risk on noninvasive testing.
–   Failure of medical therapy and with acceptable risk for PCI. Treatment of choice for unstable
angina (UA) when rest pain recurs in spite of full medical treatment.
–   Lesion suitable for PCI

–   No diabetes.
Complications of the procedure:  Bleeding, hematoma, dissection and pseudo-aneurysm from the
arterial puncture site. Serious complications are acute myocardial infarction (2%), stroke (0.4%)
and death (1%). Long-term complication is re-stenosis (33% of cases) which is due to a
combination of elastic recoil and smooth muscle proliferation (neo-intimal hyperplasia). It tends to
occur within 3 months.
Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG)In coronary artery bypass grafting, autologous veins (reversed segments of the patient’s own
saphenous vein) or arteries (internal mammary artery/radial artery/gastroepiploic arteries) are
anastomosed to the ascending aorta at one end and to the native coronary arteries distal to the area
of occlusion/stenosis at the other end.Usually done under cardiopulmonary bypass but, in few cases, it can be done in the beating heart
(‘off-pump’ surgery). Aspirin (75–150 mg daily) and clopidogrel (75 mg daily) both improve graft
patency, and one or other should be given indefinitely.Indications:
–   Significant left main coronary disease.
–   Triple vessel disease/two blood vessel disease with reduced left ventricular function (left
ventricular ejection fraction is <50%).
–   Two vessel disease with significant proximal left anterior descending artery disease and either
LVEF <50% or demonstrable ischemic on noninvasive testing.
–   Failure of medical therapy and with acceptable risk for CABG.
–   Diabetes
–   Prior CABG, PCI (percutaneous coronary interventions) with recurrent rest enosis
–   Abnormal stress test.Risks:  Higher risks in elderly, those with poor left ventricular function and those with significant
comorbidity, such as renal failure.
Minimally invasive operative procedures for bypass grafting (MIDCAB): Laparoscopic
approaches may be useful in patients with previous CABG and those with coexistent medical
conditions which would increase the operative risks of ‘full’ CABG).
Novel therapy in angina is summarized in Box 7.23.
Flowchart 7.1 shows scheme for the investigation and management of stable
angina.
Prognosis
Critical stenosis (>70%) of coronary arteries and 5 years mortality rate:
One artery—2%, two arteries—8%, three arteries—11%. 50% stenosis of
left main coronary artery has a mortality rate of about 15% per year.
Other poor prognostic factors are advanced age (>75 years), diabetes,
morbid obesity, accompanying peripheral vascular and or cerebrovascular
disease, previous myocardial infraction, high levels of plasma CRP,
evidence of LV dysfunction.

Box 7.23: Novel therapy in angina.
Newer drugs
Ivabradine: Selectively blocks I f in a current-dependent fashion in pacemaker cells of the sinoatrial
node
Ranolazine: Partial fatty acid oxidation (pFOX) inhibitor, late sodium current blocker
Trimetazidine: Inhibitor of partial fatty acid oxidation (pFOX)
Perhexilene: Inhibits mitochondrial carnitine palmitoyltransferase-1(CPT-1)
Etomoxir/Oxfenicine: CPT 1 inhibitor
Nicorandil: Activation of ATP-sensitive K+ channels
Rho kinase inhibition: Fasudil
Molsidomine and linsidomine act by releasing nitric oxide
Others: Testosterone, endothelin receptor blockers (bosentan), allopurinol
TMLR: Transmyocardial laser revascularization
EECP: Enhanced external counter pulsation
Chelation therapy: Intravenous EDTA infusions
Spinal cord stimulation, coronary sinus reducing device, apheresis
Other novel agentsMonoclonal antibodies:  Inclacumab is a P-selectin monoclonal antibody, in patients with NSTE–
ACS undergoing PCI. It reduces myocardial damage
Stem cell therapy:  The use of stem cells derived from bone marrow or myocardium to improve
cardiac function has been promising
ACUTE CORONARY SYNDROME
Q. Write short essay on acute coronary syndromes.
Ischemic heart disease (IHD) forms a spectrum of diseases (Flowchart 7.2)
and consists of stable angina and acute coronary syndromes (includes
STEMI, NSTEMI and unstable angina).
Acute coronary syndrome (ACS) is a term used for spectrum of clinical
presentations due to acute myocardial ischemia. It includes:
ST elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) (Flowchart 7.3): Majority
of STEMI has Q-wave MI (QwMI).
Non ST elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI): A small
percentage of STEMI and majority of NSTEMI have non- Q-wave MI
(NQwMI, previously known as subendocardial infarction). However, the
terms Q-wave or non Q-wave infarctions are not used at present.Unstable angina (UA): Includes patients with acute coronary syndrome

but with normal ECG, without elevation of cardiac injury markers and no
ST elevation in the ECG. Management of unstable angina and NSTEMI is
similar.
Flowchart 7.1:  Scheme for the investigation and management of stable angina.

(CABG: coronary artery bypass grafting; PCI: percutaneous coronary intervention)
Flowchart 7.2:  Spectrum of ischemic heart disease
Flowchart 7.3:  New classification scheme of acute coronary syndrome.

Pathophysiology (Table 7.40)
Table 7.40: Pathophysiology of stable angina and acute coronary syndrome.
Stable angina Unstable angina NSTEMI STEMI
Progressive
narrowing of
coronary lumen
Stable fibrous capProgressive
narrowing
Acute worsening of
coronary lumen due
to thrombus
formationAcute worsening of
coronary lumen due
to thrombus
formationSub-
occlusive/transient
coronary thrombus
with myocardial
necrosisMinimal prior
narrowing of
coronary lumenAcute rupture of
thin fibrous cap
Occlusive thrombus
formation
Acute injury pattern

Myocardial necrosis
ST Elevation Myocardial Infarction (STEMI)
Q. Discuss the etiology (risk factors), clinical features, investigations,
complications, and management of acute coronary syndrome/ACS
(ST elevation myocardial infarction—STEMI)/acute myocardial
infarction.
Causes of Myocardial Infarction
Q. Write short essay/note on risk factors of acute myocardial infarction.
STEMI is due to the formation of an occlusive thrombus at the site of
rupture of an atheromatous plaque in a coronary artery. Usually there is
minimal prior narrowing of coronary lumen.
Other causes: Coronary spasm, rarely coronary emboli as well as by
ostial narrowing due to aortitis, hypercoagulable state and use of cocaine.
Congenital anomalies such as the origin of the left anterior descending
coronary artery from the pulmonary artery may cause myocardial ischemia
in infancy, but this cause is very rare in adults.Limitation of the ability to increase flow to meet increased myocardial
demand occurs with 50% coronary stenosis while 80% coronary stenosis
causes myocardial ischemia at rest or with minimal stress.
Types of Myocardial Infarction
Type 1:  Spontaneous myocardial infarction with ischemia due to a primary coronary event, e.g.
plaque erosion/rupture, fissuring or dissection
Type 2:  Myocardial oxygen demand supply mismatch, i.e. secondary to ischemia due to increased
oxygen demand or decreased supply (e.g. coronary spasm, coronary embolism, anemia,
arrhythmias, hypertension, or hypotension).
Type 3:  Diagnosis of MI resulting in sudden cardiac death.
Type 4:  MI after percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI)—post PCI related.
Type 5:  MI after coronary artery bypass graft (CABG)—post CABG.
Transmural infarct is an infarct that involves the full thickness of myocardium. Subendocardial infarct
is an infarct which involves subendocardial region. However, these terms are no longer used. Silent
infarct is infarct without symptoms but with only ECG changes.
Non-ST Elevation Myocardial Infarction (NSTEMI)
Causes

It is most commonly caused by an imbalance between oxygen supply and
oxygen demand. This imbalance results from a partially occluding
thrombus forming on a disrupted atherothrombotic coronary plaque or on
eroded coronary artery endothelium.Severe ischemia or myocardial necrosis may develop due to the reduction
of coronary blood flow caused by the partially occluding thrombus and by
downstream embolization of platelet aggregates and/or atherosclerotic
debris.Other causes: More than one of the following processes may be involved.
–   Dynamic obstruction (e.g. coronary spasm, as in Prinzmetal’s variant
angina)
–   Severe mechanical obstruction due to progressive coronary
atherosclerosis
–   Increased myocardial oxygen demand produced by conditions such as
fever, tachycardia, and thyrotoxicosis in the presence of fixed
epicardial coronary obstruction.
Diagnosis of NSTEMI
Clinical presentation:  Diagnosis of NSTEMI is largely based on the clinical presentation.
Typically, chest discomfort is severe and has at least one of three features:
1. Occurs at rest (or with minimal exertion) lasting for >10 minutes.
2. Relatively recent onset (i.e. within the prior 2 weeks) and/or
3. Occurs with a crescendo pattern (i.e. distinctly more severe, prolonged, or frequent than
previous episodes).
Evidence of myocardial necrosis:  Diagnosis of NSTEMI is established, if a patient with the
above clinical features shows the evidence of myocardial necrosis, as reflected in abnormally
elevated levels of biomarkers of cardiac necrosis.
Clinical Features of Acute Coronary Syndrome
Symptoms
Prolonged cardiac pain: Myocardial ischemia causing chest discomfort
is termed angina pectoris. Thus, classic manifestation of ischemia is
angina, which is usually described as a heavy chest pressure or squeezing,
a burning feeling, or difficulty breathing.The discomfort often radiates to the left shoulder, neck, or arm. It typically
builds in intensity over a period of a few minutes.

The pain may begin with exercise or psychological stress, but ACS most
commonly occurs without obvious precipitating factors.
Pain may be absent in patients with prior cardiac, prior stroke, age >75
years, and diabetes mellitus. Painless MI is more common in females
compared to males.Any patient with severe chest pain that lasts for more than 20 minutes may
be suffering from a myocardial infarction. This pain is usually does not
respond to sublingual GTN.Other features: Include anxiety and fear of impending death, nausea and
vomiting, breathlessness, collapse/syncope.
Physical Signs (Table 7.41)
Sometimes infarction occurs without any physical signs.
Table 7.41: Various signs of acute coronary syndrome and its causes.
Cause of signs Sign
Tissue damage Mild fever
Sympathetic activation Pallor, sweating, tachycardia
Impaired myocardial
functionHypotension, oliguria, cold peripheries, narrow pulse pressure, raised
JVP, third heart sound, soft first heart sound, diffuse apical impulse,
basal crepitations in the lung
Vagal activation Vomiting, bradycardia
Complication Systolic murmur due to mitral regurgitation or uncommonly due to
VSD, pericardial friction rub due to pericarditis
Complications of Acute Coronary Syndrome
Major mechanical and structural complications occur only with significant,
often transmural, MI (Table 7.42).Arrhythmias
Many patients with acute coronary syndrome may develop arrhythmia and
they are transient in most of cases and are of no hemodynamic or
prognostic importance. Relief of pain relief, rest and the correction of
hypokalemia may prevent arrhythmias.Ventricular fibrillation: Develops in 5–10% of patients and appears to be
the major cause of death in those who die before receiving medical

attention.
Atrial fibrillation  is common but usually transient and does not need
emergency treatment. However, if it produces a rapid ventricular rate with
hypotension or circulatory collapse, prompt cardioversion by immediate
synchronized DC shock is required. In other cases digoxin or a β-blocker
is given.Bradycardia: Usually does not need treatment, but if there is hypotension
or hemodynamic deterioration, atropine (0.6–1.2 mg IV) may be given.
Various arrhythmias in acute coronary syndrome (Box 7.24).
Table 7.42: Complications of acute myocardial infarction.
Type Complication
Ischemic Infarct extension, reinfarction, angina
Mechanical Cardiogenic shock, cardiac failure, mitral regurgitation, ventricular
aneurysm, cardiac rupture (papillary muscle, ventricular septum,
cardiac wall)
Arrhythmic Atrial or ventricular arrhythmia, dysfunction of sinus or
atrioventricular node
Thromboembolic Left ventricular mural thrombus, CNS embolus (e.g. stroke) and
peripheral embolus
Inflammatory Pericarditis
Cardiogenic ShockCauses:
–   Arrhythmia
–   Hypovolemia due to excessive diuretic therapy or recurrent vomiting
–   Extensive myocardial damage (has bad prognosis).
Risk factors: Older age, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, multivessel
coronary artery disease, anterior MI, prior MI or angina, prior heart
failure, STEMI and left bundle branch block.
Box 7.24: Various arrhythmias in acute coronary syndrome.
Atrial fibrillation
Atrial tachycardia
Bradycardia (especially after inferior MI) and tachycardia
Atrioventricular heart blocks
Ventricular fibrillation

Ventricular tachycardia
Accelerated idioventricular rhythm
Ventricular ectopic beats
Left Ventricular Failure
Commonly leads to pulmonary edema.
Mechanical Complications
Myocardial rupture: Part of the necrotic muscle in a fresh infarct can
result in tear or cardiac rupture. Most frequent during 3 to 7 days after
transmural infarcts.
Rupture of the ventricular free wall:  It is most common and result in
hemopericardium and cardiac tamponade. It is usually fatal.
Rupture of the ventricular septum: It is less common and can lead to an
acute VSD and left-to-right shunt. It usually presents with sudden
hemodynamic deterioration and produces a new loud pansystolic murmur
radiating to the right sternal border.Rupture of papillary muscle: Can lead to acute severe mitral
regurgitation, which presents with a pansystolic murmur and third heart
sound.
Embolism
Thrombus may form on the endocardial surface of freshly infarcted
myocardium due to local abnormality in myocardial contractility (causing
stasis) and endocardial damage (creating a thrombogenic surface). This can
lead to systemic thromboembolism and occasionally causes a stroke. Venous
thrombosis and pulmonary embolism may also develop patients on prolonged
bed rest, but are now less common with the use of prophylactic
anticoagulants and early mobilization.
Ventricular Aneurysm
After acute transmural infarction, the affected ventricular wall may bulge
outward during systole resulting ventricular aneurysm. It develops as a late
complication of large transmural infarcts.
Pericarditis

Early pericarditis: A transmural myocardial infarct → can involve the
pericardium → cause fibrinous or fibrinohemorrhagic pericarditis. Usually
develops on second or third day.
Delayed form of pericarditis (postmyocardial infarction
syndrome/Dressler syndrome): Develops 2 to 10 weeks after infarction
—probably immunologically mediated reaction to necrotic muscle. It is
characterized by fever, pericarditis and pleurisy. Treatment is with aspirin
or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) or
corticosteroids.
InvestigationsQ. Write short essay/note on ECG changes in acute myocardial
infarction.
Electrocardiogram (ECG)
The 12-lead ECG is central to confirming the diagnosis and should be done
and interpreted within 10 minutes of arrival. The initial ECG may be normal
or non-diagnostic in about 30% of cases. Repeated ECGs are needed,
especially where the diagnosis is uncertain or the patient has recurrent or
persistent symptoms.
Changes in ECG: Characteristic changes are observed in leads that ‘face’
the ischemic or infracted area (e.g. anteroseptal, anterolateral, strict anterior,
inferior and posterior wall infarction).STEMI: ST-segment deviation is the earliest ECG change. With
proximal occlusion of a major coronary artery, ST-segment elevation (or
new bundle branch block) is observed initially. Later there is diminution in
the size of the R wave and, in transmural (full-thickness) infarction; there
is development of a Q wave. Subsequently, the T wave becomes inverted
and persists after the ST segment has returned to normal.NSTEMI and unstable angina: It is due to partial occlusion of a major
vessel or complete occlusion of a minor vessel, causing unstable angina or
partial-thickness (subendocardial) MI. They usually produce ST-segment
depression and T-wave changes. When infarction is present, there may be
some loss of R waves in the absence of Q waves.
Anatomic site of infarct, ECG lead and location of myocardial infarct is

discussed on pages 421-2.
Plasma Cardiac Biomarkers (Biochemical Markers of Cardiac
Injury)
Q. Write a short essay/note on serum markers in acute myocardial
infarction.
Unstable angina: There is no detectable rise in cardiac biomarkers or
enzymes in unstable angina and the initial diagnosis is made from the clinical
history and ECG only.
Myocardial infarction: Causes arise in the plasma concentration of enzymes
and proteins that are normally concentrated within cardiac cells. These
include creatine kinase (CK), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH), myoglobin and troponins (troponin I and troponin T).
These markers leak from the necrotic myocardial cells into the blood
circulation.Cardiac creatine kinase (CK): It is a nonspecific enzyme marker  and it
is present in brain, myocardium, and skeletal muscle. It has two isoforms
designated ‘M’ and ‘B’. MB heterodimers chiefly in cardiac muscle
(lesser amounts in skeletal muscle).
–   MB form of creatine kinase (CK-MB) is sensitive but not specific,
because it is also raised with skeletal muscle injury.
–   CK-MB levels rise within 4 to 6 hours of the onset of MI, peaks at 12
hours, and returns to normal within 72 hours.
–   Total CK is also raised elevated in diseases of skeletal muscle (e.g.
polymyositis, muscular dystrophies), hypothyroidism and stroke.
Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH): It not specific marker. It starts rising
after 24–48 hours. It remains for many days and returns to normal in
7–14 days. An elevated LDH1 (an isoenzyme of LDH) is a more sensitive
indicator of myocardial infarction than total LDH.
Myoglobin: It is an oxygen-carrying respiratory protein found only in
skeletal and cardiac muscle. It is an earliest marker of MI, the level rises
within 1–3 hours, peaks in about 8–12 hours and return to normal in
about 24–36 hours.
Cardiac troponins: These are proteins involved in heart muscle

contraction. Increased plasma levels establish the diagnosis of
myocardial infarction. Cardiac-specific proteins are of two types namely
cardiac Troponins I (cTnI) and T ( cTnT). They are most sensitive and
specific markers of myocardial infarction. Levels begin to rise at 4–6
hours and peaks at 48 hours. The elevated troponin levels may remain
for 7–10 days after acute MI and therefore, this assay is particular useful
in the evaluation of patients who present sufficiently long after their
episode of chest pain. Further, about one-third of patients with unstable
angina also have elevated cTn, which classifies these groups of patients to
non-ST elevation MI.Aspartate aminotransferase: Starts to rise by about 12 hours and reaches
a peak on the 1st or 2nd day.
Other enzymes: (1) Ischemia modified albumin, (2) N terminal Pro BNP,
(3) suPAR (soluble urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor) and (4)
Glycogen phosphorylase isoenzyme BB.
Fig. 7.35: Various enzyme levels following acute myocardial infarction.
Table 7.43: Characteristics of plasma biomarkers for acute myocardial
infraction (AMI).
Marker protein Elevation in plasma
after AMI (h)Peak plasma
concentration (h)Normalization of
plasma level (days)
Myoglobin 2–3 6–12 1–2
Cardiac troponin I 3–8 12–24 7–10
Cardiac troponin T 3–8 12–24 7–10

Creatine kinase MB 2–6 12–24 2–3
Various enzyme levels in acute coronary syndrome are shown in Figure 7.35
and Table 7.43.
Other Blood Tests
Leukocytosis with a peak on first day.
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR): Raised and may remain so for days.
C-reactive protein: Elevated.
Heart-type fatty acid-binding protein (H-FABP) as a plasma marker for
the diagnosis of patients presenting with chest pain suggestive of
myocardial infarction, especially in the early hours (within 2 hours) after
onset of symptoms. However, their use as a diagnostic tool for MI is
limited.
Chest X-rayMay show evidence of pulmonary edema that is not evident on clinical
examination.
Heart size is usually normal but there may be cardiomegaly due to
previous myocardial damage or pericardial effusion.
Echocardiography
Useful for assessing ventricular function and for detecting complications (e.g.
mural thrombus, cardiac rupture, ventricular septal defect, mitral
regurgitation and pericardial effusion).
Radionuclide Scanning
To detect the site of necrosis and the extent of damage to ventricular function.
Q. Write short essay/note on:
Management of a case of acute myocardial infarction in the first
24 hours.
Management of a case of acute myocardial infarction.
Management
Immediate management:  The first 24–48 hours, the patients should be admitted immediately to
hospital. During first 24–48 hours the risk for fatal arrhythmia is highest and as a result, there is a
significant risk of death or recurrent myocardial ischemia. Patients are best treated in an intensive

coronary care unit.
Management of Acute Myocardial Infarction
Initial treatment
Admit in intensive coronary care unit, attach a cardiac monitor and secure an intravenous line.General treatment (‘M O N A C’)
–   Morphine 2–4 mg q 5–10 minute to control chest pain.
–   Oxygen 4 L/minute: Hypoxemia in uncomplicated MI is usually due to ventilation-perfusion
abnormalities and may be exacerbated by CHF. Therefore, oxygen is given to patients
suspected of having an acute coronary syndromes and oxygen saturation <90%.
–   NTG (nitroglycerine) sublingual or spray, followed by infusion for persistent chest pain
–   Aspirin 160–325 mg chew and swallow or/and
–   Clopidogrel 300 mg oralConfirm diagnosis:  By investigations namely:
–   Electrocardiogram (ECG)
–   Plasma cardiac biomarkers: Troponin T or I and CK-MB
Specific therapy
–   Thrombolysis or percutaneous coronary interventions
–   β- blockers unless contraindicated
–   Treat complications (arrhythmias, congestive failure and shock).
Control of pain by analgesicsProper control of pain is necessary not only to relieve distress but also to lower adrenergic drive
which reduces vascular resistance, BP, infarct size and susceptibility to ventricular arrhythmias.
Intravenous opiates:  Initially, morphine in the dose of 2–4 mg or diamorphine 2.5–5 mg is
administered along with antiemetics (metoclopramide 10 mg) should be administered, and
repeated until the patient is comfortable.
β-blockers, nitroglycerine and thrombolysis may also help in reducing the pain.
Anti-anginal therapy (refer page 417-20)
Antithrombotic therapy
Q. Write short essay/note on indications for low dose aspirin therapy.
Antiplatelet therapy
(discussed in detail on page 419):
Aspirin: In acute coronary syndrome, oral aspirin (75–325 mg daily) improves survival, and
reduce mortality. The first dose (300 mg) should be given orally within the first 12 hours and
should be continued indefinitely if there are no side-effects.
Combination therapies:  Combination of aspirin and an ADP-receptor blocker (clopidogrel,
prasugrel or ticagrelor) is recommended in patients with STEMI who are undergoing primary PCI
(for up to 12 months) or (clopidogrel) fibrinolysis and in those who have not undergone
reperfusion therapy. In acute coronary syndrome, with or without ST-segment elevation, ticagrelor
(180 mg, followed by 90 mg twice daily) is found to be more effective than clopidogrel in
reducing vascular death, MI or stroke, and other causes of death.Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor antagonists:  These are powerful inhibitors of platelet
aggregation and prevent thrombus formation (e.g. tirofiban, eptifibatide, and abciximab ).
Abciximab is a monoclonal antibody which binds tightly and has a long half-life. They are
beneficial in patients who undergo PCI, those with recurrent ischemia and those with high risk
(e.g. diabetes mellitus, raised troponin concentration).

Various antiplatelet agents and their dosage are mentioned in Table 7.44.
Anticoagulants (antithrombin therapy)
Prophylactic anticoagulants are given to prevent deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism in
patients who do not receive fibrinolytic agents. They reduce the risk of thromboembolic
complications, and prevent re-infarction in the absence of reperfusion therapy or after successful
thrombolysis.
PreparationsUnfractionated heparin:  Given as an initial bolus dose of 60 IU/kg (with a maximum dose of
4000 units) followed by an initial infusion of 12 IU/kg/hour (maximum 1000 units/hour). The dose
is adjusted to attain the activated partial thromboplastin time at 1.5–2 times control. Heparin is
given before the completion of infusion of rt-PA or tenecteplase or patients receiving STK.
Low-molecular weight heparin: It is used as an adjunct to thrombolytics. It produces higher re-
perfusion rate and lower re-occlusion rate compared to unfractionated heparin. Dose of 5000 units
given twice a day subcutaneously.Direct thrombin inhibitors:  Appear better than the unfractionated heparin in patients undergoing
PCI. These include hirudin and bivalirudin. Pentasaccharides (subcutaneous fondaparinux 2.5 mg
daily) safe and effective. However, fondaparinux is not be used as sole agent and contraindicated
if PCI is planned.
Table 7.44: Various antiplatelet agents and their dosage.
Oral antiplatelets
Aspirin Initial dose of 325 mg nonenteric formulation followed by 75–100
mg/day of an enteric or a nonenteric formulation
Clopidogrel Loading dose of 300–600 mg followed by 75 mg/day
Prasugrel Pre-PCI: Loading dose 60 mg  followed by 10 mg/day
Ticagrelor Loading dose of 180 mg followed by 90 mg twice daily
Intravenous antiplatelet therapy
Abciximab 0.25 mg/kg bolus followed by infusion of 0.125 μg/kg per min
(maximum 10 μg/min) for 12–24 hours
Eptifibatide 180 μg/kg bolus followed 10 min later by second bolus of 180 μg with
infusion of 2.0 μg/kg per min for 72–96 hours following first bolus
Tirofiban 5 μg/kg per min followed by infusion of 0.15 μg/kg per min for 48–96
hours
Others Phosphodiesterase inhibitors—Cilostazol
Antithrombin preparations should be continued for at least 48 hours and preferably for 8 days or till
discharge or coronary revascularization.
Statins
High-dose statins are recommended in all patients during the first 24 hours of admission for STEMI,
irrespective of the patient’s cholesterol concentration, if there is no contraindications (e.g. allergy,
active liver disease). They are recommended during the early phase of therapy up to at least four
weeks. Patient on statin therapy presenting with STEMI should continue statin.

Advantages
Lowers cholesterol, direct effects on endothelial function, oxidative stress, inflammation,
thrombosis as well as plaque stabilization. High dose atorvastatin (40–80 mg) or rosuvastatin (20–
40 mg) therapy before emergency percutaneous coronary intervention has following advantages:
–   Reduce periprocedural inflammatory response
–   Reduce myocardial dysfunction
–   Prevent contrast-induced nephropathy.
Management of acute coronary syndrome are indicated in Flowchart 7.4.
Thrombolytic (or fibrinolytic) therapy in acute coronary syndrome
Q. Write short essay/note on indications, contraindications and therapeutic schedule of
thrombolytic therapy in acute myocardial infarction.
Indications for thrombolysis in acute myocardial infarction (Box 7.25)
Fibrinolytic therapy should be initiated within 30 minutes (door-to-needle time or first medical
contact-to-needle time).
Thrombolytic agents (Table 7.45):  These include plasminogen activators, i.e. streptokinase (STK),
urokinase (UK), human tissue plasminogen activator (tPA-alteplase), recombinant plasminogen
activator (rPA-reteplase), tenecteplase, anisoylated plasminogen streptokinase activator complex
(APSAC, anistreplase) and single-chain urokinase plasminogen activator (scu-PA).
Mechanism of action:  Thrombolytic or fibrinolytic agents lyse thrombi/clot to recanalize the
occluded vessels (mainly coronary arteries) by the activation of plasminogen to form plasmin. They
are curative rather than prophylactic.Fibrin-specific fibrinolytics:  They generate fibrin-specific fibrinolytics at the site of
thrombus/clot. Examples include rPA (retepalse), tenecteplase (TNK) and scu-PA. They have
lower mortality rate compared with STK and also lack the significant acute side effects of
hypotension and allergy caused by STK.Generation plasmin in the systemic circulation:  These agents generate plasmin in systemic
circulation producing a systemic lytic state. This leads to a reduction in blood viscosity, and
produces strong anticoagulant and antiplatelet effects. Examples include streptokinase (STK);
urokinase (UK). STK use is associated with lower incidence of intracranial hemorrhage, especially
in older individuals.
Box 7.25:  Indications for thrombolysis in acute myocardial infarction.
Thrombolysis: Definitely beneficialST segment elevation of more than 0.1 mV in two or more contiguous leads, with time to therapy
12 hours or less
Left bundle-branch block (LBBB) obscuring ST segment analysis and history of acute
myocardial infarction for less than 12 hours
Thrombolysis: Some benefit
ST segment elevation with time to therapy 12–24 hours
Thrombolysis: Not indicated
ST segment depression only (unless leads V 1-V4 show ST depression related to posterior wall
myocardial infarction).
Time to therapy >24 hours.

Thrombolytic therapy is not recommended for patients with NSTEMI and unstable angina.
Flowchart 7.4:  Management of acute coronary syndrome
Table 7.45: Various thrombolytic agents and their dosage.
Thrombolytic agent Dose
Alteplase (tissue
plasminogen activator-tPA)15 mg bolus followed by 50 mg intravenously over the first 30
minute, followed by 35 mg over the next 60 minutes
Streptokinase (STK) 1.5 million units (MU) intravenous infusion over 1 hour
Tenecteplase (TNK) Given as a single weight-based intravenous bolus of 0.53 mg/kg over
10 seconds
Reteplase (rPA) Double-bolus regimen consisting of a 10-MU bolus given over 2–3
minutes, followed by second 10-MU bolus 30 minutes later
Box 7.26: Signs of reperfusion.
Immediate relief of chest pain
Reduction of the initial ST-segment elevation by 50% within 60–90 minutes of fibrinolytic therapy
Onset of reperfusion arrhythmias (e.g. accelerated idioventricular rhythm and frequent ventricular
ectopics)
Early peaking of CK-MB enzyme.
Box 7.27: Contraindications to thrombolytic therapy.
Absolute

History of cerebrovascular hemorrhage anytime in life
History of nonhemorrhagic stroke or other cerebrovascular event within the past one year
Uncontrolled marked hypertension (systolic BP >180 mm Hg, diastolic BP >110 mm Hg).
However, STK can be given
Suspected aortic dissection
Active internal bleeding (excluding menses)
Known intracranial aneurysm/AV malformation/neoplasm (primary or metastatic)
Intracranial/spinal surgery within last 3 months)
Relative
Current use of anticoagulants (INR ≥2)
Recent (<2 weeks) invasive or surgical procedure, prolonged (>10 min) CPR
Known bleeding diathesis
Recent trauma (including traumatic resuscitation)
Pregnancy
Hemorrhage ophthalmic condition
Active peptic ulcer disease
History of severe hypertension that is currently controlled
Box 7.28: Thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) grading system.
TIMI 0: Absence of antegrade flow beyond a coronary occlusion
TIMI 1: Faint antegrade coronary flow beyond the occlusion, although filling of the distal
coronary bed is incomplete
TIMI 2: Flow is delayed or sluggish antegrade flow with complete filling of the distal territory
TIMI 3: Flow is normal which fills the distal coronary bed completely.
Signs of Reperfusion (Box 7.26)
Contraindications to Thrombolytic Therapy (Box 7.27)
Complications of thrombolytic therapy:
Hemorrhage:  It is the major complication. The most common site is in the region of puncture
sites, genitourinary system and intracranial hemorrhage (in about 0.5% of patients).
Allergic reactions: May develop with use of STK and APSAC.
Hypotension:  May develop if STK is infused rapidly.
Thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) grading system (Box 7.28):  It is a simple
qualitative scale to grade the flow in the culprit coronary artery when assessed by angiography.
Rescue PCI should be considered in patients with failure of reperfusion (persistent chest pain and
ST-segment elevation >90 minutes) with thrombolytic agents.
Percutaneous coronary interventions (PCI)
PCI is the treatment of choice, provided it is performed promptly by a qualified interventional
cardiologist in an appropriate facility.
Indications:  Patients with STEMI with following features
Symptoms of ischemia of less than 12 hours duration.
Symptoms of ischemia of less than 12 hours duration who have contraindications to fibrinolytic
therapy, irrespective of the time delay from first medical contact.

Cardiogenic shock or acute severe heart failure (HF), irrespective of time delay from MI onset.
May be recommended if there is clinical and/or ECG evidence of ongoing ischemia between 12
and 24 hours after symptom onset.
Maximum acceptable delay for primary PCI from presentation to balloon inflation is 60 minutes if a
patient presents within 1 hour of symptom of onset or 90 minutes if a patient present later.
Types of PCI:  Include primary PCI, rescue PCI and facilitated PCI (described below).
Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors (e.g. abciximab, tirofiban) may be used in patients undergoing
percutaneous interventions.
Reperfusion options for STEMI
Fibrinolysis:  It is usually preferred in the following situations:
–   Early presentation (≤3 hours from symptom of onset)
–   In patients where primary PCI cannot done because of the following:
♦   Catheterization laboratory occupied/unavailable
♦   Vascular access difficulties
♦   Lack of access to a skilled PCI laboratory
–   Delay to primary PCI
♦   Door-to-balloon time minus door-to-needle time is >1 hour.
♦   Door-to-balloon time is >90 minutes.Primary PCI: In which PCI is used solely in acute MI. It is indicated in cardiogenic shock, and
in patients in whom thrombolytic therapy is contraindicated. It is generally preferred with
following conditions:
–   Skilled PCI laboratory is available with good surgical backup.
♦   Door-to-balloon time is ≤90 minutes.
♦   Door-to-balloon time minus door-to-needle time is ≤1 hour.
–   High-risk STEMI
♦   Cardiogenic shock
♦   Killip class CHF ≥3
–   Contraindications to fibrinolysis including increased risk of bleeding and intracranial
hemorrhage.
–   Late presentation (>3 hours after symptom of onset).
Rescue PCI:  It is combination of PCI with thrombolytic therapy and PCI is performed within 12
after failed thrombolysis/fibrinolysis for patients with continuing or recurrent myocardial
ischemia.
–   Indications:  STEMI in aged <75 years who received fibrinolytic therapy and have
cardiogenic shock, severe congestive heart failure (Killip class III) or hemodynamically
compromising ventricular arrhythmias.
–   May be performed in patients with symptoms of persistent ischemia.
Facilitated PCI:  In this type PCI is done following initial pharmacological regimen aimed at
improving patency of coronary arteries before PCI.
–   The pharmacological regimens include GB IIB/IIIa inhibitors, full-dose or reduced-dose of
fibrinolytic therapy, and combination of a GP IIb/IIIa inhibitor and a reduced-dose
fibrinolytic/thrombolytic agent. However, this type of re-perfusion may be inferior to
thrombolysis alone or primary PCI and is usually not recommended in most patients with
STEMI.

Coronary artery bypass grafting
Recommended in:
–   Failed PCI with persistent pain or hemodynamic instability in patients with coronary anatomy
suitable for surgery.
–   Persistent or recurrent ischemia refractory to medical therapy in patients who have coronary
anatomy suitable for surgery, and are not candidates for PCI or fibrinolytic therapy.
–   Patients with STEMI at the time of operative repair of mechanical defects.
Management of right ventricular infarction
Right ventricular infarction is characterized by reduced right ventricular stroke volume which
results impaired left ventricular filling → leading to hypotension, raised JVP and clear lungs on
auscultation.
Volume expansion  with saline is the initial treatment for hemodynamically significant right
ventricular infarction.
Avoid use of diuretics, ACE inhibitors and nitrates.
Inotropics and vasodilators may be needed when a significant left ventricular dysfunction is also
present.
Routinely considered for re-perfusion therapy (fibrinolysis or PCI).
Box 7.29:  Killip classification of ventricular dysfunction.
Class I: No signs of pulmonary/venous congestion
Class II: Moderate heart failure, rales at lung bases, S3 gallop, venous or hepatic congestion
Class III: Severe heart failure, pulmonary edema
Class IV: Shock with systolic BP < 90 mm Hg, mental confusion, oliguria, peripheral cyanosis
Management of complications
Ventricular dysfunction
After STEMI ventricular remodeling occurs, ventricular dysfunction can be prevented by ACE
inhibitors and nitrates.
Killip classification of ventricular dysfunction (Box 7.29)
This classification has prognostic value with highest mortality in class IV patients.
Cardiogenic shock
–   This results when there is infarction of ≥40% of left ventricle. The patient has systolic BP <90
mm Hg and pulmonary capillary wedge pressure >18 mm Hg.
–   Cardiogenic shock is best managed by invasive means (Primary PCI). Use of intra-aortic
balloon pump and IV vasopressors may be beneficial.
Right ventricular infarction
–   Clinically significant right ventricular infarction is rare and occurs in patients with interior
infarction.
–   ST elevation in V 4R is common in first 24 hours.
–   Signs of severe right ventricular failure:  These include jugular vinous distension,
Kussmaul’s sign, hepatomegaly, with hypotension.
–   Investigation: 2-D echocardiography is useful for diagnosis and assessment of severity.
–   Treatment: Volume expansion to maintain adequate right ventricular preload.
Pericarditis

–   Common complication in first week of transmural myocardial infarct.
–   Radiation of pain to trapezius muscle is helpful in distinguishing it from ischemia.
–   Pericardial rub may be present.
–   Treatment:  Aspirin 650 mg qid and withhold anticoagulants.
Management of other complications:  These include (1) thromboembolism, (2) left ventricular
aneurysm, (3) sinus bradycardia, (4) AV block, (5) ventricular tachycardia and fibrillation and acute
mitral regurgitation, VSR and tricuspid regurgitation.
Their management is discussed in individual sections.
Aftercare and rehabilitationPhysical activities:  To be restricted for 4–6 weeks because replacement of infarct by fibrous
tissue takes 4–6 weeks. Advised gradual mobilization and return to work over 6 weeks. Exercise
and sexual activity within the limits.
Complications:  Patients who had complications, the regimen depends on the type of
complication.
Lifestyle and risk factor modification: Control of risk factors such as obesity by regular
exercises, cessation of smoking, lifestyle modifications and control of plasma lipids by diets and
drugs.Secondary prevention drug therapy
–   Aspirin and clopidogrel: Low dose aspirin (75–150 mg daily) unless there is any
contraindication. Clopidogrel (75 mg daily) for up to 12 months, particularly after stent
implantation. It may be given as an alternative when aspirin is contraindicated, or in
combination with aspirin particularly in patients with unstable angina or recurrent cardiac
events.
–   β-blocker:  Oral β-blockers are continued indefinitely (unless any contraindications).
Carvedilol, bisoprolol or metoprolol (extended release) are given to patients with heart failure.
Role of β-blockers in the secondary prevention in unstable angina is not known.
–   ACE inhibitor given early after an acute coronary syndrome. Long-term treatment with an
ACE inhibitor (e.g. enalapril 10 mg twice daily or ramipril 2.5–5 mg twice daily) is found to
counteract ventricular remodeling, prevent the onset of heart failure, and reduce recurrent MI.
–   Statin therapy started in the hospital for all patients with coronary artery disease.
–   Warfarin  after myocardial infarction is given to patients having a high-risk of systemic
thromboembolism due to atrial fibrillation, mural thrombus, congestive heart failure or
previous embolization.
–   Nitrates:  Short-acting nitrates, for chest pain. Long-acting nitrates are given for relief of
symptom when β-blocker alone is unsuccessful or is contraindicated.
–   Aldosterone antagonist  (e.g. eplerenone) is given early after myocardial infarction to patients
who have LVEF ≤40%, despite optimum dose of ACE inhibitors and β-blockers, and have
either CHF or diabetes.Device therapy:  Implantable cardiac defibrillators can prevent sudden cardiac death in patients
who have severe left ventricular impairment (ejection fraction ≤30%) after MI.
Non-ST Segment-Elevation Acute Coronary Syndrome
(NSTEACS)
Q. Briefly discuss unstable angina and non-ST elevation myocardial

infarction.
It includes unstable angina (UA) and non-ST elevation myocardial
infarction (NSTEMI).
Both are caused by coronary artery spasm, progression of the underlying
coronary artery disease (CAD) or hemorrhage into a non-occluding
atheromatous plaque with subsequent thrombosis producing coronary
obstruction over a period of few hours. The difference between UA and
NSTEMI is that in the NSTEMI shows an occluding thrombus, which
leads to myocardial necrosis and a rise in serum troponins or CKMB.Non-ST elevation MI (STEMI)
It is usually shows ST depression and T inversion in the ECG along with
elevation in serum troponins or CKMB.
Myocardial function (as shown by ejection fraction) in NSTEMI is less
deranged when compared to STEMI. However, in NSTEMI early as well
as late reinfarction rates are higher than in STEMI.
Unstable angina (UA)
Q. Write a short essay/note on unstable angina.
Three principal presentations include:
–   Rest angina:  Angina occurring at rest and prolonged, usually >20 minutes.
–   New-onset angina:  New-onset angina of at least CCS Class III severity.
–   Increasing angina:  Previously diagnosed angina that has become distinctly more frequent,
longer in duration, or lower in threshold (i.e. increased by >1 CCS) class to at least CCS Class
III severity.
Table 7.46: Risk categories in NSTEMI/UA.
Category Management
High risk (12–30%)
Prolonged chest pain (>20 minutes or
ongoing), plus:
ECG: (1) Transient ST changes, (2) sustained
ST depression and (3) deep T wave inversion
(>5 leads)Biochemical markers: Troponin/CKMB
abnormal
Recurrent ischemiaAspirin + heparin/low molecular weight
heparin (LMWH)
GP IIb/IIIa antagonist
Early percutaneous coronary intervention
(PCI)

Acute MI in last 4 weeks
Hemodynamic compromise
Intermediate risk (4–8%)
No high-risk features but ≥ 1 of:
–   Ongoing chest pain
–   Crescendo angina
–   Borderline positive troponin I (0.4–2.0)
–   Previous intervention: PCI or CABG
–   Increased baseline risk (diabetes mellitus,
elderly)Aspirin ± clopidogrel
Ultrafraction heparin (UFH) or low molecular
weight heparin (LMWH)
PCI
Low-risk (<2%)
No high or intermediated features
Chest pain, single episode, exertional
ECG: Normal or nonspecific or unchanged
May include previous history of CAD or risk
factorsAspirin
No heparin
Observe
Normal ECG (no ST elevation), without elevation of cardiac injury
markers (normal level of cardiac enzymes).
Patients with UA have a high risk of developing MI or sudden death when
compared to patients with stable angina. Thus, they need aggressive
treatment in the hospital.
Classification of risk categories in NSTEMI/UA and its management is
mentioned in Table 7.46.
Prinzmetal’s Variant Angina
Q. Write a short essay/note on clinical features and treatment of
Prinzmetal’s angina (variant angina).
In 1959 Prinzmetal et al. described a syndrome of severe ischemic pain that
usually occurs at rest and is associated with transient ST-segment elevation.
Etiology
Focal spasm of an epicardial coronary artery is the cause of
Prinzmetal’s variant angina (PVA) and leads to severe transient
myocardial ischemia and occasionally infarction.The cause of the spasm is not well defined, but it may be related to
hypercontractility of vascular smooth muscle due to adrenergic
vasoconstrictors, leukotrienes, or serotonin.

Clinical Features
Pain occurs without exertion and usually at rest. It is more frequent in
women.
Associated with migraine, Raynaud’s phenomenon and aspirin-induced
asthma. Younger patients with history of cigarette smoking.
Investigation
Characteristically, it is associated with transient ST segment elevation on
the ECG during the pain.
Coronary angiography is gold standard for diagnosis. Focal spasm
commonly accompanied by stenosis within 1 cm of spasm is the
hallmark (most commonly in right coronary artery).
Provocation tests (e.g. hyperventilation, cold pressor testing or
ergometrine or intracoronary acetylcholine challenge) may be needed for
demonstration of focal spasm and establishing the diagnosis.
ManagementNitrates and calcium channel blockers are the main therapeutic agents. Aspirin may actually
increase the severity of ischemic episodes, possibly as a result of the sensitivity of coronary tone to
modest changes in the synthesis of prostacyclin.
The response to β-blockers is variable but usually poor. Prazosin can be useful.
Coronary revascularization may be helpful in patients with discrete, flow-limiting, proximal fixed
obstructive lesions.
Prognosis
Many patients pass through an acute, active phase, with frequent episodes
of angina and cardiac events during the first 6 months after presentation.
Prognosis is better in patients with no or mild fixed coronary obstruction
than patients with severe, fixed, significant obstructive lesions. Survival at
5 years is excellent (∼90–95%).Nonfatal MI occurs in up to 20% of patients by 5 years. Patients with PVA
who develop serious arrhythmias during spontaneous episodes of pain are
at a higher risk for sudden cardiac death. In most patients who survive an
infarction or the initial 3- to 6-month period of frequent episodes, there is
a tendency for symptoms and cardiac events to diminish over time.
HYPERTENSION

Q. Classify hypertension. Discuss the clinical features, baseline
investigations, diagnosis, complications and management of essential
hypertension.
Q. Discuss the causes and investigations of secondary hypertension.
Hypertension is a hemodynamic disorder and about 15% of the general
population can be regarded as hypertensives.
Definition: A well-accepted definition of hypertension was suggested by
Evans and Rose:
‘Hypertension should be defined in the terms of blood pressure level
above which investigation and treatment do good more than harm’.
The following diagnostic criteria has been suggested by the 2017
ACC/AHA guidelines; meeting one or more of these criteria using
ambulatory blood pressure monitoring (ABPM) to qualify as hypertension.
–   A 24-hour mean of 125/75 mm Hg or above
–   Daytime (awake) mean of 130/80 mm Hg or above.
–   Nighttime (asleep) mean of 110/65 mm Hg or above.
Hypertension is defined arbitrarily at levels above generally accepted
normal (Joint National Committee—JNC 7/8 recommendations) is presented
in Table 7.47.
Table 7.47: Systolic and diastolic values used in the classification of
hypertension (JNC7/8).
Classification Systolic BP (mm Hg) Diastolic BP (mm Hg)
Normal
Pre-hypertension
Stage 1 hypertension
Stage 2 hypertension<120
120–139
140–159
≥160AND
OR
OR
OR<80
80–89
90–99
≥100
Isolated systolic
hypertension>140 AND <90
Classification and Causes (Table 7.48 and Fig. 7.36)Q. Write short note on the causes of hypertension.
Primary or essential hypertension: Constitutes about 85% of the cases
in which it is not possible to define a specific underlying cause. About

70% of these patients give a positive family history.
Secondary hypertension: Constitutes remaining 15% of the cases and are
due to a specific disease or abnormality.
Q. Write short essay or note on secondary hypertension and its causes.
Q. Write short note on causes of isolated systolic hypertension.
Essential Hypertension
In about 85–95% of cases, a specific underlying cause of hypertension cannot
be identified and such hypertension is termed as essential hypertension. The
exact pathogenesis is not known. It has multifactorial etiology and many
factors may contribute to its development.
Fig. 7.36:  2017 updated classification of high blood pressure in adults.
Table 7.48: Major causes of hypertension (systolic and diastolic).
Primary/essential hypertension  (~ 85% of case)
Secondary hypertension  (~ 15% of case)
Renal
Renal parenchymal disease (most common cause of secondary hypertension): Acute
glomerulonephritis, polycystic kidney disease, chronic nephritis, diabetic nephropathy,
hydronephrosis (obstructive uropathy)
Renal artery stenosis (renovascular hypertension)
Renin producing tumors
Endocrine
Adrenal disorders: Cushing’s syndrome, primary aldosteronism, primary adrenal hyperplasia,
pheochromocytoma
Others: Hypothyroidism (myxedema), hyperthyroidism (thyrotoxicosis), hypercalcemia, acromegaly,
carcinoid, exogenous hormones
Cardiovascular
Coarctation of aorta, polyarteritis nodosa

Neurologic
Psychogenic, porphyria, lead poisoning, primary dysautonomia (Riley-day syndrome), increased
intracranial pressure, GB syndrome
Obstructive sleep apnea
Preeclampsia/eclampsia
Medications and toxins
High-dose estrogens, alcohol and drugs—oral contraceptives, anabolic steroids, corticosteroids,
decongestants, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIDs), COX-2 inhibitors, carbenoxolone,
sympathomimetics, cyclosporine, sibutramine, bromocriptine, erythropoietin
Stress
Postoperative, pain, burns, hypoglycemia, alcohol withdrawal, hypoglycemia
Causes of isolated systolic hypertension: Atherosclerosis, aortic regurgitation, patent ductus
arteriosus, thyrotoxicosis, coarctation of aorta
Etiology
Q. Write short essay or note on risk factors for hypertension.
Genetic factors: Blood pressure tends to run in families and this may be
partly due to environmental influences.
Environmental factors: Several environmental factors may be involved and
these include salt intake, obesity, occupation, alcohol intake, family size and
crowding.
Obesity: Higher blood pressures are seen in obese individuals compared
to thin individuals. Sleep disordered breathing/ obstructive sleep apnea
often observed with obesity may be an additional risk factor.Alcohol intake: There is close relationship between the consumption of
alcohol and blood pressure level.
Sodium intake: Higher sodium intakes may be associated with an
increase in blood pressure. A high potassium diet can have protective role
against the effects of a high sodium intake. About 60% of hypertensive are
salt sensitive. Primary aldosteronism, bilateral renal artery stenosis, renal
parenchymal disease and low-renin essential hypertension are all salt
sensitive.
Stress: Acute pain or stress is associated with raised blood pressure.
However, the relationship between chronic stress and blood pressure is not
known.
Humoral mechanisms
The autonomic nervous system, the renin-angiotensin, natriuretic peptide and

kallikrein kinin system, plays a role in the physiological regulation of short-
term changes in blood pressure. They may also be probably involved in the
pathogenesis of essential hypertension.
A low renin, salt-sensitive, essential hypertension in which patients have
renal sodium and water retention has been found. Low renin hypertension
is more common in elderly and diabetics. These patients are salt-sensitive
and diuretic responsive.Normal renin hypertension (non-modulators) is more common in males
and post-menopausal females. They are salt sensitive.
High renin hypertension is characterized by high plasma renin activity and
responsiveness to angiotensin II antagonists.
Low calcium intake has been associated with an increase in blood pressure
in epidemiologic studies.
Insulin resistance is responsible for essential hypertension in majority of the
patients.Metabolic syndrome: It is characterized by hyperinsulinemia, glucose
intolerance, reduced levels of HDL cholesterol, hypertriglyceridemia and
central obesity (all related to insulin resistance). Metabolic syndrome in
associated with hypertension and is a major risk factor for cardiovascular
disease.Fetal factors
Impaired intrauterine growth resulting in low birth weight is associated with
subsequent development of high blood pressure.
Approach to Newly Diagnosed Hypertension
Q. Discuss the approach to a case of hypertension in the young.
Hypertension is usually asymptomatic and the diagnosis is usually made at
routine examination or when a complication arises. A routine BP checkup is
necessary every 5 years in adults.
Goals of the initial evaluation with high BP are to:
Obtain accurate BP measurements
Identify contributing factors, and risk factors and any underlying cause
(secondary hypertension)
Quantify cardiovascular risk

Detect any complications (target organ damage)
Identify comorbidity that may influence the choice of antihypertensive
therapy.
These are attained by a careful history, clinical examination and few simple
investigations.
Ambulatory Blood Pressure Monitoring (ABPM)
Q. Write short note on ambulatory blood pressure monitoring.
ABPM is the preferred method for confirming the diagnosis of hypertension.
High-quality data suggest that ABPM predicts target-organ damage and
cardiovascular events better than office blood pressure readings. ABPM
records the blood pressure at preset intervals (usually every 15 to 20 minutes
during the day and every 30 to 60 minutes during sleep).
Uses of ABPM (Box 7.30).
Box 7.30: Uses of ambulatory blood pressure monitoring.
Confirm white coat and masked hypertension
Suspected episodic hypertension (e.g. pheochromocytoma)
Determining therapeutic response (i.e. blood pressure control) in patients who are known to have a
substantial white coat effect)
Hypotensive symptoms while taking antihypertensive medications
Resistant hypertension
Autonomic dysfunction
Home and ambulatory BP recordings
A transient rise in BP may occur by exercise, anxiety, discomfort and
unfamiliar surroundings.
White coat hypertension: It is a transient increase in blood pressure in
normal individuals when blood pressure is recorded either in a hospital or
in a physician’s clinic.Isolated ambulatory or masked hypertension
–   It is reversal of white coat hypertension in which individuals have
normal blood pressure (<140/90 mm Hg) in a hospital or in a
physician’s clinic but have increased ambulatory or home blood
pressure values.
–   These individuals have increased prevalence of organ damage, with an

increased prevalence of metabolic risk factors.
Paradoxical hypertension
–   It is characterized by a paradoxical increase in blood pressure in patients on antihypertensive
agents.
–   This is observed in patients with:
♦   Diabetes and hypertension who are on β-blockers, if they develop hypoglycemia. It is due to
sympathetic stimulation following hypoglycemia.
♦   Bilateral renal artery stenosis who are given ACE inhibitors.
♦   Pheochromocytoma who is administered pure β-blockers.
History
Record family history, lifestyle (exercise, salt intake, smoking), other risk
factors, history of drug intake or alcohol.
Symptoms of causes of secondary hypertension (Table 7.49) or
complications such as coronary artery disease (e.g. angina,
breathlessness).
Clinical Features
Clinical features of hypertension may be due to hypertension itself and the
underlying cause of hypertension. Clinical features due to hypertension per seMajority of patients are asymptomatic and hypertension is usually
detected during routine examination.
Acute hypertension may produce transient headache and polyuria.
Long-standing hypertension may cause left ventricular hypertrophy and
heaving apical impulse, accentuation of the aortic component of the
second heart sound (A2), a fourth heart sound (S4), very short early
diastolic murmur and fundal changes (refer complications).
Table 7.49: Findings and specific investigations in various secondary
hypertension.
Findings Disease suspected Specific investigation
Paroxysmal hypertension,
palpitations, headache,
diaphoresisPheochromocytoma Urine VMA, metanephrine,
plasma metanephrine
Fatigue, weight gain, menstrual
irregularities, diastolic
hypertensionHypothyroidism Serum thyroid stimulating
hormone (TSH)

Weight loss, tachycardia, tremors,
heat intolerance, systolic
hypertensionHyperthyroidism Serum TSH
Depression, muscle weakness,
kidney stones, osteoporosisHyperparathyroidism Serum calcium, parathormone
(PTH)
Headaches, fatigue, visual
disturbances, enlarged tongue,
enlarged extremitiesAcromegaly Growth hormone (GH)
Weight gain, muscle weakness,
striae, obesity, amenrrhoea, moon
faciesCushing’s syndrome Serum cortisol
Obesity, snoring, daytime
somnolenceObstructive sleep apnea
(OSA)Polysomnography
Enlarged palpable kidneys, family
history positiveAutosomal dominant
polycystic kidney disease
(ADPKD)Ultrasound abdomen
Proteinuria, elevated serum
creatinine, edema, anemiaChronic kidney disease
(CKD)Ultrasound
Abdominal/renal bruit Renovascular cause MR angiogram
Fatigue, hypokalemia,
hypernatremiaAldosteronism Plasma renin to aldosterone ratio,
MRI abdomen
Objectives of clinical examinationIdentify any underlying cause of hypertension
Recognize risk factors that lead to complications
Abnormal signs to detect complications if already developed.
Nonspecific findings: Optic fundi may be abnormal; there may be evidence
of generalized atheroma or specific complications, such as aortic aneurysm or
peripheral vascular disease. Findings and specific investigations in various
secondary hypertension are mentioned in Table 7.49.
Q. Write short note on causes and investigations of secondary
hypertension.
Target Organ Damage (Complications of Hypertension)
Q. Write short essay or note on complications of hypertension/target
organ damage in systemic arterial hypertension.
Target organ damage in hypertension can be clinically detected.
Central Nervous System Complications

Transient ischemic attacks (TIAs): Carotid atheroma and TIAs are more
common in patients with hypertension.
Cerebrovascular accidents (strokes) is a common complication of
hypertension and may be due to cerebral hemorrhage or infarction (due to
cerebral atherothrombosis)Subarachnoid hemorrhage is also a complication of hypertension
Hypertensive encephalopathy is a rare complication characterized by
very high blood pressure, neurological manifestations (includes transient
disturbances in speech and vision, paresthesias, seizures, disorientation,
loss of consciousness) and papilledema.
Fig. 7.37:  Fundus image of hypertensive retinopathy.
Ophthalmic (Retinal) Complications
Q. Write short essay or note on grades of hypertensive retinopathy.
Hypertensive retinopathy (Table 7.50 and Fig. 7.37).
Cardiovascular Complications
Coronary artery disease (angina, myocardial infarction): Increased
cardiac mortality and morbidity associated with hypertension are chiefly
due to a higher incidence of coronary artery disease. High BP may
produce left ventricular hypertrophy with a forceful apex beat and fourth
heart sound. ECG or echocardiography is useful in risk assessment.

Left ventricular failure and pulmonary edema: May develop with
severe hypertension.
Atrial fibrillation  is common and may be due to diastolic dysfunction
caused by left ventricular hypertrophy or the effects of coronary artery
disease.
Table 7.50: Grading of hypertensive retinopathy—Keith-Wagener-Barker
classification.
Grade 1:  Mild narrowing of the arterioles—‘copper wire’
Grade 2:  Moderate narrowing—copper wire and AV nicking, changes associated with long standing
essential hypertension
Grade 3:  Severe narrowing—silver wire changes, hemorrhage, cotton wool spots, hard exudates
Grade 4:  Grade 3 + papilledema. Grade 3 and 4 highly correlated with progression to end-organ
damage and decreased survival
Blood Vessels
Larger arteries show thickening of the internal elastic lamina, hypertrophy of
smooth muscle and deposition of fibrous tissue. Smaller arteries show hyaline
arteriosclerosis in the wall, narrowing of the lumen and aneurysm.
Atherosclerosis may develop in coronary and cerebral blood vessel.
Hypertension is a major risk factor involved in the pathogenesis of aneurysm
of aorta and dissecting hematoma of aorta (aortic dissection).
Renal Complications
Long-standing hypertension may cause damage the renal vasculature and
produce (1) proteinuria, (2) hematuria and (3) progressive renal failure.
Investigations
Basic investigations in all patientsUrinalysis:  For protein, blood and glucose.
Blood urea and creatinine:  To assess renal function.
Serum electrolytes:  For hypokalemia (is usually due to diuretic therapy) and alkalosis in
hyperaldosteronism
Fasting and post-prandial blood glucose:  For hyperglycemia
Lipid profile:  Serum total cholesterol and HDL cholesterol
Electrocardiogram:  12-lead ECG for left ventricular hypertrophy, coronary artery disease.
Secondary investigations in selected patients

Chest radiograph: For detecting the cardiac size, evidence of cardiac
failure and aortic dilatation, coarctation of the aorta
Ambulatory BP recording: To detect borderline, masked hypertension or
‘white coat’ hypertension.
Echocardiogram: To detect or quantify left ventricular hypertrophy and
function.
Renal ultrasound: To detect renal disease
MRI, renal isotope scan and renal angiography: To detect or confirm
renal artery stenosis
Urinary catecholamines: To detect pheochromocytoma
Urinary cortisol and dexamethasone suppression test: To detect
Cushing’s syndrome
Thyroid function tests: To detect hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism
Serum calcium and parathyroid hormone level: To detect
hyperparathyroidism
Plasma renin activity and aldosterone: To detect possible primary
aldosteronism
Growth hormone: To detect acromegaly.
Treatment
Objective of antihypertensive therapy: To reduce the incidence of adverse cardiovascular events
(e.g. coronary artery disease), stroke and heart failure.
Target blood pressure:  For most patients, a target is <140 mm Hg systolic blood pressure and
≈85 mm Hg diastolic blood pressure. For patients with diabetes, renal impairment or established
cardiovascular disease the target is <130/80 mm Hg.
Management of hypertension can be studied under three headings.
General measures
Antihypertensive drug therapy
Treatment of underlying cause (in secondary hypertension).
Table 7.51: Various antihypertensive drugs (dose).
Diuretics
1. Thiazide diuretics
Chlorothalidone/hydrochlorothiazide (12.5–25 mg once daily)
Chlorothiazide (125–500 mg once daily)
Indapamide (1.25–2.5 mg once daily)

Metolazone (2.5–5.0 mg once daily)
2. Loop diuretics
Furosemide (10–40 mg twice daily)
Bumetanide (0.5–1.0 mg twice daily)
Torsemide (2.5–10 mg once daily)
3. Potassium-sparing diuretics
Amiloride (5–10 mg once daily)
Triamterene (25–100 mg once daily)
4. Aldosterone-receptor blockers
Spironolactone (25–100 mg once daily)
Eplerenone (50–100 mg once daily)
β-blockers
Propranolol (20–80 mg twice or thrice daily)
Metoprolol (25–100 mg twice daily)
Atenolol (25–100 mg once daily)
Bisoprolol (2.5–10 mg once daily)
Nebivolol (5–10 mg once daily)
Combined  α- and β-blockers
Carvedilol (6.25–25 mg twice daily)
Labetalol (100–900 mg twice daily)
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
Enalapril (2.5–20 mg once daily or twice daily)
Captopril (12.5–50 mg thrice daily)
Lisinopril (2.5–40 mg once daily)
Ramipril (2.5–20 mg once daily)
Perindopril (2–8 mg once daily)
Quinapril (10–80 mg once daily)
Angiotensin II receptor antagonists
Losartan (25–50 mg twice daily)
Candesartan (8–32 mg once daily)

Irbesartan (75–300 mg once daily)
Valsartan (80–320 mg once daily)
Telmisartan (20–80 mg once daily)
Olmesartan, Azilsartan (20–40 mg once daily)
Direct renin inhibitors
Aliskiren (75–300 mg once daily)
Calcium channel blockers
Nifedipine (SR)(30–60 mg once daily)
Verapamil and diltiazem (40–160 mg twice daily)
Diltiazem (SR)(90–360 mg once daily)
Amlodipine and felodipine (2.5–20 mg once daily)
Nicardipine (SR)(60–120 mg twice daily)
α-blockers
Prazosin (1–4 mg once daily or twice daily)
Terazosin (1–20 mg once daily)
Doxazosin (1–16 mg once daily)
Direct vasodilators
Hydralazine (12.5–50 mg twice daily)
Minoxidil (1.25–40 mg twice daily)
Central α 2-blockers and other centrally acting drugs
Clonidine (0.05–0.3 mg twice daily)
Alpha-methyldopa (250–1000 mg four times/day)
Reserpine (0.05–0.25 mg once daily)
Moxonidine (0.2–0.3 mg once daily or twice daily)
A. General Measures
Q. Write short essay/note on non-pharmacological treatment of hypertension.
Lifestyle modifications:  Recommended for all patients with hypertension and pre-hypertension.
A reduction in systolic blood pressure of 5 mm Hg has been associated with about 10% reduction
in mortality caused by stroke and heart disease:
–   Control of obesity: Maintain normal body weight (BMI 20–25 kg/m)
–   Diet: Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension or DASH  eating plan.
♦   Restrict salt in the diet (<100 mEq sodium or <6 g NaCl or <2.4 g Na/day).

♦   Reduce intake of fat and saturated fat.
♦   Increase consumption of diet rich in fruit vegetables (≥5 portions of fresh fruit and
vegetables/day), potassium.
♦   Limit/reduce alcohol consumption to ≤3 units/day men and ≤2 units/day women.
Cardiovascular risk reduction: Stop/avoid cigarette smoking and increase intake of oily fish.
Regular aerobic/physical exercises: Perform ≥30 min brisk walk most days of the week.
Relaxation classes, meditation and biofeedback.
Q. Write short essay or note on various types of antihypertensive drugs.
B. Antihypertensive Drug Therapy (Table 7.51)
Q. Write short note on α adrenergic blockers.
Diuretics
Indications include heart failure, elderly and systolic hypertension
–   Thiazide diuretics
♦   Adverse drug reactions: These include impotence, postural hypotension, allergic rashes,
bone marrow depression, hypokalemia, hyperuricemia, hypercalcemia and impaired glucose
tolerance/diabetes.
♦   Used as first-line agent in elderly patients with systolic hypertension. If blood pressure is
not controlled with a thiazide diuretic, add ACE inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers or
calcium channel blockers.
♦   Loop diuretics:  Furosemide or others are used if there is renal impairment or when greater
sodium excretion is needed or they are used in conjunction with an ACE inhibitor.
β-adrenoreceptor antagonists (β-blockers)
Q. Write short essay or note on β-blockers, uses and its side effects.
Uses and contraindications for β -blockers are mentioned in Table 7.52. Beta blockers are no longer
used as first-line antihypertensive therapy. They may be useful in following situations in:
Younger individuals, particularly who have an intolerance or contraindication to ACE inhibitors
and angiotensin II receptor antagonists.
Women of childbearing potential
Patients with increased sympathetic drive
Patients having hypertension and other diseases such as coronary heart disease (post-myocardial
infarction or angina), heart failure.
Nonselective (β 1 and β 2)
Mechanism of action:  Sympatholytic effect, antihypertensive effect, and relief of anxiety,
palpitation and angina. Large portion of the drug is destroyed during its passage through liver, e.g.
–  Dosage: Started with 40 mg twice a day and gradually increased to 160 mg 6 hourly. Slow-
release forms are administered as a single daily dose, e.g. propranolol
–   Side effects:  Gastric disturbances, bronchospasm, bradycardia, cardiac failure, tiredness, bad
dreams, hallucinations, cold hands and muscle weakness.
Cardioselective (β 1)
Mechanisms of action: They act more on the cardiac β 1-adrenoceptors than β 2-adrenoceptors that
mediate vasodilatation and bronchodilatation. Examples: Metaprolol and atenolol
Dose: Metaprolol 50 mg twice daily to 100 mg thrice daily, atenolol 50–100 mg once daily and
bisoprolol 5–10 mg daily. Sustained release preparation of metoprolol is given in the dose of 12.5–

100 mg once daily.
Indications
–   Hypertensive with mild airway obstruction (COPD, asthma), peripheral vascular disease and
type 1 diabetes. However, caution is necessary.
–   Ischemic heart disease and supraventricular tachycardia.
Side effect:  Similar to propranolol and also cause hyperkalemia.
Combined α- and β-blockers (labetalol and carvedilol)
Sometimes these combined β- and α-adrenoceptor antagonists are more effective than pure β-
blockers.
Mechanism of action and side effects:  Similar to propranolol.
Dose: Labetalol 100–200 mg twice daily and carvedilol 6.25–25 mg twice daily. Labetalol can be
used as an infusion in the treatment of malignant phase hypertension.
Table 7.52: Uses and contraindications for β -blockers.
Uses of β-blockers
Angina pectoris
Cardiac arrhythmias
Acute myocardial infarction and
post-myocardial infarction
period (to prevent re-infarction)
Dissecting aortic aneurysm
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Fallot’s tetralogy (cyanotic
spells)Hypertension
Thyrotoxicosis
Pheochromocytoma
Anxiety with somatic symptoms
Chronic open-angle glaucoma
Portal hypertension
Migraine prophylaxis
Essential tremor
Contraindications of β-blockers
Chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease and asthma
Cardiac failure (?)
Heart blockPeripheral vascular disease
Diabetes mellitus (masks
sympathetic signs of
hypoglycemia)
Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
Q. Write short essay or note on mechanism of action, indications and side effects of
angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors.
Q. Write short note on ramipril.
These include captopril, enalapril (20 mg daily), lisinopril (10–40 mg daily), ramipril (5–10 mg
daily), perindopril (refer page 489).

Mechanisms of action: They inhibit the conversion of angiotensin I to angiotensin II and produce
powerful arteriolar and venous dilatation, and inhibit release of aldosterone.
Dosage: Start with a small dose (captopril 6.25 mg and enalapril 2.5 mg) and then gradually
increase.
Indication:  Used in hypertension, chronic cardiac failure or left ventricular dysfunction, post-
myocardial infarction or cardiovascular disease, diabetic nephropathy, stroke secondary
prevention.
Contraindication: Renal failure (creatinine >3 mg/dL) and bilateral renal artery stenosis because
they can reduce the filtration pressure in the glomeruli and precipitate renal failure. Electrolytes
and creatinine levels should be checked before and 1–2 weeks after starting therapy. Other
contraindications include peripheral vascular disease hyperkalemia and pregnancy.Adverse reaction:  First-dose postural hypotension, cough, angioedema, skin rashes, blood
dyscrasias, hyperkalemia, renal dysfunction neuropathy and diarrhea.
Peripheral vasodilators
Mechanism of action:  Act on arteriolar smooth muscles or smooth muscles of venules and
produce peripheral arteriolar and venous dilatation.
Drugs include hydralazine, prazosin (alpha blocker), diazoxide, sodium nitroprusside.
Angiotensin receptor blockers
Q. Write short essay or note on angiotensin receptor blockers and indications.
Mechanism of action:  They block the angiotensin II type I receptor and have similar effects to
ACE inhibitors. Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) plays an important role in the
regulation of blood pressure.
–   Renin catalyzes cleavage of angiotensinogen and produces angiotensin I.
–   Angiotensin I is converted to angiotensin II by the action of ACE. Angiotensin II is the most
active hormone of the renin-angiotensin system. There are two angiotensin II receptors namely
AT1 (most effective) and AT2 (its function is not established).
–   When angiotensin II binds to its AT1 receptor, it mediates produces many effects such as
vasoconstriction, cell proliferation, hypertrophy and aldosterone secretion, provides feedback
inhibition of further renin release by the kidney.
–   The angiotensin receptor blockers block the action of angiotensin II by blocking AT1
receptors.Dose: Losartan 50–100 mg daily, candesartan 2.0–32 mg daily, valsartan 40–320 mg daily,
telmisartan 40 mg daily, olmesartan 10–40 mg daily, irbesartan, azilsartan (40–80 mg daily).
Side effects:  These drugs are better tolerated than ACE inhibitors. Side effects include
hypotension, drowsiness and dizziness. Does not cause cough.
Indications:  ACE inhibitor intolerant hypertension, <55 years old, hypertension with LVH, heart
failure or left ventricular dysfunction, myocardial infarction (to reduce myocardial remodeling),
diabetic nephropathy (to slow its progression) and chronic renal disease.
Calcium channel blockers (calcium antagonists)
Q. Write short essay or note on uses/indications of calcium channel blockers and its side
effects.
Table 7.53: Indications of calcium channel blockers.
Angina pectoris/Prinzmetal’s Peripheral vasospastic

angina
Hypertension and hypertensive
crisis
Cardiac arrhythmias
Elderly patients with systolic
hypertension
Congestive cardiac failure
Valvular diseases (mitral and
aortic regurgitation)
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathyconditions, e.g. Raynaud’s
disease, migraine
Pulmonary hypertension
Cor pulmonale (chronic
bronchitis with pulmonary
hypertension)
Subarachnoid hemorrhage (to
prevent vasospasm)
Achalasia cardia
Biliary dyskinesia
They are effective and usually well-tolerated antihypertensive drugs. Various indications of
calcium channel blockers are listed in Table 7.53.
Contraindications:  Unstable angina, heart failure, hypotension, post- infarct patients, severe
aortic stenosis, 2nd and 3rd degree AV block.
Side-effects:  Flushing, palpitations and fluid retention. The main side effect of verapamil is
constipation.
Nifedipine and verapamil
(refer page 418)
Dosage: Nifedipine 10–20 mg three to four times daily and verapamil 180–360 mg/day in divided
doses. Short-acting nifedipine should be avoided.
Centrally acting drugs
Reserpine:  It is a mild antihypertensive with central and peripheral action. It is given in the dose of
0.1–0.5 mg daily. Its side effects include nasal congestion, depression and Parkinsonism.
α methyldopa:  It is a precursor of dopamine and noradrenaline
Mechanism of action:  Converted to α-methyl noradrenaline which acts on alpha-2 receptors in
brain and causes inhibition of adrenergic discharge in adrenal medulla → fall in peripheral
vascular resistance and fall in blood pressure.
Side effects:  Cognitive impairment, postural hypotension, positive Coomb’s test, etc. Not used
therapeutically now except in hypertension during pregnancy.
Dose: 250–500 mg twice or thrice daily.
Clonidine:  Not frequently used because of tolerance and withdrawal hypertension. Side effect is
dryness of mouth. Dose: 0.1–1.0 mg daily.
Newer antihypertensive agents are listed in Table 7.54.
Table 7.54: Newer antihypertensive agents.
Direct renin inhibitor Aliskiren
Protein kinase C inhibitors Staurosporin

Calcium channel blocker Cilnidipine, azelnidipine, clevidipine
Non-selective β-blocker and weak α-blocker Bucindolol
Chymase inhibitors SPF-32629A
Prostacycline analog Treprostinil
Serotonin receptor antagonist Ketanserin
Endothelin receptor antagonist Ambrisentan, sitasenten, bosentan, darusentan
Advanced glycation end product (AGE) crosslink
breakerAlagebrium
Phosphodiesterase type 5 (PDE5) inhibitor Sildenafil
Fig. 7.38: Choosing antihypertensive drug and its combinations for patients newly diagnosed with
hypertension.
Guidelines for starting antihypertensive agents (Fig. 7.38)
Recommendations in hypertension management suggested by JNC8
(Table 7.55)
Q. Discuss the recommendations in hypertension management
suggested by JNC8.
Table 7.55: JNC8 recommendations in hypertension management.
1. Elderly: In the general population aged ≥60 years:  Start drug treatment to reduce BP of

≥150/90 mm Hg AND Treat patients for blood pressure goal of <150/90 mm Hg
2. Diastolic blood pressure:  In general individuals aged <60 years: Initiate drug treatment to
reduce diastolic BP of ≥90 mm Hg AND Treat patients for diastolic BP goal of <90 mm
Hg
3. Systolic blood pressure:  In general individuals aged <60 years: Initiate drug treatment to
reduce systolic BP of ≥140 mm Hg AND Treat patients for systolic BP goal of <140 mm
Hg
4. Chronic kidney disease: In the population aged ≥18 years with chronic kidney
disease:  Initiate drug treatment to reduce BP of ≥140/90 mm Hg AND  Treat patients for
BP goal of <140/90 mm Hg
5. Diabetes mellitus: In the population aged ≥18 years with diabetes:  Initiate drug
treatment to reduce BP of ≥140/90 mm Hg AND Treat patients for BP goal of <140/90
mm Hg
6. Non-black-first line: In the non-black individuals, including patients with diabetes
recommend antihypertensive treatment with the following: Thiazide-type diuretic, calcium
channel blocker (CCB), angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor (ACEI), or angiotensin
receptor blocker (ARB)
7. Black-first line: In the black individuals, including patients with diabetes:
Recommend antihypertensive treatment with:
Thiazide-type diuretic OR  calcium channel blocker (CCB)
8. Chronic kidney disease-first line or add on in adults aged ≥18 years with chronic
kidney disease and hypertension:
Initial or add-on antihypertensive treatment to improve kidney outcomes with: An ACEI
OR An ARB
9.Do not combine ACEI and ARB
If BP goal is not reached within 1 month of treatment  increase the dose of the drug or
add 2nd drug and if not reached with 2 drugs, add and titrate a third drug from the
above mentioned class.
If goal BP cannot be reached using only the drugs from class of thiazide-type diuretic,
CCB, ACEI, or ARB due to some contraindication or the need to use more than 3 drugs
to reach goal BP, antihypertensive drugs from other classes can be added.
Hypertensive Encephalopathy
Q. Discuss briefly about hypertensive crisis/hypertensive emergencies.
It is more generalized  term and is not defined by a specific blood pressure
reading.
It develops in previously hypertensive/normotensive patients.
It is a clinical syndrome that is associated with acute severe or abrupt
elevation of blood pressure. Characterized by severe increase in systolic
and/or diastolic blood pressure associated with signs or symptoms of acute
end-organ damage.

No blood pressure threshold for diagnosis. Usually, systolic blood
pressure >180–220 mm Hg, diastolic blood pressure >120–130 mm Hg
and mean arterial pressure (MAP) >180 mm Hg
Increased cerebral blood flow → hyperfiltration → localized or diffuse
cerebral edema → cerebral ischemia resulting from arteriolar spasm.
Severe headache, vomiting, visual disturbances, confusion, focal or
generalized seizures.
Fundoscopy examination (key role): Papilledema
It includes: (1) hypertensive emergency, and (2) hypertensive urgency.
Hypertensive Emergencies
Reason includes renovascular disease, pheochromocytoma, non-adherence to
antihypertensive medication, hyperaldosteronism, erythropoietin
administration, acute glomerular nephropathy and eclampsia.
Hypertensive Urgency
Severe elevation in BP >180/120 mm Hg without symptoms or signs of
acute target organ involvement.
Adequate treatment of these conditions, a BP lowering within 24 hours by
administration of oral drugs.
ICU admission is usually not required.
Treatment:  Requires an immediate BP reduction in few minutes to hours in an ICU care and brought
by IV drugs.
‘Malignant’ or ‘Accelerated’ Phase Hypertension
Q. Write short essay or a note on accelerated hypertension.
It is a rare condition that may complicate hypertension of any etiology. It
occurs when blood pressure rises rapidly with severe hypertension
(diastolic blood pressure >120 mm Hg). Histologically it is characterized
by fibrinoid necrosis in the walls of small arteries and arterioles and
intravascular thrombosis.Diagnosis: Presence of high BP and rapidly progressive end-organ
damage, such as retinopathy (grade 3 or 4 with flame- shaped
hemorrhages, cotton wool spots, hard exudates and papilledema), renal
dysfunction (e.g. proteinuria, hematuria) and/or cerebral edema and

hemorrhage with resultant hypertensive encephalopathy. Left ventricular
failure may develop.
If this is untreated, it may lead to death within months from progressive
renal failure, heart failure, aortic dissection or stroke.
Q. Write short essay or note on treatment of hypertensive crisis
(hypertensive emergencies).
Q. Discuss the management of accelerated/malignant hypertension.
Management of Hypertensive Emergencies
Normalization of BP is usually not recommended.
Sudden fall in BP may cause acute hypoperfusion of vital organs and results in myocardial
ischemia or infarction, hemiplegia, or acute renal failure.
Older patients with long lasting hypertension and preclinical organ involvement (LVH,
atherosclerosis and arteriolar remodelling) are at risk of these complications as the lower limit of
autoregulation shifted to right.
How fast and how much BP to be lowered to be given importanceGoal: Reduce mean arterial pressure (MAP) by no more than 20–25%, diastolic blood pressure
(DBP) to 100–110 mm Hg within few minutes to 2 hours.
More aggressive and rapid BP reduction needed in acute pulmonary edema and aortic dissection.
More slow reduction needed for acute cerebrovascular damages with monitoring of neurological
status.
Constant infusion of intravenous agents required (no intermittent IV boluses/oral/sublingual drugs
—drastic BP fall).
Various hypertensive emergencies and their treatment are presented in Table
7.56.
Drugs used in hypertensive emergencies and their dosage, action and adverse
effects are presented in Table 7.57.
Resistant Hypertension
Q. Write short note on resistant hypertension.
Definition: Resistant hypertension is defined as blood pressure above goal
(>140/90 mm Hg; >130–139/80–85 mm Hg in patients with diabetes
mellitus; >130/80 mm Hg in chronic kidney disease), despite treatment with
≥3 antihypertensive drugs of different classes, including a diuretic, at optimal
doses.Resistant hypertension is observed in about 10–20% of patients with
hypertension.

Almost 50% of these patients experience an adverse cardiovascular event
compared with patients with blood pressure controlled by three or fewer
antihypertensive agents. Non-compliance to medication is an important
cause.Diagnosis requires exclusion of both pseudo-resistance and reversible or
organic causes.
Table 7.56: Various hypertensive emergencies and their treatment.
Diagnosis Suggested drugs Targets Remarks
Acute aortic dissection Esmolol/labetelol +
nitroprusside would be
a better combinationReduce SBP as rapidly
as possible down to
100–110 mm Hg,
simultaneously control
tachycardia due to the
sympathetic activationAvoid volume
depletion
Use β-blockers before
vasodilators
Hydralazine is
contraindicated
Acute pulmonary
edemaNitroglycerine
infusion, IV
enalaprilat,
Nitroprusside infusion,
IV furosemideReduce blood pressure
by 20–30%Hypotension may
develop with
enalaprilat
Acute coronary
syndromeNitroglycerine infusion
b-blockers (metoprolol
or labetalol)Reduce blood pressure
by not more than 20–
30%Beware of hypotension
in right ventricular
infarction
Avoid hypotension
Acute renal failure Labetalol IV,
nicardipine infusion,
dialysisReduce blood pressure
not more than 20–30%Avoid nitroprusside
and ACE inhibitors
Subarachnoid
hemorrhageLabetalol bolus and
infusion
Esmolol bolus and
infusion
Nicardipine infusionSystolic pressure <160
mm Hg or mean
arterial pressure <130
mm Hg (to reduce
recurrence)Control of pain will
help in BP control
Intracranial bleed Labetalol and infusion
Nitroglycerine infusion
Nimodipine, a
dihydropyridine
calcium blocker is
effectiveTo prevent rebleeding
and reduce edema
formation. May benefit
from gradual 20–25%
reduction in BPAvoid lowering blood
pressure by more than
10–15% in 24 hours
Hypertensive
encephalopathyIV sodium
nitroprusside is the
drug of choice, rapid
onset of action). IV
labetalol, nicardipine,Mean BP should be
reduced by 20% within
first hour

hydralazine
Table 7.57: Drugs used in hypertensive emergencies.
Drug Initial dose
(mg)Onset
(minutes)Duration
(hours)Adverse effects
Labetalol 200–400 30–120 2–12 Orthostatic hypotension,
bronchoconstriction
Clonidine 0.150–0.300 30–60 8–16 Hypotension, dry mouth
Prazosin 1–2 60–120 8–12 Syncope (first dose), tachycardia
Nicardipine 20–40 30–60 8–12 Headache, tachycardia
Amlodipine 5–10 60–120 12–18 Headache, flushing
Captopril 25–50 15–45 6–8 Renal failure in bilateral renal
artery stenosis
Treatments for resistant hypertensionNon-pharmacologic intervention:  Reinforce lifestyle changes.
Drug intervention:  Look for drug compliance, optimize doses. Add drugs from other classes.
Device therapy:  Two techniques
1. Percutaneous transluminal radiofrequency sympathetic denervation of the renal arteries.
2. Carotid baroreflex activation.
Medical therapy: Aldosterone antagonist, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and
angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs) plus chlorthalidone.
Percutaneous angioplasty with or without stent placement.
Surgical revascularization or, nephrectomy in unilateral cases.
RHEUMATIC HEART DISEASE
Q. Define rheumatic fever. Discuss the etiology, risk factors,
pathogenesis, clinical features, investigations, diagnosis,
complications and management of rheumatic fever.
Definition: Rheumatic fever (RF) is an acute, post-streptococcal, immune-
mediated, multisystem inflammatory disease. It occurs as a sequel to group
A streptococcal pharyngitis.
Multisystem disease affecting connective tissue particularly of the heart,
joints, brain, cutaneous and subcutaneous tissues.
Two Major Phases
Acute rheumatic fever (ARF):  It frequently manifest as acute rheumatic

carditis.
Chronic rheumatic heart disease (RHD) is the permanent heart valve
damage resulting from one or more attacks of ARF. About 40–60% of
patients with ARF will develop RHD. The commonest valve affected is
the mitral followed by aortic,in that order. However, all four valves can be
affected. The deforming fibrotic valvular lesions are the principal/key
features of chronic RHD.
Epidemiology and IncidenceAge group: Most common in children between 5 and 15 years. It is rare
<3 years of age.
Sex: Both sexes are equally affected. However, certain clinical
manifestations, such as mitral stenosis and Sydenham chorea have a
female preponderance after pubertySocioeconomic conditions: Rheumatic fever is a worldwide disease and it
is prevalent in regions with poor economic conditions, overcrowding and
substandard housing. Incidence and mortality rate of RF and RHD have
markedly decreased over the past century, due to improved socioeconomic
conditions and rapid diagnosis and treatment of streptococcal pharyngitis.
In India, the annual incidence is 0.18 to 0.3 per 1000 school children.Poor economy and overcrowding: It is a predisposing factor in
developing countries. It is a major cause of death and disability in children
and adolescents in socioeconomically deprived regions.
EtiologyAcute rheumatic fever is a post-streptococcal disease.
It develops after a latent period of 2 to 6 weeks after an episode of
pharyngitis (sore throat) or tonsillitis by group A β-hemolytic streptococci.
It occurs most often in children.Rheumatogenic potential of various serotypes of group A streptococci
vary. M-protein is one of the well-defined determinants of bacterial
virulence. M-type 5 is commonly responsible for rheumatic fever and
other rheumatogenic sero-types include 1, 3, 5, 14, 18, 19 and 24. M-type
12 is highly prevalent, but usually does cause rheumatic fever.Recently virus (coxsackie B-4) has been suggested as causative agent with
streptococcus acting as conditioning agent.

Pathogenesis (Fig. 7.39)
Immunologically mediated disease: Exact pathogenesis of rheumatic fever
is not known. Streptococcal infection introduces the streptococcal antigens
into the body may activate both antibody and T cell–mediated reactions
against streptococci.
Molecular Mimicry
Antibodies may be produced by B-lymphocytes against various antigenic
components of the Streptococcus.
These antibodies cross react with human tissues because of the antigenic
similarity between streptococcal components and human connective
tissues (molecular mimicry). One of them produced against the M-proteins
of streptococci seems to cross-react with certain similar self-antigens in
the myocardial cells and glycoproteins of the valves in the heart. This may
be the mechanism for pancarditis in acute rheumatic fever.Immunologically mediated inflammation and damage (autoimmune) to
human tissues which have antigenic similarity with streptococcal
components—like heart, joint, brain connective tissues.
Fig. 7.39: Pathogenesis of rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease.
Streptococcal Super Antigens
Super antigens are glycoproteins synthesized by bacteria and viruses. They
can bridge class II major histocompatibility complex molecules to specific
T-cell receptors, simulating antigen binding and activation of CD4+ T-

cells. These T-cells along with antibodies cross react with self-proteins
in the heart. These reactions produce cytokines leading to activation of
macrophages, which are seen in lesions of rheumatic fever.
Host Factors
Rheumatic fever occurs in a susceptible host and only 0.3–3% of
individuals with acute streptococcal pharyngitis develops rheumatic fever.
In India, HLA-DR3 is associated more frequently in patients with
rheumatic fever and rheumatic fever has low frequency of HLA-DR2.
Clinical Manifestations
Acute rheumatic fever is a multisystem disorder. It usually presents with
fever, anorexia, lethargy and joint pain.
Previous history of sore throat: Only two-thirds of patients remember
having any upper respiratory symptoms (episode of streptococcal
pharyngitis) in the past 2–3 weeks.
Migrating PolyarthritisMost common major manifestation. It occurs early when streptococcal antibody titers are high in
about 75–90% of patients.
It is acute, painful, migratory, and asymmetric and is of short duration (fleeting and flitting).
Usually >5 joints are affected and mainly involves large joints (knees, ankles, wrists, elbows,
shoulders). The joints are involved in quick succession. Small joints and cervical spine less
commonly involved.Involved joints show signs of inflammation (red, swollen and tender) with or without effusion.
Pain and swelling develops quickly and subsides within 5–7 days. Arthritis does not progress to
chronic disease and over a period of time involved joints heal without any residual deformity (licks
the joints).Excellent response of high dose aspirin (salicylates) and NSAIDs.
Jaccoud’s arthritis  is a rare deformity of the metacarpophalangeal joints following repeated
attacks of rheumatic fever.
In children below 5 years, arthritis is usually mild but carditis is more prominent
Poststreptococcal Reactive Arthritis (PSRA)
Arthritis developing after an episode of Group A streptococcal pharyngitis
without other major criteria of acute rheumatic fever is known as PSRA.
PSRA develops 10 days after pharyngitis, can involve large joints, small
joints or axial skeleton, cumulative and persistent and does not respond to
acetylsalicylic acid.

In contrast, arthritis of rheumatic fever develops 2 to 3 weeks after an
episode of Group A streptococcal pharyngitis, migratory and transient, and
usually involves only the large joints and responds well to acetylsalicylic
acid.A small percentage of PSRA patients may subsequently develop valvular
heart disease. Hence, patients should be followed up carefully for several
months to look for evidence of carditis.
Carditis
Q. Write short essay/note on diagnosis of rheumatic fever.
Early and most serious manifestation that occur in 60–70% of patients
It manifest as pancarditis involving all three layers of the heart
(endocardium, myocardium, and pericardium). On microscopic
examination myocardium shows Aschoff body that is pathognomonic of
rheumatic myocarditis. Rheumatic endocarditis may involve valvular
(valvular endocarditis) or mural endocardium (mural endocarditis).
Rheumatic pericarditis produces pericardial effusion and thick fibrino-
serous exudates.Carditis leaves a sequelae and permanent damage to the organ (bites the
heart).
Valvular damage is the hallmark of RF. Chronic phase is characterized by
fibrosis, calcification and stenosis of heart valves (fish-mouth valves).
It is more common in younger children, and may be asymptomatic. It is
detected only on echocardiograph.

Manifestations of carditis
Pancarditis involves the endocardium, myocardium and pericardium.
Incidence of carditis decreases with increasing age. It ranges from 90% at 3
years to around 30% in adolescence.
Myocarditis
–   Tachycardia: Disproportionate to fever and persists during sleep.
–   Features of congestive heart failure: Breathlessness (due to heart
failure or pericardial effusion). Cardiac failure may be either caused by
dysfunction of myocardium or valvular regurgitation.
–   Physical examination may reveal third heart sound (S3), fourth heart
sound (S4) or a summation gallop.
–   Arrhythmias, prolongation of PR interval being the commonest.
Endocarditis: Murmurs are most commonly observed during acute
rheumatic fever. It may be a new or changed murmurs and includes:
–   Apical pansystolic murmur is a high-pitched, blowing-quality murmur
of mitral regurgitation that radiates to the left axilla.
Q. Write short note on Carey Coombs murmur.
–   Apical soft mid-diastolic murmur (also known as a Carey-Coombs
murmur) is heard during active carditis due to valvulitis with nodules
forming on the mitral valve leaflets. It accompanies severe mitral
insufficiency.
–   An early diastolic murmur of aortic regurgitation and is high-pitched,
blowing, decrescendo, and heard best along the right upper and mid-
left sternal border after deep expiration while the patient is leaning
forward.Pericarditis
–   Chest/pericardial pain (due to pericarditis or pancarditis)
–   Pericardial friction rub and precordial tenderness
–   Pericardial effusion (uncommon and always small). Rheumatic
pericarditis never causes constriction.
Other clinical features of acute rheumatic carditis: These include
palpitations, cardiac enlargement (cardiomegaly) and syncope due to
conduction defects.

Skin Lesions
Q. Write short essay/note on skin lesions in acute rheumatic fever.
Subcutaneous nodules
Occur in 9–20% of cases and often associated with carditis.
Appears as a small (0.5–2.0 cm), painless, mobile hard nodules beneath
skin appears 4 weeks after onset of RF. Thus, it helps to confirm rather
than make the diagnosis.
Most common along extensor surfaces of joint-knees, elbows, wrists and
also on bony prominences, tendons, dorsum of feet, occipital or cervical
spine.Delayed manifestation, disappears: Leaves no residual damage.
Erythema marginatum
Occur in <7% and often associated with chronic carditis and are
evanescent.
Unique, transient, serpiginous-looking lesions of 1–2 inches in size.
Pink/red macules clear centrally, serpiginous spreading edge. More on
trunks and limbs, non-itchy and almost never on the face. The resulting
red rings or ‘margins’ may coalesce or overlap.Worsens with application of heat.
Chorea (Sydenham’s chorea, Chorea Minor, Saint Vitus Dance)(refer
pages 449-50)
Others
Epistaxis, arthralgia, tender lymph nodes, scarlet fever rash, abdominal
pain, tonsillar exudates in older children, etc.
Systemic manifestations are rare and include pleurisy, pleural effusion and
pneumonia.
Duration of Attack of Rheumatic Fever
Acute rheumatic fever: Average duration of an untreated acute attack is
about 3 months.
Chronic rheumatic fever: It is defined as persistence of disease for more
than 6 months. It occurs in less than 5% of patients and may lead to
persisting congestive heart failure.

Laboratory Investigations
Investigations for Evidence of Preceding Streptococcal Infection
(Specific)
Isolation of group A streptococci/Throat swab culture: Group A β-
hemolytic streptococci is usually in only 10–25% of cases. It can be done
also in family members and contacts. However, serologic tests are usually
done to show the evidence of streptococcal infection.Streptococcal antibody tests (serologic tests)
–   Serological tests usually confirm a recent group A β-hemolytic
streptococcal infection.
–   Raised streptococcal antibody levels are found in the early stages of
acute rheumatic fever. However, in two situations their levels may be
low:
♦   When the interval between the streptococcal pharyngitis and
detection of rheumatic fever in more than 2 months (e.g. chorea).
♦   In patients with rheumatic carditis only.
–   Common serologic tests
♦   Antistreptolysin O antibodies (ASO titers): Rising titers, or levels of >200 U (adults) or
>300 U (children). This test is positive in 80% of cases. ASO titers are normal in 20% of
adult cases of rheumatic fever and most cases of chorea.
♦   Anti-DNase B
♦   Antihyaluronidase (AH)
♦   Antistreptozyme test (ASTZ) is a very sensitive indicator of recent streptococcal infection
and is also helpful in ruling out rheumatic fever. Titers more than 200 units/mL are
considered positive.
The above four tests when combined together are helps in conforming the diagnosis in 95% of
cases.
Investigations for Evidence of a Systemic Illness (Nonspecific)
Acute phase reactants: These tests confirm the presence of an
inflammatory process, but are nonspecific.
–   Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) is raised.
–   Raised C-reactive protein (CRP) in the blood.
Other tests confirming an inflammatory reaction
–   Peripheral blood: Polymorphonuclear leukocytosis and anemia (due
to suppression of erythropoiesis)

–   Serum: Increase in serum complements, and increase in serum
mucoproteins, α2 and γ globulin levels.
Investigations for Evidence of Carditis
Chest radiography: Chest X-ray may show evidences of cardiac failure,
cardiomegaly, pulmonary congestion.
Electrocardiogram: ECG changes commonly include:
–   Most consistent change is a prolongation of the PR interval and T-
wave inversion.
–   Other findings are rarely second-degree AV block features of
pericarditis and reduction in QRS voltages.
Echocardiography: It can detect myocardial dysfunction, cardiac
dilatation, valvular abnormalities and pericardial effusion.
Diagnosis of Acute Rheumatic Fever
Q. Write short essay/note on diagnosis of rheumatic fever/revised
Dukett Jones criteria for the diagnosis of rheumatic fever.
Diagnosis of acute rheumatic fever (ARF) is made by the presence of
combination of typical clinical features together with evidence of the
precipitating group A streptococci (GAS) infection. This uncertainty led
Dr T Duckett Jones in 1944 to develop a set of criteria known as Jones
Criteria to aid diagnosis.Modified Jones criteria: Presently diagnosis is based on modified Jones
criteria (Table 7.58).
Exceptions to Jones Criteria
Chorea alone, if other causes have been excluded.
Insidious or late-onset carditis (Indolent carditis) with no other
explanation.
Patients with documented RHD or prior rheumatic fever, one major
criterion, or of fever, arthralgia or high CRP suggests recurrence.
Table 7.58 World Health Organization criteria (2002–2003) for the
diagnosis of rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease
(based on the 1992 revised Jones criteria).

Diagnostic categories Criteria
Primary episode of rheumatic fever Two major or one major and two minor
manifestations plus evidence of preceding
group A streptococcal infectionRecurrent attack of rheumatic fever in a patient
without established rheumatic heart disease
Recurrent attack of rheumatic fever in a patient
with established rheumatic heart diseaseTwo minor manifestations plus evidence of
preceding group A streptococcal infection
Rheumatic chorea Other major manifestations or evidence of group
A streptococcal infection not requiredInsidious onset rheumatic carditis
Chronic valve lesions of rheumatic heart disease
(patients presenting for the first time with pure
mitral stenosis or mixed mitral valve disease
and/or aortic valve disease)Do not require any other criteria to be diagnosed
as having rheumatic heart disease
Major manifestations Minor manifestationsCarditis
Polyarthritis
Chorea
Erythema marginatum
Subcutaneous nodulesClinical: Fever, polyarthralgias
Laboratory: Elevated erythrocyte
sedimentation rate or leukocyte count
Electrocardiogram: Prolonged P-R interval
Supporting evidence of a preceding streptococcal infection within the last 45 days
Elevated or rising antistreptolysin O or other streptococcal antibody or
A positive throat culture or
Rapid antigen test for group A Streptococcus  or
Recent scarlet fever
Q. Write short essay/note on treatment of rheumatic fever with carditis.
Management of Acute Rheumatic Fever
Step I: Primary prevention (eradication of streptococci).
Step II: Anti- inflammatory treatment (aspirin, steroids).
Step III: Supportive management and management of complications.
Step IV: Secondary prevention (prevention of recurrent attacks).
Q. Write short essay/note on prophylaxis of rheumatic fever.
Step I: Primary Prevention (Eradication of Streptococci)
Primary prevention is accurate diagnosis and treatment of group A β-hemolytic streptococcal
pharyngeal infection.
Antistreptococcal therapy/primary prevention are mentioned in Table 7.59.
Step II: Anti-inflammatory treatment
Arthritis only
–   Aspirin  usually rapidly relieves the symptoms of arthritis within 24 hours and also helps to
confirm the diagnosis. Aspirin is given in the dose of 75–100 mg/kg body weight/day divided
into 4 doses for 6 weeks (attain a body level 20–30 mg/dL). It should be continued till the ESR
has fallen. It produces mild toxicity such as nausea, tinnitus and deafness and serious toxicity

as vomiting, tachypnea and acidosis.
Carditis or severe arthritis
–   Corticosteroids produce more rapid symptomatic relief compared to aspirin. They are
indicated in patients with carditis or severe arthritis. However, their long-term use is not found
to be beneficial.
–   Prednisolone given in the dose of 1.0–2.0 mg/kg per day in divided doses for 4–6 weeks (until
the ESR is normal) and then to be tapered off.
Step III: Supportive Management and Management of Complications
Bed rest  is important, because it reduces joint pain and cardiac workload.
–   Patients without carditis:  Advice bed rest until temperature and ESR are normal.
–   Patients with carditis:  Bed rest to be continued for 2–6 weeks after the ESR and temperature
has returned to normal. Avoid strenuous exercise in patients who had carditis.
Treatment of congestive cardiac failure:  Digitalis, diuretics.
Treatment of chorea:  Diazepam or haloperidol.
Rest to joints and supportive splinting.
Step IV: Secondary Prevention of Rheumatic Fever (Prevention of Recurrent Attacks)
Patients with acute rheumatic fever are susceptible to further attacks of rheumatic fever if another
streptococcal infection occurs.
Secondary prevention is directed at preventing acute group A β-hemolytic streptococcal (GABHS)
pharyngitis in patients at substantial risk of recurrent acute rheumatic fever by long-term
prophylaxis. Duration of prophylaxis is controversial and its broad outlines are provided in Table
7.60.Regimens for secondary prevention of rheumatic fever are mentioned in Table 7.61.
Table 7.59 Antistreptococcal therapy for primary prevention.
Drug Dose Mode and duration
Benzathine penicillin G OR 600000 U for patients <27 kg
1200000 U for patients >27 kgIntramuscular
Once
Penicillin V
(phenoxymethylpenicillin) ORChildren: 250 mg 2–3 times daily
or adolescents and adults: 500 mg
2–3 times dailyOral for 10 days
Procaine penicillin Daily 6,00,000 units Intramuscular for 10 days
Erythromycin 20–40 mg/kg/day 2–4 times daily
(maximum 1 g/day)Oral for 10 days
Table 7.60 Categories of rheumatic fever and duration of prophylaxis.
Category Duration
Rheumatic fever without carditis At least for 5 years or until age 21 year,
whichever is longer
Rheumatic fever with carditis but without
residual heart disease (no valvular disease)At least for 10 years or well into adulthood,
whichever is longer

Rheumatic fever with carditis and residual heart
disease (persistent valvular disease) and post-
valve surgery casesAt least 10 years since last episode and at least
until age 40 years; sometime lifelong
Table 7.61 Regimens for secondary prevention of rheumatic fever.
Drug Dose Route
Penicillin G benzathine
OR600,000 U for children, ≤27
kg and 1.2 million U for
children >27 kg, every 3 weekIntramuscular
Penicillin V OR 250 mg, twice a day Oral
Sulfadiazine or sulfisoxazole 0.5 g, once a day for patients
≤60 lb; 1.0 g, once a day for
patients >60 lbOral
For individuals who are allergic to penicillin and sulfonamide drugs
Macrolide or azalide
(erythromycin, azithromycin)Variable Oral
Rheumatic Chorea
Q. Write short essay/note on clinical features, diagnosis and treatment
of Sydenham’s chorea.
It is also known as Sydenham’s chorea, Saint Vitus dance, St. Johannis’
chorea, chorea minor or rheumatic chorea.
Definition: Rheumatic chorea is a syndrome characterized by chorea, muscle
weakness and emotional instability.
Etiology
Triggering factor is pharyngeal infection by group A β-hemolytic
streptococci.
Clinical Features
Age and gender: Occur in 5–10% of cases, mainly in girls of 1–15 years
of age.
Onset of chorea: Rheumatic chorea is a late neurological manifestation of
acute rheumatic fever. Usually occurs 3–8 months after the triggering
infection by A β-hemolytic streptococci when all the other signs may have
disappeared. If there is no previous rheumatic manifestation, the term pure
chorea is used.

First sign: Emotional lability, difficulty walking, talking, writing which is
observed in 30% of patients with acute rheumatic fever (ARF).
Characterized by spasmodic, brief, purposeless (unintentional),
involuntary, jerky movements. Choreiform movements particularly affect
the head/face (darting movement of tongue) upper limb hands or feet.
Speech may be affected and may be explosive and halting and fidgety. It
can be unilateral (hemichorea) or bilateral.Mild forms may be difficult to diagnose and following signs are helpful in
these cases:
–   Milkmaid’s grip: When the patient is asked to squeeze the examiner’s
fingers, a squeezing and relaxing motion (like milking a cow) occurs.
This is described as milkmaid’s grip and is due to inability to maintain
muscular contraction.
–   Bag-of-worms appearance is due to asynchronous contractions of the
lingual muscles.
–   Jack-in-the-box sign: When the patient is asked to keep the tongue
protruded out, it retracts involuntarily.
–   Pronator sign: Holding the arms outstretched may elicit ‘spooning’
(hyperextension of the fingers with dorsiflexion of the wrist).Severe forms: Patients is unable to get up or sit, and has violent
continuous jerks that may cause physical injury.
Additional features include hypotonia, pendular knee jerks, and mild
generalized muscular weakness.
Prognosis
Usually benign and spontaneously resolves in 2–3 months. Disappears
leaving no residual damage.
About 25% of affected patients develop chronic rheumatic valve disease.
Management
Rule out other causes of chorea such as systemic lupus erythematosus, Huntington’s disease, and
Wilson’s disease.
Rest: Complete mental and physical rest. Keep the patient in a quiet room.
Padded side-boards for beds to prevent physical injury.
Drugs: Haloperidol or sodium valproate with diazepam. Steroids may be needed in severe cases.
Rheumatic fever prophylaxis (refer pages 448-9).

VALVULAR HEART DISEASE
Mitral Valve
It is called so because it resembles the Bishops ‘mitre’.
Mitral Valve Apparatus
It consists of different components (Box 7.31). Normal mitral valve is
bicuspid (two leaflets), funnel-shaped valve between left atrium and left
ventricle with its apex in the left ventricle. The two valve leaflets are attached
by (about 120) chordae tendineae to two papillary muscles. Mitral valve
orifice is about 4–6 cm2 (average 5 cm2).
Box 7.31: Different components of mitral valve apparatus.
Mitral annulus
Mitral leaflets: (1) anterior mitral leaflet (AML) and (2) posterior mitral leaflet (PML)
Subvalvular apparatus: Chordae tendineae and papillary muscles
Left Ventricular wall where the papillary muscle attaches
Left atrium
Mitral Stenosis
Q. Discuss the etiology, pathophysiology, clinical features,
investigations, complications and management of mitral stenosis.
Q. Write short essay/note on juvenile mitral stenosis and pediatric
mitral stenosis.
Mitral stenosis (MS) is a valvular heart disease is characterized by the
narrowing of the orifice of the mitral  valve due to structural abnormality of
the mitral  valve apparatus.
Etiology (Table 7.62) and Pathology
Rheumatic fever is the most common cause of mitral stenosis. It develops
secondary to previous rheumatic fever due to infection with group A β-
hemolytic StreptococcusMitral stenosis is more common in females.
The latent period from the first attack of rheumatic fever and the
development of onset of symptoms due to mitral stenosis is usually as
short as 1–2 years in India, compared to long in Western countries. This

may due to repeated attacks of severe carditis in India.
Clinical manifestation in juvenile mitral stenosis/malignant mitral
stenosis develops below the age of 19 years and is common in India.
Pediatric mitral stenosis manifest below the age of 12 years. Pin-point
mitral valve is seen. Atrial fibrillation is rare. Valve calcification is
uncommon.
Table 7.62 Causes of mitral stenosis.
Rheumatic fever (leading cause)
Congenital mitral stenosis (parachute mitral
valve/Shone complex)
Metastatic carcinoid tumor to the lung, or
primary bronchial carcinoid.
Severe calcification of mitral valve apparatus,
e.g. in elderly
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Rheumatoid arthritis (extremely rare)
Endomyocardial fibrosis
Gout
Methysergide treatmentLutembacher’s syndrome (combination of
acquired mitral stenosis and an atrial septal
defect)Mucopolysaccharidosis—Hurlers syndrome,
Hunters
Whipple’s disease
Infective endocarditis with large vegetations
Mimics of MS
Myxoma
Ball valve thrombus
Cor triatriatum
Rheumatic Mitral Stenosis
In rheumatic MS, chronic inflammation produces:
Diffuse thickening of the mitral valve leaflets due to fibrosis and/or
calcification
Fusion of commissures and cusp
Fusion and shortening of the chordae tendineae.
Box 7.32: Salient features of mitral stenosis (MS).
First chamber to fail in MS: Left atrium
Ventricle to fail in MS: Right ventricle
Atria that fibrillates in MS: Affects both right and left atria
Left ventricle in MS: Left ventricular end-diastolic volume (LVEDV) is reduced in 15% while it is
normal in the rest
Commonest complication of MS: Atrial fibrillation (AF)
The above morphological changes progress and cause rigidity of mitral
valvular cusps which in turn leads to narrowing at the apex of the funnel-
shaped (‘fish-mouth’) mitral valve → severe narrowing (stenotic) of valve

orifice and progressive immobility of the valve cusps.
Salient features of mitral stenosis are presented in Box 7.32.
Pathophysiology and Hemodynamics (Fig. 7.40)
Long latent period: Mitral stenosis clinically manifests after a latent period
about 20 years from the first episode of acute rheumatic fever. It symptoms
usually start when the mitral valve surface area reduces to 2.5 cm2.
Normally, the mitral valve opens during (left ventricular) diastole and
allows the flow of blood from left atrium to the left ventricle. During
ventricular diastole, the pressures in the left atrium and the left ventricle
are equal.
Fig. 7.40:  Pathophysiology of mitral stenosis.
Mitral stenosis obstructs the blood flow from left atrium to left ventricle
and raises the pressure in the left atrium (up to 25 mm Hg in severe
stenosis). Initially, this rise in left atrial pressure may occur only during
exercise, but later it is raised even during rest.Raised left atrial pressure is reflected back in the pulmonary veins that
produce pulmonary venous hypertension  and subsequently pulmonary
arteries which produce pulmonary arterial hypertension . The symptoms
consist of episodes of paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea (PND) evident as

pulmonary edema and hemoptysis, i.e. Winter bronchitis.
Repeated episodes of PND produce arteriolarization of pulmonary
capillaries and veins → pulmonary arterial hypertension. During this
period, there may resolution of symptoms and signs of pulmonary venous
hypertension. Patient develops progressive exertional dyspnea. Patient
feels better in terms of symptoms, although the disease has progressed.Pulmonary arterial hypertension (pulmonary hypertension) progressively
increases in severity over the next 10–15 years till finally the right
ventricle fails (early forth decade). Types of pulmonary hypertension in
MS are presented in Box 7.33.Consequences of chronic pulmonary hypertension:
–   Hypertrophy of right ventricle: Which may later undergo dilatation
→ right ventricular failure.
–   Functional tricuspid regurgitation  due to dilatation tricuspid valve
ring secondary to dilatation of right ventricle.
–   Pulmonary valve incompetence (regurgitation) may develop due to
dilatation of pulmonary valve ring.
Consequences of raised left atrial pressure: Causes left atrial dilatation
and this enlarged left atrium is prone to:
–   Atrial fibrillation
–   Stasis of blood with thrombus formation
–   Detachment of the thrombus resulting in systemic embolism.Reduced ejection fraction of left ventricle is found one-third of patients
due to:
–   Decreased preload due to impaired filing
–   Increased afterload secondary to reflex vasoconstriction (secondary to
decreased cardiac output)
Severe mitral stenosis: There is decompensation by tachycardia or high
flow. Tachycardia reduces diastolic LV filling time thereby increasing
pressure in LA. Hyperkinetic circulatory states increase flow rate across
mitral valve leading to increased transmitral gradient leading to increased
LA pressure.
Box 7.33: Types of pulmonary hypertension in MS.
Passive pulmonary hypertension:  Due to passive backward transmission of elevated left atrial

pressure by venous and capillary.
Reactive pulmonary hypertension:  Due to reflex spasm of pulmonary arterioles in response to
elevate pulmonary venous and left atrial pressure.
Obliterative pulmonary hypertension:  Due to chronic hypertension producing fibrosis of
pulmonary bed.
Clinical Features
Q. Write short essay/note on clinical features of mitral stenosis.
Symptoms
Dyspnea on exertion  is due to pulmonary hypertension and is slowly
progressive.
–   Precipitated by severe exertion, excitement, fever, anemia, sexual
intercourse, pregnancy, thyrotoxicosis and atrial fibrillation.
Fatigue on exertion: Due to pulmonary hypertension and low cardiac
output. It is slowly progressive.
Hemoptysis
–   Rupture of bronchial veins or of pulmonary vein or bronchial vein collaterals—pulmonary
apoplexy
–   Rupture of pulmonary capillaries during pulmonary edema
–   Pulmonary congestion, embolism and infarction
–   Winter bronchitis
–   Pulmonary hemosiderosis due to chronic recurrent pulmonary edema
–   Anticoagulant useChest pain: Develops in about 15% patients due to (1) right ventricle
enlargement, right ventricular hypertrophy, and pulmonary hypertension,
(2) coexistent coronary artery disease (CAD), (3) coronary embolism and
(4) angina due to decreased cardiac output.Palpitations develop when there are atrial fibrillations (AF), chamber
enlargement (right ventricle and pulmonary artery).
Systemic thromboembolism: Paroxysmal AF results in embolism most
commonly to the cerebral vessels resulting in stroke, but mesenteric, renal
and peripheral emboli (e.g. ischemic limb) can also develop.Syncope: PAH, arrhythmias, ball valve thrombus
Hoarseness of voice—La Ortner’s syndrome: Due to compression of
the left recurrent laryngeal nerve due to the dilated pulmonary artery or
giant left atrium.

Right heart failure
Orthopnea and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea: Due to left atrial
failure.
Winter bronchitis: Patients with MS are susceptible to recurrent attacks
of bronchitis, especially during the winter.
Physical signs
General examination
Mitral facies is characterized cyanotic lips and face, malar flush (dusky
pink discoloration over the upper cheeks due to arteriovenous anastomoses
and vascular stasis) and mild jaundice. It may develop when MS is very
severe with low cardiac output and peripheral vasoconstriction.Peripheral edema and ascites when right heart failure develops.
Pulse
–   Pulse in low volume and peripheral pulse may be absent if embolism
develops.
–   Pulse rhythm is irregularly irregular and varying volume in atrial
fibrillation.
Blood pressure: May be mildly reduced. Mean of 3 readings to be taken
if atrial fibrillation is present
Jugular veins
–   Jugular venous pressure is raised when congestive heart failure
develops.
–   Jugular venous pulse: (1) Prominent a waves (due to vigorous right
atrial systole) observed when there is pulmonary hypertension without
atrial fibrillation, (2) absence of waves in atrial fibrillation and (3)
prominent v waves (c-v waves) and rapid y descent when there is
development of functional tricuspid regurgitation.Inspection and Palpation of Precordium
Apex beat is not shifted and is tapping character of S1 at apex (closing
snap). Apex beat is shifted when there is coexistent of MS with mitral
regurgitation (MR)/aortic stenosis (AS)/systemic hypertension/ischemic
heart disease (IHD)/myocarditisDiastolic thrill  at apex

Palpable pulmonary component of second heart sound (P2) if there is
pulmonary arterial hypertension.
Left parasternal heave: Present when there is right ventricular
hypertrophy or left atrial enlargement.
Epigastric pulsations of right ventricular type.
Precordial bulge in juvenile/malignant MS.
Other findings: Right heart failure is associated with peripheral edema,
tender hepatomegaly, and ascites.
Auscultation
Q. Write short essay/note on auscultatory findings in mitral stenosis.
Loud first heart sound
–   In mitral stenosis, the forces that open and close the mitral valve
increase as left atrial pressure increases. Hence, the first heart sound
(S1) is loud and can be palpable (tapping apex beat) in mitral stenosis.
–   When associated with atrial fibrillation, the intensity of first heart
sound varies.
–   A low intensity of the first heart sound in MS may be due to (1)
calcification of the mitral valve, (2) congenital MS and (3) dominant
associated mitral/aortic regurgitation.Loud second heart sound
–   It is a sign of pulmonary hypertension. The second heart sound is
closely split and the pulmonary component of the second heart sound
(P2) is loud.
Mitral opening snap
–   OS is a sharp, snappy sound heard during early diastole, following the sound of aortic valve
closure (A 2) by 0.05–0.12 s.
–   Opening snap (OS) is produced due to the sudden (abrupt) opening of the dome of the
stenosed mitral valve with the force of the increased left atrial pressure during diastole. It is
the most important auscultatory sign of valvular involvement in MS. Absent OS indicates
the calcification of body of the leaflets.
–   The time interval between A 2 and OS is inversely proportional to the severity of the MS.
–   Best heard:  During expiration, just medial to the cardiac apex with the diaphragm of the
stethoscope.
–   Other conditions with OS: Mitral regurgitation (10%), tricuspid stenosis, atrial septal
defect.

–   Well’s index:  Q-S1 interval minus A 2-OS interval and is expressed in units of 0.01
seconds. More than 2 units indicate MVA less than 1.2 cm2.
Murmur of mitral stenosis
–   Mid-diastolic/presystolic murmur:  Turbulent blood flow through stenosed mitral valve
produces the characteristic low pitched, rumbling, mid-diastolic murmur and sometimes
accompanied by a thrill. Murmur is best heard with the bell of the stethoscope held lightly
at the apex with the patient lying on the left side.
♦   Duration of the murmur varies and usually depends on the severity of stenosis. In severe
MS, the mid-diastolic murmur is long and merges with the presystolic murmur to
produce a holodiastolic murmur.
♦   To increase intensity of MDM:  Left lateral position using bell of stethoscope, while
holding expiration auscultate after walking (isotonic exercise), and squatting (increased
peripheral resistance in these procedures contribute to the increased murmur).
♦   In the early phase of mitral stenosis, a presystolic murmur may be the only auscultatory
abnormality. Mechanism of presystolic murmur: (1) atrial contraction, (2) persistent
atrioventricular gradient, and (3) left ventricular contraction in presystole reducing
mitral funnel.
♦   Presystolic accentuation of the murmur:  Atrial contraction contributes to increased
gradient in pre systole. Hence, mid-diastolic murmur is accentuated by exercise. In
patient with sinus rhythm, the murmur becomes louder during atrial systole and during
long R-R interval in atrial fibrillationis termed as presystolic accentuation .
♦   Absence of presystolic murmur in MS:  Atrial fibrillation, mild MS, prolonged PR
interval, bradycardia, elevated left ventricular dysfunction (LVEDP).
♦   Causes of absent mid-diastolic murmur:  Thick chest wall and emphysema, dampened
MS (severe pulmonary hypertension throttling the left sided input), low cardiac output
and marked RV enlargement with RV occupying the apex.
– Systolic murmur:  When pulmonary hypertension  develops it will lead to right ventricular
hypertrophy and dilatation with secondary tricuspid regurgitation. This produces a systolic
murmur and giant ‘ v waves’ in the venous pulse.
♦   If MS coexists with mitral regurgitation, it produces a loud pansystolic murmur that
radiates towards the axilla and is heard at the lower left sternal border. Functional
tricuspid regurgitation produces a pan-systolic murmur. It is accentuated during
inspiration (de Carvallo’s sign).
–   Murmur of pulmonary regurgitation (Graham Steell murmur):  It is a high-pitched
early diastolic decrescendo murmur heard along the left sternal border and indicative of
severe pulmonary hypertension.
Diagrammatic representation of timing of heart sounds and murmur in mitral
stenosis are shown in Figure 7.41.
Auscultatory findings in mitral stenosis are listed in Box 7.34.
Grades of mitral stenosis and its features are presented in Table 7.63.
Box 7.34: Auscultatory findings in mitral stenosis.Loud S 1

Loud P 2 and narrow split of S 2 if pulmonary arterial hypertension
Opening snap
Mid-diastolic murmur at apex with presystolic accentuation
Tricuspid regurgitation: Pansystolic murmur
Pulmonary hypertension: Ejection systolic/early diastolic (Graham Steell) murmur.
Fig. 7.41:  Diagrammatic representation of timing of heart sounds and murmur in mitral stenosis
features are loud first heart sound, an opening snap (OS), mid-diastolic murmur (MDM) with
presystolic accentuation.
Q. Write short essay/note on grading the severity of mitral stenosis
based on mitral valve orifice size.
Clinical judgment of the severity of mitral stenosis: Following features
suggest severe MS:
Presence of pulmonary hypertension.
More closeness of the opening snap to the second heart sound (short A2-
OS interval).
Lengthy mid-diastolic murmur.
Investigations
Radiological features of mitral stenosis (Chest X-ray)(Figs. 7.42A to D)
Q. Write short essay/note on radiological/X-ray chest findings in mitral
stenosis.
Table 7.63 Grades of mitral stenosis and its features.

Grade of mitral
stenosis (valve area in
cm2)S2-OS interval in
secondSigns
Very mild (2.5 to 2.1)
Mild (2 to 1.6) 0.08–0.12 Short MDM/or presystolic murmur or murmur
may appear with exercise
Moderate (1 to 1.5) 0.06–0.08 MDM + presystolic murmur with a gap between
them. Varying degree of MDM in atrial
fibrillation
Severe (less than 1) 0.04–0.06 MDM + presystolic murmur with no gap,
presystolic murmur with atrial fibrillation
Note: Normal mitral valve orifice is 4–6 cm2
(S2 : second heart sound; OP: opening snap; MDM: mid-diastolic murmur)
Figs. 7.42A to D: (A) X-rays of mitral stenosis showing double atrial shadow and straightening of left
heart border; (B) Lateral X-ray of mitral stenosis showing walking man sign; (C) Diagrammatic of
Kerley lines; (D) X-ray of Kerley lines.
Due to enlargement of left atrium

Enlarged left atrial appendage causes filling up of normal concavity between pulmonary artery
shadow and the left ventricle.
Double atrial shadow:  Border of enlarged left atrium together with right atrial border gives an
appearance like atrium within an atrium.
Straightening of left heart border: Mitralization of heart
Due to left atrial appendage enlargement, large pulmonary artery, hypoplastic aorta, under filled left
ventricle.
Consequences of left atrial enlargement:
–   Pushing of left main bronchus upwards causing wide carinal angle (splaying of carina).
–   Pushing esophagus backwards visible in lateral view of chest X-ray.
–   Left shift of aorta (Bedford sign).
–   Walking man sign (shift of left bronchus forwards)(Fig. 7.42B).
Pulmonary venous/capillary hypertensionGrade 1:  Cephalization (prominence of veins of upper lobe of lung) of pulmonary vasculature
(pulmonary venous pressure ≤ = 20 mm Hg) (inverted moustache sign/antler’s horn sign).
Grade 2:  Kerley’s lines (A, B, C) (pulmonary venous pressure 20–25 mm Hg), peribronchial,
perivascular cuffing (Figs. 7.42C and D)
–   Kerley’s A line:  Linear opacities extending from the periphery to hila; they are caused by
distension of anastomotic channels between periphery and central lymphatic’s
–   Kerley’s B line:  Short horizontal lines situated perpendicularly to the pleural surface at the
lung base; they represent edema of inter lobar septa.
–   Kerley’s C line:  Reticular opacities at lung base, representing Kerley’s B line en face.
Grade 3:  Batwing opacities (pulmonary venous pressure >25 mm Hg).
Pulmonary arterial hypertension
Prominent pulmonary outflow tract: enlarged pulmonary arteries (diameter of right descending
pulmonary artery >14 mm in women and >16 mm in men) + pruning of peripheral pulmonary vessels.
Right ventricle
Right ventricular hypertrophy:  In presence of cardiomegaly, acute angle is observed between
apex of enlarged heart and diaphragm.
Sternal contact sign: Earliest and most sensitive sign in the lateral X-ray is obliteration of
Holtzneck’s space, i.e. retrosternal space.
Others
Right atrial enlargement
Calcification of mitral valve/pericardium/MacCallum patch
Pulmonary hemosiderosis.
Electrocardiogram
It can confirm enlargement of left atrium (‘P’ mitrale), right ventricular
hypertrophy, tall R waves in V1–V3, P mitrale, and atrial fibrillation.
Echocardiogram
–   It can reveal thickening of mitral valve area, valvular leaflet,
thickening and shortening chordae tendinae, fusion of commissures,

calcification of leaflets and chordae, and diastolic doming (due to
commissural fusion).
–   Wilkins score (4 to 16): 4 points each for leaflet thickness, leaflet
mobility, leaflet calcification and chordal involvement.
Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE)
To assess mitral regurgitation (MR) severity and to rule out left atrial
appendage (LAA) thrombus.
Doppler
Provides definite evaluation of MS. It shows pressure gradient across mitral
valve, pulmonary artery pressure and left ventricular function.
Cardiac catheterization
It is not usually needed. It is used to assess coexisting condition such as
coronary artery disease, pulmonary artery pressure, mitral stenosis and
regurgitation.
Complications of Mitral Stenosis (Table 7.64)
Q. Write short essay/note on complications of mitral stenosis.
Atrial fibrillation (AF)
–   Commonest complication of MS prevalence and incidence varies
according to age and roughly parallels the age of the patient (e.g.
second decade—10% and sixth decade and beyond—80%).
–   AF worsens symptoms of MS by: (1) Decreasing diastolic filling time
—leads to increased LA pressure, (2) loss of atrial contribution to LV
filling—leads to increased LA pressure and (3) LA thrombus leading
to systemic embolization.
–   Prognosis: 5-year survival of AF without MS is 85% and with MS is
64%.
–   AF causes decrease in cardiac output by 20% in MS.
Table 7.64 Complications of mitral stenosis.
Atrial fibrillation
Thrombus formation
Systemic embolization
Pulmonary hypertensionOrtner’s syndrome
Hemoptysis
Dysphagia
Lower lobe pneumoniaPulmonary edema
Pulmonary infarction
Cardiac cirrhosis
Pulmonary hemosiderosis

Infective endocarditis Right heart failure
Systemic embolism
–   Source of emboli: Left atrial thrombus, vegetations of infective
endocarditis (rare).
–   Factors predisposing to systemic embolism in MS: Atrial
fibrillation, spontaneous echo contrast in left atrium, size of left atrium,
age and low cardiac output.
–   Clinical features: Depends on the localization of emboli. Cerebral
(strokes, abscess), coronary (leads to chest pain), renal (leads to
hypertension)
♦   Leriche’s syndrome: Claudication of thigh (due to embolism at
branching of common iliac artery) + impotence.
♦   Ball valve or free floating thrombus may produce syncope in
specific body position, variability in physical findings and requires
urgent surgery.Infective endocarditis: May develop infrequently with isolated mitral
stenosis.
Ortner’s syndrome is a very rare complication of sever pulmonary
hypertension secondary to mitral stenosis. It is characterized by paralysis
of left recurrent laryngeal nerve due to compression between the enlarged
tense pulmonary artery and the aorta at ligamentum arteriosum. It
produces hoarseness of voice.Damped MS: Development of pulmonary hypertension diminishes the
cardiac output (throttle effect) and results in temporary symptom-free
period (period of illusion). The MDM may not be audible, only OS will be
present.
Management
Mild mitral stenosis may not require any treatment other than treatment of attacks of bronchitis.Medical management: MS with  minor symptoms are treated medically.
–   Rheumatic fever prophylaxis to be given. However, infective endocarditis prophylaxis is not
necessary.
–   Indications for anticoagulation:  (1) Atrial fibrillation (persistent or paroxysmal), (2) embolic
events, (3) left trial thrombus, (4) left atrial diameter >55 mm, and (5) spontaneous echo
contrast.
–   Restrict/decrease sodium intake.
–   Diuretics:  Early symptom such as mild dyspnea (due to pulmonary congestion) is usually

treated with low doses of diuretics.
–   Beta blockers or non-dihydropyridines (DHP) calcium channel blockers (e.g. verapamil or
diltiazem) to reduce heart rate (even in sinus rhythm, more useful in atrial fibrillation).
–   Digoxin if atrial fibrillation with right heart failure. Atrial fibrillation also needs
anticoagulation to prevent atrial thrombus and systemic embolization.
Surgical management
Four operative measures available.
–   Trans-septal balloon mitral valvotomy (BMV)
♦   Also known as percutaneous balloon valvuloplasty (PBV) is the treatment of choice.
♦   Procedure: Under local anesthesia a catheter is passed through the femoral vein into the
right atrium. The interatrial septum is punctured and the catheter is passed into the left
atrium and across the mitral valve. A balloon is passed over the catheter across the valve,
and briefly inflated to split the valve commissures.
♦   Indications: Pliable mitral valves with little involvement of the subvalvular apparatus and
minimal mitral regurgitation.
♦   Contraindications:  Moderate or severe mitral regurgitation, severe calcification, severe
subvalvular fibrosis, thrombus in left atrium or ventricle, recent embolism, bleeding
disorders and interatrial septal thickness more than 3 mm (relative contraindication).
♦   Complications:  Mitral regurgitation may be severe enough to need surgery (2%), mortality
(1–2%), cardiac perforation (1%), and cerebral embolism (1%).
–   Closed mitral valvotomy (CMV)
♦   Indication:  Mobile, non-calcified mitral valves without regurgitation.
♦   Contraindication: Left atrial thrombus, mitral valvular calcification, severe subvalvular
disease or moderate or severe mitral regurgitation.
♦   Advantages: Cardiopulmonary bypass is not required and good result is obtained for 10
years or more.
♦   Disadvantage:  The valve cusps may refuse necessitating another operation.
–   Open mitral valvotomy (OMV)
♦   It is usually performed and is preferred over closed valvotomy or mitral valve replacement.
♦   Procedure: Under direct view, the valvular cusps are carefully separated from each other
and commissures are incised.
♦   Advantage:  Less chances of traumatic mitral regurgitation, concurrent annuloplasty can be
done for mitral regurgitation. Removal of LA thrombus (if present), calcium in leaflets,
amputation of LA appendage and separation of fused chordae can also done along with this
surgical procedure.
♦   Disadvantage:  Needs cardiopulmonary bypass.Q. Write short essay/note on indications for mitral valve replacement.
–   Mitral valve replacement (MVR)
♦   Indications
◊  Mitral stenosis associated with mitral regurgitation.
◊  Severely damaged or severely calcified stenotic valve which cannot be reopened without
producing significant mitral regurgitation.
◊  Moderate or severe mitral stenosis and presence of thrombus in the left atrium even after
anticoagulation therapy.
♦   Type of prosthesis: Mechanical prosthesis if age is less than 65 years and bioprosthesis if

age is more than 65 years.
♦   Artificial valves usually work successfully for >20 years and anticoagulants are usually
given postoperatively to prevent thrombus formation and its embolization.
Mitral Regurgitation
Q. Discuss the etiology, pathophysiology, clinical features,
investigations, complications and management of chronic mitral
regurgitation.
Management of acute severe mitral regurgitation in pulmonary
edema.
Mitral regurgitation (MR) or mitral insufficiency (MI) or mitral
incompetence is a disorder of the heart in which the mitral valve does not
close properly.Etiology (Box 7.35)
Box 7.35: Causes of mitral regurgitation.
Causes of acute mitral regurgitation
Infective endocarditis, rupture of a papillary muscle (e.g. acute myocardial infarction, mitral
valve prolapse), chest trauma, cardiac surgery, acute rheumatic carditis, dysfunction of prosthetic
valve.
Causes of chronic mitral regurgitation
Damage to valve leaflets: Rheumatic heart disease, myxomatous degeneration, mitral valve
prolapse (MVP), infective endocarditis, SLE
Damage to annulus:  Abscess (IE), annular calcification, dilated cardiomyopathy
Damage to chordae tendineae: Myxomatous degeneration (MVP, Marfan syndrome, Ehlers-
Danlos syndrome), infective endocarditis, acute rheumatic fever
Damage to papillary muscles: Coronary artery disease [ischemia, myocardial infarction,
rupture (MI), dilated cardiomyopathy]
Damage to left ventricle:  Ischemia, dilated cardiomyopathy
Note:  Major causes are highlighted in bold letter
Q. Write short essay/note on causes of acute mitral regurgitation/mitral
regurgitation.
Lesion in any one of 5 component of mitral valve apparatus namely (1)
valve leaflets, (2) the annulus, (3) the chordae tendineae or (4) papillary
muscles, or (5) the left ventricle can produce mitral regurgitation (MR).
Mitral regurgitation may be acute or chronic.

Causes of MR in IE:  Leaflet perforation, vegetations preventing leaflet function, rupture of
chordate tendineae, annular abscess.
Causes of MR in RHD:  Rigid and retracted leaflet, shortening of chordae tendineae.
Causes of MR in CAD:  Regional wall motion abnormalities, ischemia of papillary muscle, LV
failure.
Pathophysiology
Acute mitral regurgitation: During this, the normal compliance of the
left atrium does not permit much dilatation and the pressure of left atrium
rises. This markedly increases the left atrial pressure and pulmonary
venous pressure and cause pulmonary edema. Since part of the stroke
volume is regurgitated, the stroke volume increases (to a lesser degree
than it does in chronic MR) to maintain the forward cardiac output. This
may result in enlargement of left ventricle.Chronic mitral regurgitation: Causes gradual dilatation of left atrium
but little increase in left atrial pressure because the regurgitant flow is
accommodated by the large left atrium. In longstanding cases, the left
ventricle slowly dilates and the left ventricular diastolic and left atrial
pressures gradually increase due to chronic volume overload of the left
ventricle. MR begets MR.
Clinical Features
SymptomsSymptoms depend on the rapidity of development of the mitral
regurgitation.
Acute mitral regurgitation: Usually presents dyspnea due to acute
pulmonary edema.
Chronic mitral regurgitation: It may asymptomatic for many years. It
may become symptomatic only after the onset of irreversible LV
dysfunction.
–   Palpitation is the most common symptom due to increased stroke
volume or atrial fibrillation.
–   Dyspnea and orthopnea: Due to pulmonary venous hypertension and
left ventricular failure occur late in the course of mitral regurgitation.
–   Fatigue and lethargy: Due to reduced cardiac output.
–   Symptoms of right heart failure: Develop in the late stages and lead

to congestive cardiac failure.
–   Cardiac cachexia
–   Thromboembolism: Less common than in mitral stenosis. However,
subacute infective endocarditis is more common.
–   Other symptoms and complications are similar to mitral stenosis.
Signs
Pulse: Volume is high and in severe mitral regurgitation it may be mildly
collapsing.
Irregular rhythm and varying volume if there is atrial fibrillation.
Jugular veins
Uncomplicated mitral regurgitation: Jugular venous pressure (JVP) is
normal.
With atrial fibrillation: Disappearance of a waves.
With pulmonary hypertension: Prominent a waves.
With right ventricular failure and functional tricuspid regurgitation:
Jugular venous pressure is raised and very prominent v waves.
Blood pressure: In sever mitral regurgitation: wide pulse pressure. Three
recordings are necessary if patient has atrial fibrillation (AF). Pulsus
alternans in acute MR.Inspection and palpation
Hyperdynamic precordium
Apex beat: Shifted to the left (due to left ventricular dilatation), forceful
(feels active and rocking) and diffuse (hyperdynamic) in character due to
left ventricular volume overload.Cardiomegaly: In chronic MR. Acute MR does not produce
cardiomegaly.
Systolic thrill (if MI is severe) at the apex.
Left parasternal heave and palpable P2.
Epigastric pulsations of right ventricular type.
Auscultation (Fig. 7.43)

Fig. 7.43:  Diagrammatic representation of timing of heart sounds and murmur in mitral regurgitation.
Features are normal or soft first heart sound, pansystolic murmur (PSM), extending to the second heart
sound (A 2, P2). A third heart sound (S 3) may develops with severe mitral regurgitation.
Soft first heart sound (S1): Because of the incomplete apposition of the
mitral valve cusps and partial closure of these valve cusps when
ventricular systole begins. It is loud if there is coexistent MS, MVP-MR or
papillary muscle dysfunction MR.
Widely split second heart sound (S2) is due to aortic valve closure (A1)
occurring early but the split is mobile.
Pulmonary component (P2) of S2 is loud and palpable in pulmonary
hypertension and also due to anterior displacement of pulmonary artery
caused by dilated LA.
Left ventricular third heart sound (S3): Indicates severe mitral
regurgitation.
S4 is a sign of acute MR as left atrium is not dilated in acute MR.
Pulmonary ejection sound in pulmonary hypertension.
Murmur of mitral regurgitation
Apical pansystolic murmur: The typical features of murmur in mitral
regurgitation are:
–   High pitched, blowing and usually holosystolic/pansystolic loudest at
the apex.
–   Plateau shaped best heard with diaphragm of stethoscope
–   Commonly radiates widely over the precordium and into the axilla and
left interscapular area (if anterior leaflets involved as in rheumatic) or
radiating to base (if posterior leaflets involved).

–   It is produced due to the mitral regurgitant jet occurring throughout the
whole of systole.
–   It may be accompanied by a thrill.
Character of murmur depends on the underlying pathology in mitral
regurgitation (Table 7.65).
Severe MR with soft or no murmur (silent MR): It is observed with left
ventricular dilation, acute mitral regurgitation (MR), paraprosthetic MR,
COPD, obesity, dampened MR.Dynamic auscultation:
–   Non-MVP MR murmur is distinguished from MVP murmur by
increase with squatting and decrease with standing (opposite with
MVP).
–   MR murmur is distinguished from AS/HCM murmur by increase with
isometric handgrip (opposite for AS/HCM).
Short mid-diastolic flow murmur: Sometimes a short, rumbling mid-
diastolic murmur may be detected at the apex in severe cases due to an
increased flow across the mitral valve. It may follow the third heart sound.Other murmurs
–   Ejection systolic murmur or early diastolic murmur at pulmonary area
when there is pulmonary hypertension.
–   Pansystolic murmur at lower left sternal border when there is
functional tricuspid regurgitation.
–   Opening snap can be heard in 10% patients with MR.
Table 7.65 Features of murmur depending on the underlying pathology in
mitral regurgitation.
Pathology Features of murmur
Giant left atrium (>6 cm) Radiates to the entire interscapular region
Ruptured chordate tendineae Cooling’ or ‘sea gull’ quality
Flail mitral leaflet Musical’ quality and late systolic
Papillary muscle dysfunction Late systolic
MVP-MR Mid-systolic
Acute MR Musical and tapering
Severe MR Holo systolic murmur with mid-systolic accentuation, i.e. Christmas
tree appearance

Signs indicating severity of mitral regurgitation (Box 7.36)
Box 7.36: Signs indicating severity of mitral regurgitation.
Mild MR: Only murmur
Moderate MR: Murmur + thrill and cardiomegaly
Severe MR:  Murmur + thrill, cardiomegaly, LV S3, flow mid-diastolic murmur, pulmonary
hypertension
Q. Write short note on clinical assessment of the severity of mitral
regurgitation.
Other signs in MR: These include signs related to:
Atrial fibrillation/flutter
Pulmonary venous congestion, e.g. crepitations, pulmonary edema,
effusions
Pulmonary hypertension and right heart failure
Left and right heart failure.
Signs in acute mitral regurgitation
Normal apical impulse since there is no ventricular dilatation.
Third and/or fourth heart sound.
An early systolic or pansystolic murmur.
Differences between acute and chronic mitral regurgitation are listed in Table
7.66.
Differences between mitral regurgitation due to mitral valve prolapsed and
that due to rheumatic heart disease are listed in Table 7.67.
Table 7.66 Differences between acute and chronic mitral regurgitation.
Characters Acute MR Chronic MR
Pulse Alternans High volume
Atrial fibrillation Absent +
Jugular venous pressure (JVP) Grossly elevated Mild elevation
Cardiomegaly Absent Present
Pulmonary hypertension Very severe Variable
S1 Normal Soft
S3 Present +/–

S4 Present Can never be present
Murmur Late systolic Pansystolic
Table 7.67: Differences between mitral regurgitation due to mitral valve
prolapse and that due to rheumatic heart disease.
Characters Mitral valve prolapse MR Rheumatic heart disease
MR
Leaflets affected Any Posterior
S1 Loud Soft
Click Midsystolic click No
Murmur Midsystolic Holosystolic
Squatting and isometric
handgripDecrease murmur Increases murmur
Association Atrial septal defect (ASD), polycystic
kidney diseaseMitral stenosis
(MR: mitral regurgitation)
Investigations
Electrocardiogram (ECG): It can reveal:
–   Enlargement/hypertrophy of left atrium (if not in atrial fibrillation)
–   Dilatation and hypertrophy of left ventricle
–   Hypertrophy of both left and right ventricle in pulmonary hypertension
–   Atrial fibrillationChest X-ray: May show the following abnormalities: All signs as
described for MS
–   Enlargement of left atrium (more than in MS), left ventricle
–   Pulmonary venous congestion
–   Pulmonary edema: Interstitial edema in acute MR, chronic
decompensated MR or with coexistent MS.
–   Annular calcium appears as a C-shaped opacity in posterior third of
heart in lateral or RAO (right anterior oblique) view.
Echocardiogram
–   Shows a dilated left atrium and left ventricle.
–   Structural abnormalities of mitral valve, e.g. prolapsed, chordal or
papillary muscle ruptures if present.

–   Doppler echocardiogram
♦   Detects and assesses the severity of regurgitation (quantification of
regurgitation).
♦   Mitral annular calcification between mitral valve apparatus and
posterior wall.
–   Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE): Useful to identify
structural valve abnormalities and can be helpful before surgery
especially in MVP. Intraoperative TEE helps in the assessment of the
efficacy of valve repair. MVP is defined as more than 2 mm systolic
displacement of mitral leaflet into left atrium (LA).Cardiac catheterization: This can show dilated left atrium and left
ventricle mitral regurgitation, pulmonary hypertension and coexisting
coronary artery disease (if present).
Complications of mitral regurgitation are listed in Box 7.37.
Box 7.37: Complications of mitral regurgitation.
Progressive heart failure is the most common cause of death
Less frequent:  Sudden death, stroke and fatal endocarditis
Atrial fibrillation, infective endocarditis, left ventricular failure
Pulmonary hypertension (late), right ventricular failure (very late)
Rarely systemic embolism
Table 7.68: European Society of Cardiology (ESC) guidelines for surgical
intervention in mitral regurgitation.
Symptomatic patients who present with Asymptomatic patients with
Severe mitral regurgitation
Left ventricular ejection fraction (EF) >30%
End-diastolic dimension (ESD) of under 55
mmLeft ventricular dysfunction
End-systolic dimension >45 mm and/or
ejection fraction of under 60%
New onset atrial fibrillation and/or pulmonary
hypertension
Management
Asymptomatic mild mitral regurgitation can be managed conservatively.
Moderate mitral regurgitation can be treated medically.
Medical Management
Acute MR:  Afterload reduction with nitroprusside.
Chronic MR:  In mitral regurgitation, high afterload may worsen the degree of regurgitation, and
hypertension is treated with vasodilators, e.g. ACE inhibitors and nifedipine are used.

Diuretics.
Treatment of AF: Digoxin and anticoagulants.
Anticoagulation.
Infective endocarditis prophylaxis.
Rheumatic fever prophylaxis.
Surgery (Table 7.68 and Box 7.38) Mitral Valve Replacement
Box 7.38: Conditions in which repair of mitral valve is possible.
MVP (mitral valve prolapse)
Chordal rupture
Papillary muscle dysfunction
Annular dilation
Leaflet perforation due to IE
Rheumatic MR in the young
Combined Mitral Stenosis and Mitral Regurgitation
Clinically assessment of the dominance of lesions (Table 7.69).
Table 7.69: Clinically assessment of the dominance of lesions in the
presence of combined mitral stenosis and mitral regurgitation.
Parameter Predominant mitral
regurgitationPredominant mitral stenosis
Pulse volume High Low
Blood pressure Wide pulse pressure Narrow pulse pressure
Cardiomegaly ++ --
S1 Soft Loud
LVS3 ++ -
Mid-diastolic murmur Short Long, loud with presystolic
accentuation
Mitral Valve Prolapse (MVP)
Q. Write short essay/note on mitral valve prolapse (MVP) or Barlow’s
syndrome.
Mitral valve prolapse (MVP) is an abnormal movement of one or both of
the mitral valve leaflets ≥2 mm beyond annular plan into the left atrium
during systole with or without mitral regurgitation.
Barlow’s syndrome: Involves the posterior leaflet and cusps. Reads

syndrome/ floppy valve syndrome is considered as a variant of Barlow
that affects both mitral cusps as well-other valves like aortic valve.
Cobb’s syndrome selectively affects the anterior mitral cusp.
MVP syndrome is also called as systolic click-murmur syndrome.
MVP is one of the more common causes of mild mitral regurgitation.
Pathogenesis
It is caused by congenital anomalies or degenerative myxomatous changes
(e.g. Marfan’s syndrome and cystic medical necrosis) that are associated
with excessive or redundant mitral leaflet tissue. Familial incidence with
an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance.Prolapse of the cusp occurs in systole → tensing of the chordae → pulling
of papillary muscles which sometimes may interfere with blood supply.
Conditions associated with MVP: Atrial septal defect (20%), polycystic
kidney disease, chronic rheumatic heart disease, ischemic heart disease,
and cardiomyopathies.
Clinical Features
SymptomsAge and gender: More common in females between 15–30 years. But,
severe mitral regurgitation caused by prolapsed mitral valve is more
common in older males compared to young females.
May be asymptomatic or present with anxiety neurosis.
Symptoms include atypical chest pain (precordial stabbing), palpitation,
syncope or presyncope and fatigue.
Rarely: Symptoms of left ventricular failure (exertional dyspnea,
orthopnea and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea) in patients with mitral
regurgitation, sudden death and transient ischemic attacks.
SignsAsthenic built, straight back/pectus excavatum
Mid-systolic click: In mildest forms, the valve is competent but bulges
back into the atrium during systole, causing a mid-systolic click occur
≥0.14 seconds after S1 without any murmur.Late systolic murmur: When there is mitral regurgitation, the click is

followed by a late systolic murmur apical murmur (rarely ‘whooping’ or
‘honking’). Its length increases as the regurgitation becomes more severe.
The systolic murmur of mitral valve prolapse increases during standing
and Valsalva maneuver, but decreases during squatting and isometric
exercise.Investigations
Electrocardiogram (ECG): Nonspecific ST-T changes or inverted T
waves in leads II, III and aVF.
Echocardiography: Used for confirmation of the diagnosis. Color
Doppler is used to assess the degree of mitral regurgitation.
Complications
These include arrhythmias, sudden rupture of the chordate, progressive
mitral regurgitation, and infective endocarditis.
Rare complications include transient cerebral ischemic attacks, embolism,
acute severe mitral regurgitation and sudden death.
Management
Medical
–   Reassurance for patients without symptoms
–   β-blockers:  For atypical chest pain.
–   Antiarrhythmic drugs:  For the treatment of arrhythmias.
–   Transient ischemic attacks: Aspirin, dipyridamole or anticoagulants.
–   No need for infective endocarditis prophylaxis.
Surgical: Mitral valve repair or replacement in severe mitral regurgitation.
Prognosis: Long-term prognosis is good.
Aortic Stenosis
Q. Write a long essay on the classification, causes/etiology, clinical
features, investigations and management of valvular aortic stenosis.
Aortic stenosis is a chronic progressive disease and characterized by
obstruction to the left ventricular stroke volume.
Normal aortic valve area 3–4 cm2 without any gradient across it. Critical
aortic stenosis develops when an aortic valve area becomes less than 0.8
cm2 or a gradient of more than 50 mm Hg.

Classification and Etiology of Aortic Stenosis (Table 7.70)
Pathophysiology
Normal aortic valve area is 2.5–3.5 sq cm.
Hemodynamically significant AS occurs when the aortic valve is reduced
by 60–75%.
Critical AS when valve area <0.8 cm2/gradient >80%.
Initially, cardiac output is maintained. Pathological hallmark is fixed
outflow obstruction to the left ventricle. It limits the increase in cardiac
output required during exercise. The coronary blood flow may be
inadequate and patients may develop angina even in the absence of
concomitant coronary disease. Obstruction to the outflow leads to left
ventricular hypertrophy (LVH). Wall stress due to outflow obstruction
manifests in two forms.
1. Development of concentric LVH: Wall stress is not allowed to rise by
development of concentric LVH. This type is more likely in females.
2. Ventricular dilation and eccentric hypertrophy: Rise in wall stress
and systolic dysfunction are features of this type. This type is more
likely in males.Later the left ventricle cannot overcome the outflow tract obstruction and
pulmonary edema develops. In aortic stenosis, pulmonary arterial
hypertension is due to increased LV diastolic pressure.
Table 7.70 Classification and etiology of aortic stenosis.
Valvular aortic stenosisAcquired: Rheumatic aortic stenosis (young adults, middle-aged, elderly), calcific aortic
valvular disease (CAVD—in middle aged to elderly), systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE),
Fabry’s disease, chronic kidney disease, Paget’s disease of bone, rheumatoid arthritis, infective
endocarditis, senile degenerative aortic stenosis (middle-aged to elderly), previous radiation
exposure, homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia, ochronosisCongenital:  Congenital aortic stenosis (infants, children, adolescents), bicuspid aortic valve
(BAV), calcification and fibrosis of congenitally bicuspid aortic valve (young adults to middle-
aged)
Subvalvular aortic stenosis
Membranous diaphragm
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Congenital subvalvular aortic stenosis (infants, children, adolescents)

Supravalvular aortic stenosis
Hourglass constriction of aorta
Congenital supravalvular aortic stenosis (infants, children, adolescents)
Williams’ syndrome
Williams syndrome:  Characterized by Elfin facies, supravalvular aortic stenosis, idiopathic
hypercalcemia, mental retardation and behavioral profile. On examination, the right upper limb blood
pressure may be a higher than the left upper limb and the pulse volume on the right arm better than
left. This is called Coanda Effect
Shone’s complex:  It is a rare combination of four left-sided congenital cardiac anomalies including
parachute mitral valve, supravalvular ring, coarctation of the aorta, and subaortic obstruction
Clinical Features
Usually asymptomatic aortic stenosis is moderately severe (aortic orifice
reduced to one third of its normal size). It is commonly diagnosed in
asymptomatic patients during routine clinical examination.
Symptoms
Q. Write short note on symptomatic triad of aortic stenosis.
Age of onset of symptoms: Bicuspid aortic valve between 50 and 70
years, calcific aortic stenosis >70 years and rheumatic aortic stenosis
between 40 and 50 years of age.Symptomatic triad of aortic stenosis: Three cardinal symptoms are (1)
breathlessness (dyspnea), (2) angina, and (3) syncope.
Exercise intolerance: Most common initial presentation. Dyspnea with
exertion due to cardiac decompensation or fatigue with exertion due to
inadequate rise of cardiac output with exertion.Angina is typical exertional and is due to mismatch in myocardial oxygen
demand-supply ratio, or coexistent coronary artery disease (CAD).
Exertional syncope (or presyncope): Due to failure of cardiac output to
rise to meet demand, leading to a fall in BP.
Heart failure: Orthopnea and paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea (PND).
–   The average survival after the onset of symptoms were 5, 3 and 2 years
respectively for angina, syncope and dyspnea.
Infective endocarditis
Embolism.
Gastrointestinal bleed due to angiodysplasias (Heyde syndrome), acquired
von Willebrand syndrome.

If untreated the approximate time interval from the onset of symptoms to
death is 1.5–2 years for heart failure (Dyspnea, PND), 3 years for syncope,
and 5 years for angina.
Signs
Appearance: Severe AS produces ‘Dresden China’ look-asthenic
appearance with pale skin.
Pulse
–   Parvus and tardus pulse: Slow rising, late peaking, and low amplitude.
–   Pulsus bisferens if AS is associated aortic regurgitation (AR).
–   Anacrotic pulse and apico-carotid delay in severe AS.
–   Coanda effect in supravalvular AS.
–   Normal pulse if there is coexistent AR, hypertension (HTN).Blood pressure
–   Low systolic and pulse pressures. Systolic decapitation (SBP<120 mm
of Hg).
–   Normal BP if there is coexistent AR, hypertension (HTN).
Carotid shudder: Thrill in carotids.
Jugular venous pressure (JVP): Prominent a waves (Bernheim effect).
Apex beat: Thrusting/heaving LV type apex beat due to LV pressure
overload. It is not usually displaced because hypertrophy (as opposed to
dilatation) does not produce significant cardiomegaly.
Palpable LV S4.


Fig. 7.44: Diagrammatic representation of timing of heart sounds and murmur in aortic stenosis.
Features are diamond-shaped ejection mid-systolic murmur. An ejection click (EC) may be present in
young patients with a bicuspid aortic valve. Soft second heart sound (A 2, P2).
Auscultation (Fig. 7.44)
S1 is normal. If loud suspect coexistent MS.
S2-A2: Soft (single S2) in rheumatic AS, loud in BAV, normal in
sub/supravalvular AS. In severe AS paradoxical (reversed) split of second
heart sound A2 (splitting on expiration).
Systolic ejection click in bicuspid aortic valve (BAV)
Ejection mid-systolic murmur:  Harsh/rough, radiates to the neck (to carotids arteries) and
also the precordium with late peaking in severe AS. Best heard in the base of heart (aortic
area). Murmur is likened to a saw cutting wood and especially in older patients may have a
musical quality like the ‘mew’ of a seagull. It is diamond-shaped (crescendo decrescendo). The
murmur is usually longer in severe AS. The intensity of the murmur should not be correlated
with the severity of AS because it is less intense when the cardiac output is reduced. In severe
AS it may not be audible. In calcific AS, high frequency components radiate to apex producing
a long systolic murmur at apex—Gallavardin phenomenon/ hour-glass conduction due to
periodic wake phenomenon. With LV failure, murmur intensity decreases and murmur may
disappear.Differences between aortic stenosis and mitral regurgitation presented in
Table 7.71.
Table 7.71: Differences between aortic stenosis and mitral regurgitation.
Features Aortic stenosis Mitral regurgitation
Site of systolic murmur Aortic area + Apex Apex
Nature of murmur and its relation
with A 2Usually ejection-mid
systolic. stops before A 2Pan systolic. Continues till A 2
Post VPC intensity Increases No change/decreases
Carotid pulse Slow rising, low volume Quick rising high volume
Severity of aortic stenosis (Box 7.39)
Box 7.39: Signs indicating severity of aortic stenosis.
Mild:  Only murmur (early peaking)
Moderate:  Low volume pulse, mid-systolic peaking murmur, pulsus parvus et tardus
Severe:  Anacrotic pulse, paradoxical split S 2, late peaking murmur, palpable S 4, apico-carotid delay

Investigations
Chest X-ray
–   Rounding of apex due to concentric left ventricular hypertrophy with
normal heart size or a relatively small heart.
–   Prominent dilation of ascending aorta (more prominent if bicuspid
aortic valve) due to turbulent blood flow above the stenosed aortic
valve causing post-stenotic dilatation.
–   Calcification of aortic valve (if present).
Electrocardiogram (ECG)
–   Left ventricular hypertrophy correlation between QRS voltage.
–   Atrial fibrillation in 10–15%.
–   AV conduction defects and IVCD in 5% of calcific AS due to
extension of calcium to conduction system.
Echocardiography
–   Helps in evaluation of severity and gradient across the aortic valve.
–   Dobutamine stress echo
♦   Severe AS: Increase in gradient. No change in valve area.
♦   Mild AS: Increase in valve area.
♦   Also assesses contractile reserve, predicts improvement in LV
function after surgery. Doppler: Useful for detecting the severity of stenosis and associated
aortic regurgitation.
Cardiac magnetic resonance and cardiac CT: They may be required for
assessing the presence of aneurysm, dissection or coarctation thoracic
aorta.Cardiac catheterization  is rarely needed because since all these
information can be obtained from noninvasive with echocardiography and
CMR. Coronary angiography is needed before aortic valve surgery
and for detecting any associated coronary artery disease.
Treatment
Asymptomatic patients:  Irrespective of the severity of AS, asymptomatic patients have a good
immediate prognosis. Hence, should be managed conservatively with regular review for
assessment of symptoms and echocardiography.
Medical treatment

Avoid vigorous physical activity in patients with severe AS.
Diuretics decrease dyspnea but may also reduce cardiac output.
ACE inhibitors:  To be used with caution and given only if there is LV failure.
Avoid beta blockers: Because they produce LV failure.
Vasodilators for other purposes like angina:  Be careful in titration as there will be no
compensatory increase in cardiac output.
Atrial fibrillation:  Cardioversion can be tried.
Infective endocarditis prophylaxis for those who have undergone valvular replacement.
Rheumatic fever prophylaxis.
Surgical treatment
Indications
Symptomatic patients: Symptoms are a good index of severity in aortic stenosis, and all
symptomatic patients should undergo aortic valve replacement.
Asymptomatic patients:  Surgical intervention for severe aortic stenosis is recommended in
patients with:
–   Symptoms during an exercise test or with a fall of blood pressure.
–   Left ventricular ejection fraction of <50%.
–   Moderate to severe aortic stenosis undergoing CABG, surgery of the ascending aorta or other
cardiac valve.
Surgical procedures
Balloon dilatation (valvuloplasty)  may be tried in adults (especially elderly) as an alternative to
surgery. But results are poor and they should be reserved for patients unfit for surgery or as a
‘bridge’ to surgery (as systolic function will often improve).
Aortic valve replacement:  The above procedure causes only temporary relief from the
obstruction and aortic valve replacement will usually needed after few years.
Percutaneous valve replacement:  Transcatheter implantation with a balloon expandable stent
valve may be done for patients unsuitable for surgical aortic valve replacement.
ROSS procedure:  Replacement of deceased aortic valve by pulmonic valve and implantation of
homograft instead of native pulmonic valve.
Transcatheter aortic valve replacement (TAVR), transcatheter aortic valve implantation
(TAVI) is a procedure for select patients with severe symptomatic aortic stenosis.
Aortic Sclerosis
Q. Write short note on aortic sclerosis.
Aortic sclerosis is characterized by irregular thickening of the aortic valve
leaflets seen on echocardiography but without significant aortic
obstruction. It may produce a systolic ejection murmur without any
symptoms. Pulse, BP will be normal.About 25% patients are above the age 65 years and 40% over 85 years.
Risk factors: Dyslipidemia, diabetes, hypertension, and smoking. Higher
prevalence in Paget disease and end stage renal disease (ESRD).

There may be coexisting mitral annular calcification. Even if there is no
AS, calcific aortic sclerosis increases cardiovascular death and MI by
50%.
Rate of progression is variable so difficult to predict in an individual
patient. The valve area declines 0.1–0.3 cm2 per year; the systolic pressure
gradient across the valve can increase by as much as 10–15 mm Hg per
year.
Treatment
No medical treatment available.
Rosuvastatin has been shown to decrease progression of less severe AS to severe AS. Other drugs
tried include ACE inhibitors.
Bicuspid Aortic Valve (BAV) Disease
Q. Write a short note on bicuspid aortic valve disease.
Bicuspid aortic valve is the commonest congenital heart disease found in
1–2% of live births.
Male to female ratio is 3:1.
Some cases are inherited as autosomal dominant and NOTCH1 gene
mutation are found in some cases.
Associated conditions: Other congenital cardiac diseases (e.g. dilatation
of proximal ascending aorta secondary to abnormalities of the aortic
media), coarctation of aorta, ventricular septal defect (VSD), atrial septal
defect (ASD). Calcification is common in adults with bicuspid aortic
valve.Auscultatory findings: Ejection click best heard at the apex and may be
associated murmurs of aortic stenosis or aortic regurgitation.
Diagnosis: By echocardiography.
Complications
Aortic regurgitation: About 20% develop severe AR.
Aortic stenosis: Due to calcification and severe AS occurs after 50 years
of age.
Infective endocarditis.
Ascending aortic dilation: Due to medial degeneration and is not related

to severity of aortic stenosis.
Aortic dissection: Risk is increased by 5 to 9 times.
Treatment
Medical management: Control of hypertension and use of β-blockers.
Surgical treatment: Aortic valve replacement and may also require aortic root surgery.
Prognosis: Life-expectancy is usually not shortened.
Box 7.40: Causes of aortic regurgitation.
Acute aortic regurgitation
Infective endocarditis
Aortic dissection
Acute rheumatic fever
Ruptured sinus of Valsalva aneurysm
Failure of prosthetic valve
Trauma
Chronic aortic regurgitation
Congenital:  Bicuspid aortic valve or disproportionate cusps
Acquired:
–   Rheumatic heart disease
–   Infective endocarditis
–   Trauma
–   Aortic dilatation, e.g. aneurysm, dissection
–   Arthritides, e.g. ankylosing spondylitis
–   Rheumatoid arthritis
–   Syphilitic aortitis
–   Hypertension
–   Connective tissue disorders, e.g. Marfan syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
–   Osteogenesis imperfecta, methysergide
Aortic RegurgitationQ. Discuss the etiology, clinical features, complications, investigations
and treatment of aortic regurgitation.
Aortic regurgitation  (AR) is incompetency of the aortic valve which causes
backflow (reflux) of blood from the aorta through the aortic valve into the left
ventricle during diastole.
Etiology (Box 7.40)

Aortic regurgitation may be caused by diseases of the aortic valve (e.g.
endocarditis) or diseases of the aortic root (e.g. Marfan’s syndrome)
causing dilatation of the aortic root.
Aortic regurgitation can be acute or chronic.
Acute aortic regurgitation of significant severity leads to sudden
increased blood volume in the left ventricle during diastole. The left
ventricle does not have sufficient time to dilate in response to the sudden
increase in volume. This causes rapid increase in end-diastolic pressure of
left ventricle → leading to an increase in pulmonary venous pressure. As
pressure increases throughout the pulmonary circulation, the patient
develops dyspnea and pulmonary edema. In severe cases, left ventricular
failure with cardiogenic shock may develop. Decreased myocardial
perfusion may lead to myocardial ischemia.Chronic aortic regurgitation: Produces increased blood volume in the
left ventricle during diastole. To maintain the net cardiac output, the total
volume of blood pumped from the left ventricle into the aorta increases,
and consequently the left ventricle enlarges. AR begets AR. There is fall
in the diastolic blood pressure and decreased coronary. Myocardial
ischemia occurs due to:
–   Increased myocardial oxygen demand due to increased afterload,
increased LV ejection time and increased LV mass.
–   Decreased myocardial oxygen supply due to decreased aortic diastolic
pressure, decreased diastolic filling time due to increased LV ejection
time and decreased effective stroke volume.
Clinical Features
SymptomsAge and gender: About three-fourths of patients with pure or
predominant valvular AR are males. Females with primary valvular AR
have associated rheumatic mitral valve disease. Chronic AR usually
begins during late 50s. Usually, the prevalence and severity of AR
increase with age.Acute AR
–   Sudden, severe shortness of breath.
–   Chest pain if myocardial perfusion pressure is decreased or an aortic

dissection is present.
–   Rapidly developing heart failure, pulmonary edema and cardiogenic
shock.
Chronic AR
–   Relatively asymptomatic for 10–15 years and significant symptoms
occur late. Symptoms may not develop until left ventricular failure
occurs.
–   Palpitations, especially on lying down may persist for many years.
Sinus tachycardia, during exertion or with emotion may produce
palpitations as well as head pounding.
–   Exertional dyspnea: Usually, the first symptom of diminished cardiac
reserve. It depends on the extent of left ventricular dilatation and
dysfunction. It is followed by orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal
dyspnea, and excessive diaphoresis.
–   Angina pectoris: Anginal chest pain develops even in the absence of
coronary artery disease (CAD) at rest as well as during exertion.
Nocturnal angina may be accompanied by marked diaphoresis. These
episodes of angina can be prolonged and usually do not respond
satisfactorily to sublingual nitroglycerine. Mechanisms of angina in
AR:
♦   Associated CAD.
♦   Low aortic diastolic pressure leading to decreased myocardial
perfusion (because coronary flow occurs mainly in diastole).
♦   Increased myocardial oxygen demand due to myocardial
hypertrophy.Congestive heart failure
Sudden cardiac death
Arrhythmias are not common.
Signs
Q. Write short essay/note on peripheral signs of aortic regurgitation.
Peripheral signs of aortic regurgitation
Pulses
Peripheral pulses: Prominent, large-volume (bounding) or ‘collapsing’.

Low diastolic and increased/wide pulse pressure: Pulse pressure is the
difference between the systolic and diastolic blood pressures. In aortic
regurgitation there is increased/wide pulse pressure. Table 7.72 shows list
of (rare) signs of wide pulse pressure that indicates a hyperdynamic
circulation in aortic regurgitation.Inspection and palpation
Prominent neck pulsations and thrill in the carotids
Apex beat: Displaced inferiorly and toward the axilla. The point of
maximal impulse may be diffuse or hyperdynamic.
Pre-systolic impulse
Diastolic thrill: May be palpable along the left sternal border in patients
with thin-chest (Erbs maneuver).
Prominent systolic thrill: May be palpable in the suprasternal notch and
transmitted upward along the carotid arteries.
Table 7.72 Signs of wide pulse pressure in aortic regurgitation.
Sign Feature
Light house sign/Morton and Mahon
signAlternate flushing and blanching of forehead
Landolfi’s sign Change in pupillary size in synchronous with cardiac cycle
Becker’s sign Retinal artery pulsations
De Musset’s sign Head nodding with each heart beat/pulse
Muller’s sign Systolic pulsations of uvula
Quincke’s sign Capillary pulsations in the lip or nail bed. Detected by
pressing a glass slide on patients lip or nail bed
Corrigan’s sign Dancing carotids
Locomotor brachii Prominent pulsation of brachial artery
Watson’s water hammer
pulse/collapsing pulseBounding and forcible, rapidly increasing and subsequently
collapsing pulse
Pulsus bisferiens Double peaking in single systole
Pistol shot femorals or Traube’s sign Sharp bang heard on auscultation over the femoral arteries
in time with each a heart beat
Duroziez’s sign To and fro murmur heard when the femoral artery is
auscultated with pressure applied distally
Hill’s sign Popliteal cuff systolic pressure exceeds brachial cuff
pressure by >20 mm
Hg (Mild AR: 20–40 mm Hg, moderate AR: 40–60 mm

Hg, severe AR: > 60 mm Hg)
Drummond sign Systolic expulsion of air from nose when mouth is closed
Mayan’s sign When arm is raised, diastolic BP drops by more than 15
mm Hg
Quincke’s sign Pressure on tip of fingernail, fingertip transillumination or
glass slide on lip
Rosenbach’s sign Pulsations of liver
Gerhardt’s sign Pulsations of spleen
Ashrafian sign Pulsatile pseudoproptosis
Bozzolo sign Pulsatile nasal mucosa
Palmar click Pulsating palm
Dennison/Shelley sign Pulsatile cervix
Lincoln sign Popliteal pulsation
Sherman sign Dorsalis pedis prominent pulsation in age of 75 years or
more
Auscultation
First heart sound (S1): May be soft.
A2 component of second heart sound (S2): Soft in rheumatic aortic
regurgitation and loud and ‘tambour’ like in syphilitic AR. Narrowly
split, single or paradoxically split second heart sound.
S3 gallop, third heart sound (S3) if left ventricular dysfunction is present.
Fourth heart sound (S4) prominent in left ventricular hypertrophy
Murmurs
–   Early diastolic murmur: Early-holo diastolic murmur, immediately
after A2, usually as a high-pitched blowing sound that is loudest at the
left sternal border, and decrescendo. Best heard in at end of expiration,
in sitting and leaning forward position. The duration of the murmur
correlates better with the severity of AR than does the loudness of the
murmur.
–   Cole-Cecil murmur: It is the term used for the diastolic murmur of
AR when well or predominantly heard in the left axilla.
–   If the murmur is musical (cooing dove murmur), it signifies eversion or
perforation of an aortic cusp.
–   Harvey sign: When regurgitation is caused by primary valvular
disease, the diastolic murmur is heard best along the left sternal border

in the 3rd and 4th intercostal space. When murmur is caused mainly by
dilation of the ascending aorta, the murmur is more readily audible
along the right sternal border.
A functional systolic flow murmur may also be present because of
increased stroke volume, although concurrent AS may also be present.
Q. Write short note on Austin flint murmur.
Austin-Flint murmur:  It may be audible at the cardiac apex in severe AR. It is a low-pitched,
mid-diastolic rumbling murmur caused due to:
–   AR jet impinges on anterior mitral leaflet (AML) forces it down and reduces the mitral orifice.
–   Turbulence produced when AR jet meets mitral inflow jet.
–   AML fluttering due to AR jet.
–   LV endocardial vibrations due to AR jet.
The auscultatory features of AR are intensified by strenuous and sustained
handgrip (increases systemic vascular resistance).
As heart failure develops, peripheral vasoconstriction may occur and
arterial diastolic pressure may rise, even though severe AR is present (Box
7.41). Thus, pulse pressure can be normal or narrow in severe AR.
Box 7.41: Causes of AR with normal/low pulse pressure.
Acute AR
AR with AS or severe MS
AR with CHF
AR
Indicators of severity of aortic regurgitation are listed in Box 7.42.
Acute aortic regurgitation
Clinical presentation: Sudden in onset with acute left ventricular failure.
Signs
–   Pulse pressure: Normal and near normal systolic and diastolic
pressures.
–   S1: Soft or absent.
–   P2: Normal or increased
–   S3: Usually audible.
–   Murmur:

♦   Early diastolic murmur is short and functional systolic murmur
across aortic valve is less loud.
♦   Austin flint murmur is usually absent.
Investigations of acute aortic regurgitation:
–   ECG and chest X-ray: Do not show evidence of left ventricular
enlargement. Chest X-ray may show redistribution of upper lobe
vessels due to pulmonary venous hypertension.
Box 7.42: Indicators of severity of aortic regurgitation.
Duration of murmur:  If murmur > two thirds of diastole, murmur becomes holodiastolic and
rough in quality
Bisferiens pulse
S3
Positive Hill’s sign >60 mm Hg
Cardiomegaly:  Apical impulse displaced down and out
Austin-Flint murmur
A2 soft
Marked peripheral signs
Investigations of Chronic Aortic Regurgitation
Chest X-ray: It shows cardiomegaly due to the enlargement/dilatation of
the left ventricle in an inferior and leftward direction. The ascending aorta
(and the aortic arch or knob) is also severely dilated. Left atrial
enlargement is not found unless there is significant left ventricular
dysfunction. Calcification of the ascending aortic wall and the aortic valve
may be observed in syphilitic aortic regurgitation. Later it may show
features of left heart failure.Electrocardiography (ECG): It shows the adaptive changes in the left
ventricle due to the volume overload. These include: (1) LV hypertrophy:
Tall R waves and deeply inverted T waves in the left sided chest leads, (2)
left axis deviation, (3) left atrial enlargement, (4) LV volume overload
pattern (prominent Q waves in leads I, aVL, and V3 to V6 and relatively
small r waves in V1) and 5) LV conduction defects (typically late in the
disease process).Echocardiography:
–   Aortic valve structure and morphology (e.g. bileaflet versus trileaflet,

flail, thickening).
–   Presence of vegetations or nodules (may require transesophageal
echocardiography in selected cases)
–   Quantitative measurements of regurgitant volume, fraction and orifice
area assessed.
–   Fluttering anterior mitral leaflet
–   Regurgitant volume, fraction, and orifice area
–   Associated lesions of the aorta, e.g. dilation, aneurysm, dissection, or
ectasia
–   LV structure and function
Doppler echocardiography: To assess the severity. Transesophageal
echocardiography is not usually needed.
Cardiac magnetic resonance and cardiac CT: To assess the thoracic
aorta for the aneurysm, dissection or coarctation but are rarely needed.
Cardiac MR can quantify regurgitant volume.Cardiac catheterization
Coronary angiography: Indicated for the assessment of coronary
anatomy prior to aortic valve surgery in patients with risk factors for
coronary artery diseaseOther tests
–   VDRL and TPHA: If syphilitic cause is suspected.
–   RA factor, ANA, ESR and CRP: To exclude connective tissue
disorders.
Box 7.43: Indications for aortic valve surgery.
Patient is symptomatic (dyspnea, NYHA class IIIB, angina) with chronic severe aortic
regurgitation
Patient is asymptomatic, with a resting left ventricular ejection fraction (EF) of ≤55%
Patient is asymptomatic, with left ventricular ejection fraction >55% but with left ventricle dilation
(LV end diastolic dimension >70 mm or end-systolic dimension >55 mm)
Fractional shortening (FS) <0.27
Acute severe aortic regurgitation, e.g. endocarditis
If undergoing CABG, surgery of the ascending aorta or other cardiac valve
Q. Write short essay/note on management of acute severe aortic
regurgitation in pulmonary edema.

Treatment
Underlying cause of AR like dissection, endocarditis, syphillis has to be treated.
Prophylaxis:  Rheumatic fever prophylaxis is needed if due to rheumatic. Infective endocarditis
prophylaxis is not required.
Acute severe AR: Surgical intervention is usually needed, but the patient may be medically
supported with dobutamine to augment cardiac output and shorten diastole and sodium
nitroprusside  to reduce afterload in hypertensive patients.
Chronic severe AR.
Medical treatment
Vasodilator therapy may be used in selected conditions to reduce afterload in patients with systolic
hypertension to reduce wall stress and optimize LV function. In normotensive patients, vasodilator
therapy may not be useful because it does not reduce regurgitant volume (preload) significantly.The acute administration of sodium nitroprusside, hydralazine, nifedipine or felodipine reduced
PVR and results in an immediate augmentation in forward cardiac output and a reduction in
regurgitant volume. Nitroprusside and hydralazine induced acute hemodynamic changes lead to a
consistent decrease in end-diastolic volume (EDV) and an increase in ejection fraction (EF).
Surgical treatmentAR usually requires replacement of the diseased valve with a prosthetic valve, although valve-
sparing repair is available like transcatheter aortic valve replacement/implantation
(TAVR/TAVI) .
Indications for aortic valve surgery (Box 7.43)
Types of valves:  For patients undergoing AV replacement, careful consideration should be given
to the relative risks and benefits of mechanical vs bioprosthetic valves.
–   Mechanical valves:  More durable but require long-term anticoagulation with warfarin due to
increased risk of thrombosis.
–   Bioprosthetic (tissue) valves carry a greater risk of long-term deterioration (e.g. rapid
calcification and degeneration of the valves) and risk of reoperation but avoid the need for
long-term warfarin. Thus they are preferred in the elderly and when anticoagulants must be
avoided. They are contraindicated in children and young adults.Aortic root dilation causing AR:  For example, Marfan’s syndrome. Treated by encircling suture
or subcommissural annuloplasty, or aortic graft with prosthetic valve (coronaries need to be
reimplanted) or aortic graft alone.
Difference between rheumatic and syphilitic aortic regurgitation (Table
7.73)
Q. What are the differences between rheumatic and syphilitic aortic
regurgitation?
Table 7.73: Differences between aortic regurgitation (AR) of rheumatic and
syphilitic etiology.
Feature Rheumatic AR Syphilitic AR
Age group 10–40 years Older than 40 years

Angina Less common More common
Early diastolic murmur (EDM) best
audible atErb’s area Aortic area
Character of EDM Soft, blowing Cooling dove or seagull
Character of A 2 Soft Loud and tambour
Association with aortic stenosis or
mitral valve diseaseMay be associated Not associated
Decompensation Relatively late Relatively early
Calcification aorta Not seen May be present
Features of underlying cause or
etiologyOther features of RHD may
be presentStigmata of syphilis present
Difference between Acute and Chronic Aortic Regurgitation
(Table 7.74)
Q. What are the differences between acute and chronic aortic
regurgitation?
Table 7.74: Differences between acute and chronic aortic regurgitation.
Clinical features Acute aortic regurgitation Chronic aortic
regurgitation
Congestive cardiac failure Early and sudden Late and insidious
Arterial pulse Low volume
Pulsus alternansHigh volume, collapsing,
water hammer, pulsus
bisferans
Blood pressure Normal/low Wide pulse pressure
Contour of peak of pulse Single Bisferians
Left ventricle impulse Near normal Laterally displaced
S1 Soft to absent Normal
A2 Soft N/decreased
S3 Common Absent
S4 Consistently absent Usually absent
Aortic systolic murmur Grade 3/less Grade 3/more
Aortic regurgitant murmur Short, medium pitched Long, high pitched
Austin Flint murmur Mid-diastolic Presystolic, mid-diastolic
Peripheral signs Absent Present
Difference between Austin Flint murmurs from the murmur of mitral

stenosis (Table 7.75)
Q. What are the differences between Austin Flint murmur and the
murmur of mitral stenosis (MS)?
Table 7.75: Differences between Austin Flint murmur and the murmur of
mitral stenosis.
Feature Austin Flint murmur Mitral stenosis
murmur
Diastolic thrill at apex Absent Present
Wide pulse pressure Present Absent
Peripheral signs of AR ++ –
Heart sounds and murmur
First heart sound (S 1) – Loud
P2– Loud
Third heart sound (S 3) + –
Opening snap (OS) – +
Presystolic accentuation ± +
Associated EDM at aortic area ++ –
With amyl nitrite Murmur decreases No change
Evidence of pulmonary hypertension, RV
enlargement and/or hypertrophyAbsent Present
Evidence of LV enlargement and/or hypertrophy Present Absent
Atrial fibrillation - May occur
Tricuspid Stenosis (TS)
Q. Write short essay/note on tricuspid stenosis (TS).
Tricuspid stenosis is a narrowing of the tricuspid valve opening.
Uncommon valve lesion that is more common in females than males.
Etiology (Box 7.44)
Box 7.44: Causes of tricuspid stenosis.
Rheumatic (frequently associated with mitral and/or aortic valve disease)
Carcinoid syndrome:  Tricuspid stenosis and regurgitation are found in carcinoid syndrome
Congenital

Infective endocarditis
Anorectics:  Fenfluramine
Fabry’s disease
Pathophysiology
Tricuspid valve stenosis reduces the cardiac output, which is restored to
normal when the pressure of right atrium increases → results in systemic
venous congestion → hepatomegaly, ascites and dependent edema.
Clinical Features
Symptoms
Usually, symptoms are due to associated left sided rheumatic valve lesions
(e.g. mitral stenosis).
Tricuspid stenosis may produce symptoms of right heart failure:
Abdominal pain/hepatic discomfort (due to hepatomegaly), peripheral
edema, and ascitesLittle or no dyspnea and fatigue is common.
Signs
Jugular venous pressure (JVP): JVP is raised with prominent a waves
(giant a waves) and slowly descent due to the loss of normal rapid right
ventricular filling.Mid-diastolic murmur: Loud first heart sound and a rumbling mid-
diastolic murmur (higher-pitched than the murmur of mitral stenosis) with
presystolic accentuation, best heard at the lower left sternal border and
increases/louder during inspiration (De-Carvallo’s sign).Tricuspid opening snap (OS): Occasionally heard.
Right heart failure: Hepatomegaly with presystolic pulsation felt over
the liver, ascites and peripheral edema.
Investigations
Chest X-ray: May show a prominent right atrial bulge.
ECG: Enlarged right atrium
Echocardiogram: May reveal thickened and immobile tricuspid valve.
Treatment
Medical management: Diuretic therapy and salt and fluid restriction.

Surgical treatment:  Tricuspid valve replacement.
Tricuspid Regurgitation
Q. Write short essay/note on tricuspid regurgitation. What is De-
Carvallo’s sign?
In tricuspid regurgitation, tricuspid valve does not close properly, causing
blood to flow backward (leak) into the right atrium.
Etiology
Tricuspid regurgitation is common. Most commonly it is functional
secondary to right ventricular dilatation.
Causes of Tricuspid Regurgitation
Primary/organic: Rheumatic heart disease, endocarditis (IV drug abuse)
Ebstein’s congenital anomaly carcinoid syndrome
Secondary
–   Functional tricuspid regurgitation: Right ventricular dilatation due
to chronic left heart failure
–   Right ventricular infarction, inferior wall infarction
–   Pulmonary hypertension (e.g. cor pulmonale)
–   Cardiomyopathy.
Clinical Features
Symptoms are usually nonspecific. Tiredness due to reduced forward
flow.
Valvular regurgitation increases the right atrial and systemic venous
pressure. Patients may develop of right heart failure, i.e. edema, ascites
and hepatomegaly with systolic pulsations due to venous congestion.JVP: Raised with most prominent ‘giant’ v wave in the jugular venous
pulse (a cv wave replaces the normal x descent).
Earlobe pulsations (Lancisi’s sign)
Blowing pansystolic murmur: At the lower-left sternal border that is
increased during inspiration and reduced during expiration (De-Carvallo’s
sign).P2 may be loud (due to pulmonary hypertension) and RV S3 is heard.

Severe TR: Right jugular venous thrill and an RV impulse at the left
lower sternal border. Long-standing severe TR may lead to RV
dysfunction–induced heart failure and atrial fibrillation (AF).
Echocardiogram: It shows dilated right ventricle and thickened valve.
Treatment
Functional tricuspid regurgitation  due to right ventricular dilatation usually disappears with
treatment of the underlying cause of right ventricular overload. Treatment consists of with diuretic
and vasodilator treatment of congestive cardiac failure.
Organic tricuspid regurgitation: TR is usually well tolerated when there is normal pulmonary
artery pressure. Severe organic tricuspid regurgitation may require operative repair of the tricuspid
valve by annuloplasty or plication or valve repair, or occasionally tricuspid valve replacement. In
drug addicts with infective endocarditis of the tricuspid valve, surgical removal of the valve is
recommended to eradicate the infection.
Pulmonary Stenosis
Q. Write short essay/note on pulmonary stenosis.
Pulmonary stenosis (PS) is characterized by obstruction to blood flow from
the right ventricle to the pulmonary artery.
Etiology
Congenital: Usually PS is a congenital lesion. It may be associated with
rubella during pregnancy. May be an isolated lesion or associated with a
ventricular septal defect (Fallot’s tetralogy).Acquired:
–   Rheumatic (very uncommon)
–   Carcinoid syndrome.
Pulmonary stenosis may be classified as valvular, subvalvular (infundibular)
or supravalvular.
Clinical Features
Symptoms
Mild pulmonary stenosis may be asymptomatic.
Fatigue, syncope, dyspnea and the symptoms of right heart failure. Angina
or syncope indicates severe pulmonary stenosis.
Signs

Systolic thrill: The ejection systolic murmur (described below) is often
associated with a thrill. It is best felt when patient sits up, learns forward
and breathes out.
Right ventricular heave (sustained impulse) and epigastric pulsation may
be felt.
Pulmonary closure sound (P2) is soft and delayed.
Wide splitting of second heart sound: Due to delay in right ventricular
ejection.
Ejection systolic murmur: It is principal physical sign. It is best heard on
inspiration at the left upper sternum in the second intercostal space. It
radiates towards the left shoulder. With progressive severity, the murmur
gets harsh/louder longer and peaks later in systole. This murmur is usually
preceded by an ejection sound (click).Ejection click: Mild stenosis is characterized by a systolic ejection click
which is often more prominent in expiration. This seemingly paradoxical
behavior of the pulmonary ejection click is explained by an inspiratory
increase in RV end-diastolic pressure, which opens the valve in late
diastole and hence absence of systolic ejection click during inspiratory
phase.High-pitched diastolic murmur  after a prominent P2 may be evident in
patients with pulmonary regurgitation secondary to pulmonary
hypertension (Graham Steel murmur).
If stenosis is valvular, pulmonary ejection sound/click will be heard.
Moderately severe stenosis is associated with a right ventricular fourth
sound and a prominent jugular venous a wave.
Features of severe pulmonary stenosis: (1) loud harsh murmur, (2)
inaudible pulmonary closure sound (P2), (3) increased right ventricular
heave, (4) prominent a waves in the jugular pulse, (5) right ventricular
hypertrophy in ECG and (6) chest X-ray shows post-stenotic dilatation in
the pulmonary artery.Investigations
ECG: Shows both right ventricular and right atrial hypertrophy.
Chest X-ray:  Shows a prominent pulmonary artery (extending into the
left pulmonary artery branch) owing to post-stenotic dilatation.

Doppler echocardiography is the definitive investigation.
Cardiac catheterization.
Treatment
Mild and even moderate pulmonary valve stenosis and regurgitation do not result in RV overload
and may require no specific treatment other than prophylaxis for infective endocarditis.
Moderately severe and severe pulmonary valve stenosis (resting gradient >50 mm Hg with a
normal cardiac output) is currently treated by percutaneous balloon valvotomy or, if this is not
available, by surgical valvotomy. Postoperatively pulmonary regurgitation may develop which is
benign in nature.
Prognosis: Long-term prognosis is very good.
INFECTIVE ENDOCARDITIS
Q. Discuss the etiology, pathology, clinical features, laboratory
features/investigations, management/treatment of infective
endocarditis.
Q. Discuss the etiology, pathology, clinical features, complications,
investigations, management/treatment of subacute bacterial
endocarditis (SBE).
Infective endocarditis (IE) is an infection of the endocardium of heart
valves or the mural endocardium.
Definition: Infective endocarditis is defined as an endovascular infection of
cardiovascular structures by microbes. These structures include heart valves,
atrial and ventricular endocardium, large intrathoracic vessels and
intracardiac foreign bodies (e.g. prosthetic valves, pacemaker leads and
surgical conduits).The causative organism may be bacterium, fungus, chlamydia or
rickettsia. Majority of cases are due to infection by streptococci and
staphylococci.Consequences of infective endocarditis: Valvular dysfunction, localized or
generalized sepsis and source for embolism.
Classification
According to the clinical course: Acute, subacute and chronic.
According to the causative organism: Bacterial, viral, rickettsial, or

fungal.
According to the nature of valve or device: Native or prosthetic.
According to the side affected: Left-sided or right-sided infective
endocarditis.
According to the side affected and nature of valve/device: (1) Left-
sided infective endocarditis, (2) left-sided prosthetic infective
endocarditis, (3) right-sided infective endocarditis and (4) device-related
(permanent pacemaker, implantable cardioverter defibrillator) infective
endocarditis.
Differences between acute endocarditis and subacute endocarditis (Table
7.76)
Table 7.76: Differences between acute and subacute endocarditis.
Characteristic Acute infective endocarditis Subacute infective
endocarditis
Onset Acute Insidious
Condition of valve Infection of normal heart
valve as well as damaged
valvesInfection of structurally
abnormal/deformed valves
or at sites where the
endothelium is damaged by
a high pressure jet of blood
Virulence of organisms Highly virulent
(suppurative) and invasive
organismsLow virulent
Source of infection or portal of entry Often evident Common sources of
infection are periodontal
infections (dental treatment),
gastrointestinal tract
infections and urinary tract
infections
Lesions Vegetations are more florid.
Affected valve is rapidly
destroyed. Abscess (local
and metastatic) formation is
more commonLess destructive. Formation
of vegetations, embolic
episodes, mycotic
aneurysms, valve
regurgitation, splenic and
renal infarcts, and immune
glomerulonephritis
Clinical features Of acute infection Of complications
Course Fulminant course, death
within 6 weeksProtracted course of weeks
Complications Acute heart failure or Infectious complications are

overwhelming sepsis uncommon
Causative organisms Staphylococcus aureus
Pseudomonas
Candida
Streptococcus
pneumoniae
Neisseria gonorrhoeaeStreptococcus viridans (S.
sanguis, S. mitis),
Streptococcus milleri,
Streptococcus bovis,
Enterococcus faecalis,
Staphylococcus aureus
HACEK Group*
(*HACEK:  H  = Haemophilus parainfluenzae, Haemophilus aphrophilus, Haemophilusparaphrophilus, Haemophilus influenzae;  A = Actinobacillus actinomycetem comitans; C =
Cardiobacterium hominis;  E = Eikenella corrodens;  K = Kingella kingae, Kingella denitrificans )
Predisposing Factors
Underlying heart disease:
–   About 72% of patients have a pre-existing structural cardiac
abnormality.
–   Congenital isolated aortic valvular stenosis is most often associated
with infective endocarditis (IE). Other congenital heart diseases
include ventricular septal defect (VSD), tetralogy of Fallot (TOF),
idiopathic subaortic stenosis and atrial septal defect (uncommon).
–   When IE involves valses it commonly involves mitral valve followed
by aortic valve and uncommonly tricuspid valve (1%).
–   Major risk for IE are cardiac prosthetic valves and parenteral narcotic
drug abuse.
Impaired host defense mechanism: It may occur in diabetes mellitus,
malignancies (e.g. leukemias and lymphomas), cytotoxic therapy and
neutropenia.Conditions with bacteremia: Most important predisposing factors to the
development of endocarditis are conditions that lead to bacteremia.
Transient bacteremia from any cause may lead to infective endocarditis
and include the following surgical procedures from different sources.
–   Respiratory tract: Tonsillectomy and/or adenoidectomy, surgical
operations (incision or biopsy) involving respiratory mucosa and any
invasive procedure of the respiratory tract used to treat an established
infection (e.g. drainage of an abscess or empyema).
–   Oral cavity: All dental procedures in which there is handling of
gingival tissue or the periapical region of teeth or perforation of the

oral mucosa (e.g. dental extractions, suture removal, placement of
orthodontic band, root canal treatment).
–   Gastrointestinal tract: Procedures done in an established GIT
infection.
–   Genitourinary tract: Procedures performed in an established infection
(e.g. cystoscopy during known enterococcal urinary tract infection—
UTI).
–   Skin and musculoskeletal system: Procedures involving infected
tissue.
Common Organisms for Infective Endocarditis (Table 7.77)
Q. Write short essay/note on common causative agents for infective
endocarditis.
More than 75% of infective endocarditis is caused by streptococci or
staphylococci.
Postoperative Endocarditis or Prosthetic Valve Endocarditis
It develops after cardiac surgery and may affect native or prosthetic valves and other prosthetic
materials.
Depending on the time of development of endocarditis following surgery, it can be divided into
early, intermediate and late endocarditis.
–   Early (within 60 days of surgery) endocarditis is caused by intraoperative or hospital-acquired
infections. The most common organism is a coagulase-negative Staphylococcus ( Staph.
epidermidis) which is a normal commensal in the skin and followed by fungi ( Candida,
Aspergillus).
–   Late (after 1 year) endocarditis is caused by infection with community-acquired organisms. The
causative organism is the same with those causing acute and subacute endocarditis of native
valve.
–   Endocarditis developing between 60 days and 1 year are due to a mixture of hospital-acquired
episodes caused by less virulent organisms community-acquired episodes. The organisms
include Streptococcus viridans  and enterococci. Type of prosthetic valves:
–   Aortic prosthetic valve is more prone to endocarditis than mitral prosthetic valve.
–   During first 3 months after surgery mechanical heart valves develop endocarditis more
frequently than bioprosthetic ones. However, later on the rates of infection for the two valve
types are same and are comparable at 5 years.
Table 7.77: Organisms causing infective endocarditis.
Native valves % Narcotic addicts % Prosthetic valves %

Streptococcus
viridians30–40 Staphylococcus
aureus50–60 Staphylococcus
epidermidis20–30
Staphylococcus
aureus10–30 Streptococci 8–15 Staphylococcus
aureus15–20
Staphylococcus
epidermidis1–3 Staphylococcus
epidermidis2–5 Streptococcus
viridans5–20
Enterococci 5–15 Enterococci 8–10 Enterococci 5–10
Other streptococci 15–20 Other streptococci 10–15 Other streptococci 1–5
Gram -ve bacilli 2–10 Gram -ve bacilli 4–8 Gram -ve bacilli 10–20
Fungi 2–4 Fungi 4–5 Fungi 5–15
Culture negative 5–10 Culture negative 5–8 Culture negative <5
Right-sided endocarditis: Develops in intravenous drug users and are
mainly caused by organisms found on the skin (e.g. Staphylococcus aureus,
Candida). It usually presents with acute endocarditis and affects mainly
tricuspid valve.
Culture Negative Endocarditis (Box 7.45)Defined as endocarditis without etiology following inoculation of at least
three independent blood samples in a standard blood culture system with
negative cultures after 7 days of incubation and subculturing.
They constitute 5–10% of cases of endocarditis.
Box 7.45:  Causes of culture negative endocarditis.
It is usually due to prior antibiotic therapy
Inadequate quantity of blood taken for culture
Anaerobic infection
Some may be due to a variety of fastidious organisms that does not grow in normal blood cultures.
These include Coxiella burnetti (cause of Q fever), Chlamydia  species, Bartonella species (cause
trench fever and cat scratch disease) and Legionella
Right-sided endocarditis
Non-infective endocarditis.
Pathogenesis
Mechanism by which virulent organisms infect apparently normal valves is
poorly understood.
The probable sequence of events, which occur with the infection of a
damaged valve by less-virulent organisms is as follows:
Endocardial damage/injury and denudation

Formation of sterile thrombus
Adherence of the microorganisms: Transient bacteremia →
microorganisms gain access to the circulation and adhere and gets
deposited to the sterile vegetations (infection of thrombi).
Proliferation of microorganisms within vegetations
Formation of emboli: The vegetation may get detached and form
infective emboli → cause spread of infection to visceral organs such as
kidney, spleen, and brain. They may result in infarction or abscess. Septic
emboli cause arteritis with weakness of arterial wall leading to mycotic
aneurysms.Deposition of immune complexes: Antigen and antibody may form
immune complexes and can produce focal glomerulonephritis and
microscopic hematuria, diffuse glomerulonephritis, vasculitis of cerebral
vessels leading to cerebrovascular accidents and perisplenitis.
Clinical Features
Q. Write short essay/note on important signs of infective endocarditis.
The clinical features of infective endocarditis depend on the causative
organism and the presence of predisposing cardiac conditions.
Endocarditis may be acute or a more insidious ‘subacute’ form. However,
there is overlap between the two because the clinical pattern depends not
only on the causative organism, but also depends on the site of infection,
prior antibiotic therapy and the presence of a valve or shunt prosthesis.
Subacute Endocarditis (SBE)
Clinical suspicion of subacute endocarditis is necessary when a patient with
congenital or valvular heart disease develops certain features. These include:
Evidence of infectionVague symptoms such as unusual tiredness, fatigue, lassitude, loss of
appetite, loss of weight.
Persistent or intermittent low-grade or high-grade fever (84%) with night
sweats, chills and rigors.
Clubbing (Fig. 7.45A) in fingers is a late sign and is found only in 10–
20% of patients.
Splenomegaly:  Spleen is frequently palpable and the liver may also be

enlarged.
Brownish pigmentation of face and limbs.
Evidence of new valve lesion (regurgitant)/murmurs or change of
murmur
New murmur: Particularly a diastolic murmur is the diagnostic feature. It
is detected in about 15% of patients during initial period. However, most
patients develop a murmur during the course of the disease.Changing murmurs: Apart from integrity of valves, factors such as
change in cardiac output, temperature, and hematocrit may be responsible
for change of murmurs. However, new regurgitant murmur developing in
acute sepsis is almost diagnostic of endocarditis.
Evidence of embolismCutaneous manifestations: These include the following:
–   Purpura and petichiae  (20–40%)(Fig. 7.45B) subconjunctival splinter
(Fig. 7.45C) or subungual splinter hemorrhages due to
microthromboemboli.
–   Janeway lesions: Erythematous, non-tender nodules on palms or soles.
–   Ocular manifestations:  Roth spot (Fig. 7.45D) are flame-shaped
hemorrhages which may occasionally appear like cotton wool spots.
Septic infarcts/abscess: Spleen (painful splenomegaly), kidney (loin pain,
hematuria and renal failure), brain (convulsions, hemiplegia, aphasia, loss
of vision and cerebellar disturbances), peripheral arteries (claudication,
absence of peripheral pulses and gangrene) or lungs (pulmonary
infarction, pleurisy and pleural effusion due to right-sided endocarditis).Mycotic aneurysms.
Evidence of immunological phenomena
Osler nodes (Fig. 7.45E): Tender, small, painful, swollen,
purplish/erythematous subcutaneous papules/nodules in pulp of distal
fingers due to hypersensitive angiitis. Cultures are negative and persist for
hours to several days.Roth spots (Fig. 7.45F) are circular retinal hemorrhages with white or
pale centers spots composed of fibrin.
Focal segmental glomerulonephritis: Develop due to deposition of
antigen-antibody complexes in glomeruli. Grossly, the outer surface of

kidney develops a flea-bitten appearance due to patchy hemorrhagic foci
involving the glomeruli. Patents develop microscopic hematuria.
Investigations
Aim of investigations: (1) To confirm the diagnosis of infective
endocarditis, (2) to identify the causative organism for appropriate therapy,
and (3) to assess the patient’s response to therapy.
Figs. 7.45A to F:  Signs of infective endocarditis: (A) Clubbing; (B) Petechiae; (C) Subconjunctival
hemorrhage; (D) Roth spots; (E) Oslers nodes; (F) Echocardiography showing vegetation.
Q. Write short essay/note on tests for infective endocarditis.
Microbiological Investigations
Blood cultures are the crucial investigations in infective endocarditis (1)
to identify the causative microorganism and (2) guide antibiotic therapy.
At least 3 sets of blood samples for cultures should be taken from different
venipuncture sites over 24 hours before commencing therapy. Aseptic
technique should be followed and the risk of contaminants should be
minimized. Blood samples for cultures should not be obtained from an in-
dwelling line. Both aerobic and anaerobic cultures are needed.Serological tests are useful if there is suspicion of diagnosis and the
cultures are negative. Culture negative cases may be due to organisms
which will not grow in blood cultures such as Coxiella, Bartonella,
Legionella, Chlamydia.

Electrocardiogram: ECG will help to detect complications like
conduction abnormalities (AV block) and occasionally myocardial
infarction due to emboli. PR prolongation/heart block is associated with
aortic root abscess.Chest X-ray: It may show evidence of cardiac failure, cardiomegaly,
pulmonary edema in left-sided disease, pulmonary emboli/abscess in
right-sided disease.Echocardiography: It plays a key role to identify the presence and size of
vegetations (Fig. 7.45F), assess valve damage, abscess formation, detect
intracardiac complications and assess cardiac function. However, if
vegetations are not detected the diagnosis of endocarditis cannot be
excluded.
–   Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE): It is a first-line noninvasive
imaging test with sensitivity of 60–75% and high specificity for
demonstrating vegetations, valvular dysfunction, ventricular function,
abscesses. Vegetations as small as 2–4 mm can be detected.
–   Transesophageal echocardiography (TOE): It is a second-line
invasive imaging test with greater sensitivity (>90%) and specificity
than TTE. It can detect vegetations even smaller ones (1–1.5 mm),
aortic root abscess, and prosthetic valve endocarditis.Complete blood counts: May show normocytic normochromic anemia
(reduced hemoglobin) and increased WBC counts and increased or
reduced platelets.Urea and Creatinine: May be increased due to glomerulonephritis.
Liver biochemistry: Serum alkaline phosphatase may be increased.
Inflammatory markers: Increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
and C-reactive protein are observed. CRP also helps in monitoring
response to therapy; it is reduced in response to therapy and increased with
relapse.Urine: Proteinuria and hematuria occur frequently.
Modified Duke Criteria for the Diagnosis of Infective
Endocarditis (Table 7.78)
Diagnosis by these guidelines requires either pathologic or clinical criteria.
If clinical criteria are used

–   Definite endocarditis, two major, or one major + three minor, or five
minor criteria are required for diagnosis.
–   Possible endocarditis = One major and one minor, or three minor
criteria.
Complications
Q. Write short essay/note on complications of infective endocarditis.
Cardiac complications: These are due to direct valvular damage and
consequences of local invasion . The infection may spread locally from
valve into the valve ring, adjacent mural endocardium or chordae
tendineae.
–   Ring abscess: Vegetations may erode the underlying myocardium
and produce an abscess which is known as ring abscess.
–   Perforation and rupture: May involve valve leaflets, aorta or
interventricular septa (depending on the site of infection).
–   Myocardial abscess usually due to S. aureus
–   Suppurative pericarditis.
–   Valvular dysfunction and heart failure: Stenosis or insufficiency.
Heart failure is most common and is due to valvular regurgitation.
–   Prosthetic dehiscence
–   Valvular distortion/destruction chordal rupture.
–   Conduction abnormalities
–   Purulent pericarditisRenal : At least in 4 forms: (1) prerenal due to low cardiac output, (2)
microabscess formation secondary to septic emboli, (3) glomerular
dysfunction as a result of circulating immune complexes and (4) renal
failure as a result of antibiotics.Embolic events (discussed under evidence of embolism—subacute
endocarditis)
–   Vegetations are usually friable and likely to be break, detach and cause
embolism.
–   Embolic complications (due to septic emboli): Emboli contain large
numbers of virulent organisms → abscesses develop at the sites of
arrest of the emboli. Septic emboli from left side of the heart: They

enter systemic circulation and its consequences are:
♦   Septic infarcts (e.g. spleen, kidney or brain)
♦   Mycotic aneurysms
♦   Small emboli (microthromboemboli) may produce: (1) splinter or
subungual hemorrhages and (2) Janeway lesions
♦   Septic emboli from right side of the heart: They enter pulmonary
circulation → lead to pulmonary abscess.
Immunological phenomena
–   Focal segmental glomerulonephritis: Develop due to deposition of
antigen-antibody complexes in glomeruli. Grossly, the outer surface of
kidney develops a flea-bitten appearance due to patchy hemorrhagic
foci involving the glomeruli.
–   Osler nodes: They are small, tender subcutaneous nodules in the pulp
of the digits and persist for hours to several days.
–   Roth spots are retinal hemorrhages with white or pale centers
composed of fibrin.
Table 7.78 Modified Duke criteria for the diagnosis of infective
endocarditis.
Clinical Criteria
Major
Positive blood cultures for IE (one of the following):
Typical microorganisms consistent with IE from two separate blood cultures:Staphylococcus aureus
Viridans streptococci
Streptococcus gallolyticus (formerly S. bovis), including nutritional variant strains (Granulicatella
spp and Abiotrophia defectiva)
HACEK group: Haemophilus spp, Aggregatibacter  (formerly Actinobacillus actinomycete
comitants ), Cardiobacterium hominis , Eikenella spp., and Kingella kingae
Community-acquired enterococci, in the absence of a primary focus; OR
Persistently positive blood culture:
For organisms that are typical causes of IE: At least two positive blood cultures from blood
samples drawn >12 hours apart
For organisms that are more commonly skin contaminants: Three or a majority of ≥4 separate
blood cultures (with first and last drawn at least one hour apart)
Single positive blood culture for Coxiella burnetii  or phase I IgG antibody titer >1:800
Evidence of endocardial involvement (one of the following):
Echocardiogram positive for IE:

Vegetation (oscillating intracardiac mass on a valve or on supporting structures, in the path of
regurgitant jets, or on implanted material, in the absence of an alternative anatomic explanation)
OR
Abscess OR
New partial dehiscence of prosthetic valve
New valvular regurgitation
Increase in or change in preexisting murmur not sufficient
Minor
Fever ≥38 °C (100.4 °F)
Predisposition: Predisposing heart lesion or intravenous drug use
Vascular phenomena: Arterial petechiae, subungual/splinter hemorrhages, emboli, septic
pulmonary infarcts, mycotic aneurysm, intracranial hemorrhage, conjunctival hemorrhages,
Janeway lesions
Immunological phenomena: Focal segmental glomerulonephritis, Osler nodes, Roth spots
Microbiologic evidence, including a single culture positive but not meeting a major criterion, or
for an unusual organism that can cause infective endocarditis
Pathologic Criteria
Demonstration of microorganisms by culture or histologic examination in:
Vegetation
Embolus from a vegetation
Intracardiac abscess
Histological confirmation of active endocarditis in vegetation or intracardiac abscess
Table 7.79 Antimicrobial treatment of common causative organisms in
infective endocarditis.
Organism Antimicrobial treatment with dose and duration
Infective endocarditis
awaiting culture report, no
suspicion of staphylococciBenzylpenicillin IV 1.2 g 4 hourly, 4–6 weeks
Plus Gentamicin IV 80 mg 12 hourly, 2–6 weeks
OR Amoxyclline/clavulanate 12 g/day in four divided doses plus
gentamicin 1 mg/kg thrice a day for 4–6 weeks
Suspected staphylococcal
endocarditis (IVDU, recent
intravascular devices or
cardiac surgery, acute
infection)Vancomycin IV 1 g 12 hourly (30 mg/kg/day—(not to exceed 2
g/day) for 6 weeks
Plus gentamicin IV 80–120 mg 8 hourly for 1–2 weeks. In prosthetic
valve endocarditis, add rifampicin 20 mg/kg/day in two divided doses.
Streptococci highly sensitive
to penicillinBenzylpenicillin IV 1.2 g 4 hourly for 4 weeks OR
Ceftriaxone IV 2 g once a day for 4 weeks OR
Benzylpenicillin or ceftriaxone for 2 weeks plus gentamicin 3 mg/kg
once a day for 2 weeks
Vancomycin 30 mg/kg/day in two divided doses (not to exceed 2
g/day) for 4 weeks in penicillin-sensitive patients
Streptococci less sensitive to
penicillinBenzylpenicillin IV 1.2 g 4 hourly or ceftriaxone IV 2 g for 4–6
weeks and gentamicin 3 mg/kg/day (as single infusion) for at least 2

weeks
Anaerobic streptococci Benzylpenicillin IV 1.2 g 4 hourly, metronidazole
Staphylococcal endocarditis
(methicillin-sensitive)Cloxacillin 2 g 4 hourly OR Cefazolin 2 g 8 hourly, vancomycin 1 g
12 hourly, OR Flucloxacillin 2 g 4 hourly OR Benzylpenicillin 1.2 g
4 hourly for 4–6 weeks
PLUS  gentamicin 80–120 mg (1mg/kg) three times a day for 3–5
days
Enterococcal endocarditis Ampicillin/amoxicillin 2 g 4 hourly for 4– 6 weeks OR vancomycin 1
g twice daily plus Gentamicin 1 mg/kg three times a day for 6 weeks
Candida Amphoterecin B 1 mg/kg QID 2 weeks maximum up to 4 weeks. Do
not exceed 50 mg/day
Flucytocine 150 mg/kg oral for four days
Coxiella burnetii Doxycycline 100 mg twice daily with either hydroxychloroquine 600
mg daily OR  rifampin (900 mg/day) for 18–24 months
Bartonella Doxycycline (100 mg PO or IV twice daily) plus  gentamicin (1
mg/kg IV every eight hours) for 14 days
Q. Write short essay/note on management of infective
endocarditis/subacute infective endocarditis.
Management
Box 7.46:  Indications for surgical treatment in infective endocarditis.
Endocarditis of prosthetic valve
Large vegetations
–   Left-sided large vegetation (10 mm) with an episode of embolization
–   Very large (15 mm) and mobile vegetation (high-risk of embolism)
Progressive cardiac failure due to valvular damage
Active infection persisting, i.e. fever and evidence of bacteremia for more than 7–10 days in
spite of adequate antibiotic treatment
Abscess formation, perivalvular involvement, Staph. aureus and fungal endocarditis
Medical treatment
Blood should be collected for cultures before starting the empirical antibiotic therapy. However,
this should not delay therapy in unstable patients.
If source of infection is identified, it should be removed as soon as possible (e.g. tooth with an
apical abscess should be extracted).
Empirical treatment regimen:  Penicillins are fundamental to the therapy of bacterial
endocarditis. Empirical treatment regimen depends on the mode of presentation, the suspected
organism, and whether the patient has a prosthetic valve or penicillin allergy (Table 7.79).
Prognosis:  It is fatal in about 20% patients and higher in those with prosthetic valve endocarditis and
those infected with antibiotic resistant organisms.
Surgical treatment (Box 7.46)
Decisions to carry out surgical intervention in patients with infective endocarditis should take into

account the (1) patient specific features such as age, non-cardiac morbidities, presence of prosthetic
material or cardiac failure and (2) infective endocarditis features such as causative organism, size of
vegetation, presence of perivalvular infection, systemic embolization.
Cardiac surgery consists of debridement of infected material and valve replacement. Antimicrobial
therapy should be started before surgery.
Bacterial Endocarditis Prophylaxis
Q. Write short essay/note on prevention of infective
endocarditis/prevention of infective endocarditis before dental
procedure.
Q. Write short essay/note on antibiotic prophylaxis against infective
endocarditis during dental procedure/during urogenital surgery.
Q. Write short essay/note on prophylaxis of infective endocarditis.
Prophylaxis is not needed for routine local anesthetic injections through
noninfected tissue, placement of removable prosthodontic or orthodontic
appliances, shedding of deciduous teeth, vaginal delivery, and hysterectomy
or tattooing, bronchoscopy, laryngoscopy, endotracheal intubation,
cystoscopy, colonoscopy or skin suturing.Indications
Cardiac lesions: For which antibiotic prophylaxis is advised is listed in Box
7.47.
Box 7.47:  Infective endocarditis prophylaxis.
High-risk group
Prosthetic heart valves
Prior bacterial endocarditis
Complex cyanotic congenital heart disease
Surgically constructed systemic-pulmonary shunts
Repaired shunts within 6 months
Valvulopathy after cardiac transplantation
Moderate-risk group
Congenital cardiac malformations (other than those listed in other 2 groups)
Acquired valvular dysfunction (e.g. rheumatic heart disease)
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Mitral valve prolapse with valvular regurgitation, thickened leaflets, or both
Negligible-risk group

Isolated secundum atrial septum defect
Surgical repair of atrial septal defect, ventricular septal defect, or patent ductus arteriosus
Previous coronary artery bypass graft surgery
Mitral valve prolapse without valvular regurgitation
Physiologic, functional, or innocent heart murmurs
Previous Kawasaki syndrome without valvular dysfunction
Previous rheumatic fever without valvular dysfunction
Cardiac pacemakers (intravascular and epicardial) and implanted defibrillators
Q. Write short note on infective endocarditis/subacute infective
endocarditis (SBE) prophylaxis.
Procedures: Endocarditis prophylaxis is advised in patient at high or
moderate risk for endocarditis. These include following procedures:
–   Dental procedures: Extraction, periodontal procedures, implant
placement, root canal instrumentation, intra- ligamentary injections
(anesthetic).
–   Respiratory procedure: Bronchoscopy with rigid bronchoscope
operations involving the mucosa.
–   Gastrointestinal procedures: Sclerotherapy of esophageal varices,
stricture dilation, ERCP, biliary tract surgery, surgery involving
mucosa.
–   Genitourinary procedures: Urethral dilation, prostate or urethral
surgery or cystoscopy.
Antibiotic regiment for prophylaxis of endocarditis in adults at moderate or high-risk
Oral Cavity, Respiratory Tract, or Esophageal ProceduresStandard regimen: Amoxycillin 2.0 gm PO 1 hour before procedure.
Inability to take oral medication: Ampicillin 2.0 g IV or IM within 30 minutes of procedure.
Penicillin allergy
–   Clarithromycin 500 mg PO 1 hour before procedure.
–   Cephalexin or cefadoxil 2.0 g PO 1 hour before procedure.
–   Clindamycin 600 mg PO 1 hour before procedure or IV 30 minutes before procedure.
Inability to take oral medication: Cefazolin 1.0 g IV or IM 30 minutes before procedure.
Note:  For patients at high-risk administer of half-dose 6 hours after the initial dose.
Genitourinary and Gastrointestinal Tract Procedure
High-risk patients: Ampicillin 2.0 g IV or IM plus gentamicin 1.5 mg/kg IV or IM within 30
minutes of procedure. Repeat ampicillin, 1.0 gm IV or IM or amoxicillin 1.0 g PO 6 hours later.
High-risk penicillin-allergic patients: Vancomycin 1.0 g IV or 1M over 1–2 h plus gentamicin 1.5
m/kg IV or IM within 30 minutes before procedure, no second dose recommended.

Moderate-risk patients: Amoxycillin 2.0 g PO 1 hour before procedure or ampicillin 2.0 g IV or
IM 30 minutes before procedure.
Moderate-risk, penicillin-allergic patients: Vancomycin 1.0 g IV inferred over 1–2 hours and
completed within 30 minutes of procedures.
Culture-negative infective endocarditis (IE) is defined as endocarditis
without etiology following inoculation of three blood samples in a standard
blood culture system (e.g. negative cultures after 7 days).
Reasons for culture-negative in infective endocarditis:1. Administration of antimicrobial agents prior to blood culture incubation.
2. Inadequate microbiological techniques.
3. Infection with highly fastidious bacteria or nonbacterial pathogens (e.g.
fungi).
Noninfective Endocarditis
Q. Write short essay/note on noninfective endocarditis.
Characterized by the formation of sterile platelet and fibrin thrombi on
cardiac valves and adjacent endocardium.
It develops in response to trauma, circulating immune complexes,
vasculitis or a hypercoagulable state.
Symptoms are caused due to systemic arterial embolism.
Diagnosis is by echocardiography and negative blood cultures.
Marantic Endocarditis (Nonbacterial Thrombotic Endocarditis—
NBTE)
Etiology
NBTE is often encountered in a number of conditions. These include
debilitated patients with cancer or sepsis, hence previously termed
marantic endocarditis (root word marasmus, relating to malnutrition). It
frequently develops concomitantly with deep venous thrombosis,
pulmonary emboli, or underlying systemic hypercoagulable state and
advanced malignancy. There is a striking association with mucinous
adenocarcinomas, potentially relating to the procoagulant effects of tumor-
derived mucin or tissue.Other less common causes include systemic lupus erythematosus,
antiphospholipid syndrome, rheumatic heart disease, rheumatoid arthritis

and burns.
Vegetations are small, bland and usually attached to the line of closure of
valve leaflets.
Treatment:  Consists of systemic anticoagulant therapy and treatment of the underlying malignancy
or associated condition.
Libman-Sacks Endocarditis
Libman-Sacks endocarditis (otherwise known as verrucous endocarditis)
is characteristic cardiac manifestation of the autoimmune disease such as
systemic lupus erythematosus.Pathogenesis: It produced due to circulating immune complexes.
Endocarditis: It is characterized by small or medium-sized vegetations on
either side of the valve leaflets. They appear mulberry-like clusters of
verrucae and consist of accumulations of immune complexes and
mononuclear cells.

HEART FAILURE
Q. Define heart failure. Discuss the types, common cause,
pathophysiology, clinical features and management of heart failure.
Q. Describe the etiology, clinical features and management of chronic
heart failure. Mention the factors which will acutely decompensate a
patient with chronic stable heart failure.
Q. Discuss the symptoms and signs of heart failure. Outline the rational
management.
Q. Describe the etiology, classification, clinical features, diagnosis and
management of congestive cardiac failure (heart failure).
Q. Outline the clinical features, investigations and treatment of
congestive cardiac failure with hypertensive heart disease.
Q. Define heart failure.
Definition: Heart failure or cardiac failure is the pathophysiological process
in which the heart as a pump is unable to meet the metabolic requirements of
the tissue for oxygen and substrates despite the venous return to heart is
either normal or increased.It is a complex syndrome that can result from any structural or functional
cardiac disorder. In heart failure, heart is unable to pump blood at a rate
of sufficient to meet the metabolic demands of the tissues or can do so
only at an elevated filling pressure.Older term congestive heart failure (CHF) should be avoided because not
all patients with heart failure have volume overload. Hence the term heart
failure is preferred.Heart failure is the common end stage of many forms of chronic heart
disease and most common reason for hospitalization in adults >65
years of age.
Heart failure usually develops insidiously from the cumulative effects of
chronic work overload (e.g. in valve disease or hypertension) or ischemic
heart disease (e.g. following myocardial infarction with heart damage).

However, acute hemodynamic stresses, such as fluid overload, sudden
valvular dysfunction, or myocardial infarction, can cause sudden heart
failure.
Pathophysiology
Q. Write short essay/note on pathophysiology of heart failure.
Cardiac output is determined by preload (the volume and pressure of
blood in the ventricles at the end of diastole), afterload (the volume and
pressure of blood in the ventricles during systole) and myocardial
contractility.Myocardial contractility (inotropic state): It depends on the adrenergic
nervous activity and the levels of circulating catecholamines.
Heart Failure
In the intact heart, myocardial failure causes reduction of the volume of
blood ejected with each heart beat and an increase the volume of blood
remaining after systole. This increased diastolic volume stretches the
myocardial fibers and restores the myocardial contraction. However, the
failing myocardium results in myocardial depression (of the ventricles).Heart failure is a progressive disorder that is initiated after an index event
that either damages the heart muscle (with loss of functioning cardiac
myocytes) or disturbs the myocardial ability to generate force (prevents
the heart from contracting normally). The common feature of these events
is a decrease in the pumping capacity of the heart. The compensatory
mechanisms include tachycardia, increased myocardial contractility and
activation of neurohumoral systems.
If the heart failure progresses, the compensatory mechanisms are
overwhelmed and become pathological . Thus, there is pathological
peripheral vasoconstriction and sodium retention. Heart failure is the
common end stage of many forms of chronic heart disease.Heart failure usually develops insidiously from the cumulative effects of
chronic work overload (e.g. in valve disease or hypertension) or ischemic
heart disease (e.g. following myocardial infarction with heart damage).
However, acute hemodynamic stresses, such as fluid overload, sudden
valvular dysfunction, or myocardial infarction, can cause sudden heart
failure.

Q. Write short note on ventricular remodeling/cardiac remodeling.
Ventricular remodeling/cardiac remodeling: Refers to the changes in size,
shape, structure and physiology of the heart after injury to the myocardium.
Left ventricular remodeling is the process by which mechanical,
neurohormonal, and possibly genetic factors alter ventricular size, shape,
and function.Remodeling occurs in several clinical conditions, including myocardial
infarction, hypertension, cardiomyopathy and valvular heart disease.
It is characterized by hypertrophy, loss of myocytes, and increased
interstitial fibrosis.
Mechanism of heart failure is depicted in Flowchart 7.5.
Types of Heart Failure
Q. Write short note on types of heart failure.
Depending on Output
Low-output heart failure
–   Systolic heart failure: Characterized by decreased cardiac output and
decreased left ventricular ejection fraction.
–   Diastolic heart failure: Characterized by elevated left and right
ventricular end-diastolic pressures and may have normal left
ventricular ejection fraction.
High-output heart failure: Characterized by failure of the heart to
maintain sufficient circulation despite an increased cardiac output (defined
as cardiac output >8 L/minute or a cardiac index >3.9 L/minute/m2).
Examples include cardiac failure associated with hyperthyroidism,
anemia, pregnancy, arteriovenous fistulae, beriberi and Paget’s disease.
Diastolic and Systolic Dysfunction
Systolic dysfunction: Systolic heart failure is characterized by an
abnormality of ventricular contraction . The ejection fraction is usually
below 40%. Causes include coronary artery disease, hypertension and
valvular heart disease.Diastolic dysfunction: Characterized by an impaired ventricular
relaxation  and increased ventricular stiffness resulting in reduced filling

(diastolic dysfunction). Causes include hypertension, coronary artery
disease, hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM), restrictive
cardiomyopathy.
Flowchart 7.5:  Mechanism of heart failure
Acute and Chronic Heart Failure
Acute heart failure is characterized by sudden development of heart
failure. This suddenly reduces cardiac output and systemic hypotension
without peripheral edema. Examples include acute myocardial infarction
and rupture of a cardiac valve. Acute left heart failure may develop either
de novo or as an acute decompensated episode, on a background of
chronic heart failure (acute-on chronic heart failure).Chronic heart failure is characterized by gradual development of heart
failure and systemic arterial pressure is well maintained, but edema
develops. Examples include dilated cardiomyopathy and multivalvular
disease.Compensated heart failure is the term used to describe the condition of
those with impaired cardiac function, in whom adaptive/compensatory

changes have prevented the development of overt heart failure. Severe
overt or acute heart failure may precipitated by minor insult such as an
infection or development of atrial fibrillation.
Left-sided, Right-sided and Biventricular Heart Failure
The left side of the heart consists of the functional unit of the left atrium, left
ventricle, mitral and aortic valves. The right side of the heart consists of the
right atrium, right ventricle, and tricuspid and pulmonary valves.Left-sided (left ventricular) heart failure is characterized by:
–   Reduction in left ventricular output
–   Increase in left atrial and pulmonary venous pressure: An acute
increase in left atrial pressure produces pulmonary congestion or
pulmonary edema (e.g. myocardial infarction). A more gradual
increase in left atrial pressure leads to reflex pulmonary
vasoconstriction, which prevents the development pulmonary edema
(e.g. in mitral stenosis, aortic stenosis). This increases pulmonary
vascular resistance and leads to pulmonary hypertension, which in turn
can impair the function of right ventricle.Right-sided (right ventricular) heart failure is characterized by:
–   Reduction in right ventricular output.
–   Increase in right atrial and systemic venous pressure.
–   Causes of isolated right heart failure, e.g. chronic lung disease (cor
pulmonale), multiple pulmonary embolism and pulmonary valvular
stenosis.
Biventricular heart failure is characterized by failure of the ventricles of
the left and the right heart.
–   Dilated cardiomyopathy or ischemic heart disease, affects both
ventricles
–   Disease of the left heart leads to chronic elevation of the left atrial
pressure, pulmonary hypertension and leading to right heart failure.
Table 7.80 Causes of heart failure (HF).
Reduced Ejection Fraction (<40% HFrEF)
Coronary artery disease:  Myocardial
infarction, myocardial ischemiaChronic pressure overload:  Hypertension,
obstructive valvular disease (e.g. mitral/

tricuspid stenosis), endomyocardial fibrosis
Chronic volume overload of ventricle:
Regurgitant valvular disease (e.g. mitral/aortic
regurgitation), left -to-right shunt (e.g.
ventricular septal defect, patent ductus
arteriosus, atrial septal defect)Chronic lung disease:  Cor pulmonale,
pulmonary vascular disorders
Nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy Chagas’ disease
Toxic/drug-induced damage
Preserved ejection fraction (>40–50%)
Pathologic hypertrophy, aging, restrictive cardiomyopathy
High-output states
Metabolic disorders: Thyrotoxicosis Chronic anemia
Nutritional disorders (beriberi)
Forward and Backward Heart Failure
Forward heart failure is characterized by decreased cardiac output,
inadequate perfusion of organs that causes poor tissue perfusion. Reduced
renal perfusion activates renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system resulting in
excessive absorption of sodium by renal tubules.Backward heart failure is characterized by a normal cardiac output, severe
salt and water retention, and venous congestion in the pulmonary and
systemic circulation.
Causes of heart failure are listed in Table 7.80.
Q. Write short note on causes of heart failure.
In practice, the most common causes of heart failure are ischemic heart
disease, hypertensive heart diseases.
Q. Write short essay/note on factors that precipitate heart failure.
Factors that may precipitate or aggravate heart failure in pre-existing
heart disease (Box 7.48).
Risk factors for heart failure: Hypertension, diabetes mellitus, use of
cardiotoxic substances (e.g. alcohol, tobacco and cocaine), hyperlipidemia,
coronary artery disease.
Box 7.48: Precipitating factors for heart failure.
Intercurrent illness, e.g. infection

Supervening heart diseases, e.g. myocardial ischemia or infarction , myocarditis, infective
endocarditits
Cardiac arrhythmia, e.g. atrial fibrillation
Poor compliance with therapy
Administration of a drug with negative inotropic (β-blocker), disopyramide, or fluid-retaining
properties [nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), corticosteroids]
Pulmonary embolism
Conditions associated with increased metabolic demand, e.g. anemia pregnancy, thyrotoxicosis
IV fluid overload, e.g. postoperative IV infusion
Systemic hypertension
Excess salt intake
Physical and emotional stress
Clinical Manifestations of Heart Failure (Table 7.81)
Q. Write short essay/note on clinical features (symptoms and signs) of
heart failure and acute left ventricular failure.
Symptoms
Dyspnea
Exertional dyspnea
Orthopnea
Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea (PND)
Cardiac asthma is closely related to PND and nocturnal cough. It is
characterized by wheezing (secondary to bronchospasm) which is most
prominent at night. Acute pulmonary edema represents is a severe form of
cardiac asthma.Acute pulmonary edema
Cheyne-Stokes respiration.
Nocturia
It is observed during early heart failure. It is because renal perfusion and
diuresis is better at night when the patient is supine.
Cerebral symptoms
Includes confusion, difficulty in concentration, impaired memory, headache,
insomnia and anxiety. These symptoms may be produced due to arterial
hypoxemia and reduced cerebral perfusion.

Nonspecific symptoms
Fatigue due to low cardiac output and weakness due to decreased
perfusion of skeletal muscles.
Low-grade fever due to reduction of cutaneous blood flow.
Anorexia, nausea, abdominal fullness/pain due to congestion of liver and
portal venous system.
Table 7.81 Symptoms and signs of heart failure.
Symptoms Signs
Left ventricular failure
DyspneaExertional dyspnea
Orthopnea
Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea
Acute pulmonary edema
Cough
Fatigue
Decreased urine outputCardiac sign
Enlargement of LV
Gallop rhythm S 3
Systolic murmur in apex
Pulmonary sign
Crepitations
Pleural effusionThink FACES: F atigue,
Activities limited, Chest
congestion, Edema or
ankle swelling, and
Shortness of breath.
Right ventricular failure
Leg swelling
Symptom of gastrointestinal—
anorexia
Symptom of renal origin—
oliguria
Pain in right hypochondrium
DyspneaRaised JVP
Hepatojugular reflux positive
Hepatomegaly
Edema
Pleural fluid and ascites
Signs
Dependent/cardiac edema
Dependent/cardiac edema: Due to gravity, fluid accumulates over
dependent parts of the body. In ambulant patients, it is found
symmetrically in the both legs, particularly in the pretibial region and
around the ankles. It is less in the morning and become more towards the
evening. In bedridden patients, it is observed in the sacral region.Anasarca: In advanced heart failure, the fluid accumulating throughout
the body and is severe termed as anasarca. Face and upper limbs are
usually spared until the terminal stages.

Cyanosis: It is usually observed in lips and nail beds. The extremities appear
cold and pale due to reduced blood flow.
Pulse: Pulse volume is reduced and pulsus alternans is a sign of severe heart
failure.
Blood pressure
Reduced pulse pressure is due to reduced stroke volume.
Occasionally, there may be mild elevation of diastolic blood pressure due
to generalized vasoconstriction.
Hypotension is prominent in acute heart failure.
Jugular venous pressure (JVP)
JVP is raised because of elevated systemic venous pressure.
JVP may not be raised at rest during early stages of heart failure. It may be
demonstrated:
–   During and immediately after exercise
–   With sustained pressure on the abdomen (positive hepatojugular or
abdominojugular reflux).
Third and fourth heart sound
Presence of a third heart sound in highly suggestive of heart failure.
Triple/quadruple/summation gallop seen.
Respiratory system
Percussion: Dull percussion notes over the bases of lungs (infra-scapular,
infra-axillary areas).
Auscultation: Inspiratory crepitations over the bases of lungs. If there is
pulmonary edema, coarse crepitations are heard widely over both lung
fields associated with expiratory rhonchi.
Liver (congestive hepatomegaly)
Hypoglycemia can develop in long-standing cases due to depletion of
glycogen stores in liver and increased production of lactic acid from
glucose, induced by hypoxia.Jaundice: Hyperbilirubinemia of both conjugated and unconjugated type
may be a late feature. In acute hepatic congestion jaundice is severe and
liver enzymes are markedly elevated.

Effusion
Pleural effusion  develops more commonly on the right side and is due to
raised pleural capillary pressure and transudation of fluid into pleural
space.
Ascites is due to transudation secondary to raised pressure in the hepatic
vein, portal veins and veins draining the peritoneum.
Pericardial effusion: Rare.
Renal system
Poor renal perfusion leads to oliguria and prerenal azotemia (uremia).
Blood urea is usually raised out of proportion to serum creatinine.
Urine: Specific gravity of urine is high, mild proteinuria seen and urinary
sodium is low.
Cardiac cachexia
Chronic heart failure is sometimes associated with severe anorexia, marked
weight loss (cardiac cachexia), impaired absorption due to gastrointestinal
congestion and skeletal muscle atrophy due to immobility.
Framingham Criteria for Diagnosis of Heart Failure (Table
7.82)
The diagnosis of heart failure should not be made on history and clinical
findings alone. It requires evidence of cardiac dysfunction (by investigation)
and identification of the underlying cause of heart failure in all cases.
Criteria for Diagnosis of Heart Failure: One major + two minor
Table 7.82 Framingham criteria for diagnosis of heart failure.
Major Minor Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea
Distension of neck vein
Rales
Cardiomegaly
Acute pulmonary edema
S3 gallop
Increased venous pressure (>16 cm H 2O)
Positive hepatojugular reflux
Weight loss ≥4.5 kg over 5 days treatmentExtremity edema
Night cough
Dyspnea on exertion
Hepatomegaly
Pleural effusion
Vital capacity reduced by one-third from
normal
Tachycardia (≥120 beats per minute)

Investigations in Heart Failure
Chest X-ray: It may reveal cardiomegaly. Other findings include phantom
tumor (fluid in horizontal or oblique fissures of lungs which disappears
after treatment with diuretics), bat’s wing appearance (hazy opacification
spreading from the hilar regions on both sides (Fig. 7.46), and pleural
effusion (bilateral or unilateral).Electrocardiography: It may reveal previous MI, active ischemia,
ventricular hypertrophy (e.g. due to hypertension), atria abnormality,
arrhythmias, and conduction abnormalities (e.g. arrhythmia).Echocardiography is very useful to: (1) determine the etiology, (2) detect
any unsuspected valvular heart disease (e.g. occult mitral stenosis), (3)
identify patients who will benefit from long-term drug therapy (e.g. ACE
inhibitors), (4) assess cardiac chamber dimension (size and shape),
ejection fraction, valvular functions, cardiomyopathies and regional wall
motion abnormalities and (5) differentiate between systolic and diastolic
heart failure.Stress echocardiography: It helps in assessing the viability in
dysfunctional myocardium. Dobutamine stress identifies contractile
reserve in stunned or hibernating myocardium.Nuclear cardiology: Radionucleotide angiography (RNA) is useful for
quantify ventricular ejection fraction, single photon emission computed
tomography (SPECT) or positron emission tomography (PET) can reveal
myocardial ischemia and viability in dysfunctional myocardium.CMR (cardiac MRI): It helps to assess the viability in dysfunctional
myocardium with the use of dobutamine for contractile reserve or with
gadolinium for delayed enhancement (‘infarct imaging’).Cardiac catheterization: It is useful in the diagnosis of ischemic heart
failure (and suitability for revascularization), measurement of pulmonary
artery pressure, left atrial (wedge) pressure, left ventricular end diastolic
pressure.Cardiac biopsy: It is useful in the diagnosis of cardiomyopathies (e.g.
amyloid) and follow-up of cardiac transplanted patients to assess rejection.
Cardiopulmonary exercise testing: Peak oxygen consumption (VO) is
useful in predicting hospital admission and death in heart failure.
Ambulatory 24 hour ECG monitoring (Holter): May be necessary in

patients with suspected arrhythmia. It may be useful in severe heart failure
or inherited cardiomyopathy to decide the necessity of defibrillator.
Brain natriuretic peptide (BNP) or N-terminal portion of proBNF
(NPproBNP) is elevated in heart failure and highly sensitive for the
diagnosis of its diagnosis. It is a marker of risk (>100 pg/mL) and  is
useful in the investigation of patients with breathlessness or peripheral
edema (to differentiate cardiac from respiratory cause of acute dyspnea).Blood tests: Full blood count, liver function tests, serum urea, creatinine
and electrolytes, cardiac enzymes in acute heart failure, thyroid function
may help to establish the nature and severity of the underlying heart
disease and detect any complications.Invasive hemodynamic monitoring: Useful in selected patients with
acute heart failure who have persistent symptoms is spite of empiric
standard therapies.
Fig. 7.46:  Chest X-ray in heart failure showing bat wing appearance.

Complications in Advanced Heart Failure
Renal failure: Cardiorenal syndrome (poor renal perfusion caused by
low cardiac output) may be worsened by therapy [e.g. diuretics,
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and angiotensin receptor
blockers].Hypokalemia: Due to the result of treatment with potassium-losing
diuretics or hyperaldosteronism produced by activation of the renin–
angiotensin system and impaired aldosterone metabolism due to
congestion of liver.Hyperkalemia: Due to the effects of drugs which promote renal
resorption of potassium (e.g. combination of ACE inhibitors or
angiotensin receptor blockers, and mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists).Hyponatremia: May develop in severe heart failure and is a poor
prognostic sign. It may be due to diuretics, inappropriate retention of
water (due to high ADH secretion), or failure of the cell membrane ion
pump.Hepatic dysfunction: Due to hepatic venous congestion and poor arterial
perfusion.
Thromboembolism: Deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary embolism may
develop due to the effects of a low cardiac output and immobility.
Systemic emboli may develop in patients with atrial fibrillation or flutter,
or with intracardiac thrombus complicating conditions such as mitral
stenosis, MI or left ventricular aneurysm.Atrial and ventricular arrhythmias: Very common and include atrial
fibrillation (20%), sudden death (50%) due to a ventricular arrhythmia,
ventricular ectopic beats and non-sustained ventricular tachycardia. They
may be due to electrolyte changes (e.g. hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia),
the underlying heart disease, and the pro-arrhythmic effects of sympathetic
activation.Q. Write short essay on management of congestive heart failure.
Q. Write short note on lifestyle measures in heart failure.
Management of Heart Failure
Aim of treatment:  (1) Relief of symptoms, (2) prevent and control of disease causing cardiac
dysfunction and heart failure, (3) retard disease progression and (4) improve quality and length of

life.
A. General Lifestyle Advice/Measures
Education of patients and their relatives:  Explanation of nature of disease, about the causes and
treatment of heart failure.
Measures to prevent heart failure:  Cessation of smoking and illicit drugs, control of
hypertension, diabetes and hypercholesterolemia, and pharmacological treatment following
myocardial infarction. Identify and treat any factor that aggravates the heart failure.
Treatment of the underlying cause of heart failure (e.g. coronary artery disease):  Wherever
possible to prevent progression to heart failure.
Dietary modifications:  Good general nutrition and maintain desired weight and body mass index.
Avoid large meals, foods rich in salt or added salt. Diet low in fat, rich in fruit and vegetables, and
increase fiber. Fluid restriction (limited to 1.5 liters) is needed only when heart failure is severe.
Alcohol has a negative inotropic effect and should be avoided. Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty
acids reduce mortality and admission.Physical activity, exercise and emotional rest:
–   Physical activity and exercise:  Regular low level endurance exercise (e.g. 20–30 minutes
walking three or five times/week at 70–80% of peak heart rate) reverses ‘deconditioning’ of
peripheral muscle metabolism and is advisable in patients with compensated heart failure.
Avoid strenuous isometric activity.
–   Bed rest:  Reduces the demands on the heart. Bed rest for a few days is for patients with
exacerbations of congestive cardiac failure. However, prolonged bed rest may predispose to
deep vein thrombosis. This can be avoided by daily leg exercises, low-dose subcutaneous
heparin and elastic support stockings.
B. Drug Therapy/ManagementFunction of heart can be improved by increasing contractility, reducing preload or afterload. Drugs
that reduce preload are used in patients with high end-diastolic filling pressures and pulmonary or
systemic venous congestion. Drugs that reduce afterload or increase myocardial contractility are
used in patients with signs and symptoms of a low cardiac output.
–   Diuretic therapy
♦   In heart failure, diuretics act by increasing the urinary excretion of salt (sodium) and water
leading to reduction in blood and plasma volume. Diuretics reduce preload and improves
pulmonary and systemic venous congestion. They may also reduce afterload and ventricular
volume and increase cardiac efficiency.
♦   Loop diuretics (e.g. furosemide 20–40 mg once or twice) and thiazide diuretics (e.g.
hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg once or twice, or metolazone 2.5–5 mg OD) are given to
patients with fluid overload.
♦   In severe heart failure, the combination of a loop and thiazide diuretic may be needed.
Regular monitoring of serum electrolytes and renal function is necessary because of risk of
hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia.
♦   Mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists, such as spironolactone (12.5–25 once or twice), are
potassium-sparing diuretics and are beneficial in patients having heart failure with severe
left ventricular systolic dysfunction.
–   Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEI) therapy
♦   Mechanism of action:  They prevent the conversion of angiotensin I to angiotensin II. This
in turn prevents peripheral vasoconstriction, activation of the sympathetic nervous system
and salt and water retention due to aldosterone release. Thus, they interrupt the vicious
circle of neurohumoral activation that is characteristic of moderate and severe heart failure.

They also prevent the undesirable activation of the renin-angiotensin system caused by
diuretic therapy.
♦   Uses:  ACEI improve survival in patients in all functional classes (NYHA I– IV) and are
given to all patients at risk of developing heart failure. They improve effort tolerance and
mortality. They can also improve outcome, prevent the onset of overt heart failure in
patients with asymptomatic heart failure following myocardial infarction.
♦   Initiation:  Start low dose; if tolerated then gradual increase in few days to weeks to target
dose or maximum tolerable dose with regular blood pressure monitoring. Serum creatinine
should be measured concomitantly and potassium-sparing diuretics should be discontinued.
♦   Drugs and dosage:  Capotopril (6.25 mg thrice till 50 mg thrice a day), enalapril (2.5 mg
twice to 10–20 mg twice a day), lisinopril (2.5–5 mg once to 20–40 mg once a day),
ramipril (1.25–2.5 mg once till 10 mg once a day).
–   Angiotensin II receptor antagonists (ARA)/blockers therapy
♦   Indications:  ARAs are indicated as second line therapy in patients intolerant of ACEI or
alternative to ACEI.
♦   Drugs and dosage:  Losartan (25–50 mg once till 50–150 mg once a day), valsartan,
telmisartan. olmesartan (20–40 mg twice till 160 mg twice).
♦   Same initiation and monitoring as ACEI and titration by doubling the dose.
–   Beta-adrenoceptor blocker therapy
♦   Indications:  To all patients with current or prior HF and a LVEF ≤40% (HFrEF) in the
absence of a contraindication.
♦   Start low and increased gradually over a 12-week period even during hospitalization.
♦   Drugs and dosage bisoprolol (1.25–2.5 mg once till 10 mg once), carvedilol (3.125 twice till
50 mg twice), metoprolol succinate (12.5 once till 200 mg once).
–   Aldosterone receptor antagonists
♦   Indications:  NYHA II-IV, EF ≤35%, no contraindication (GFR >30, creatinine: 2.5 mg/dL
male and 2.0 mg/dL female, K<5 mg/dL). They improve survival in patients with heart
failure.
♦   Dose:  Spironolactone 12.5–25 mg once till 50 mg daily.
♦   Monitoring:  Stop all K+ supplements, check K+ and creatinine 2–3 days after starting then
one week and every month for 3 months and every 3 month and when clinically indicated.
♦   Side effects:  Increase K+ (10–15%), gynecomastia or breast pain.
–   Digoxin (Cardiac glycoside)
♦   Digoxin is a cardiac glycoside that is used in patients in atrial fibrillation with heart failure.
It can be used as add on therapy in symptomatic heart failure patients already receiving
ACEI and beta blockers. No mortality benefit, only decrease frequency of hospitalizations.
♦   No loading required. Usual dose 0.125–0.25 mg daily (low dose 0.125 mg alternate day if
>70 years, chronic kidney disease, low lean body mass). Maintain 5–0.9 ng/dL plasma
concentration (narrow therapeutic range).
–   Vasodilators and nitrates (Hydralazine Nitrate Combination)
♦   The combination of hydralazine and nitrates reduces afterload and preload. Their use is
limited by pharmacological tolerance and hypotension.
♦   Indication:  African-American origin, NYHA III-IV, low EF on ACEI and BB, patients
intolerant or contraindication of ACEI or ARA (e.g. in severe renal failure).
♦   Dose:  37.5 mg hydralazine and 20 mg and isosorbide dinitrate start one tab TID to increase
till 2 tabs TID.

–   Ivabradine
♦   Ivabradine acts on the if inward current in the SA node and reduces the heart rate. It reduces
hospital admission and mortality rates in patients with heart.
♦   It is best given to patients who cannot take β-blockers or in whom the heart rate remains
high despite β-blockade. It is not useful in patients with atrial fibrillation.
–   Anticoagulation therapy is indicated in patients with heart failure who are at risk for
thromboembolism. These include patients with atrial fibrillation, valvular heart disease,
documented left ventricular thrombus or a history of embolic stroke.
C. Nonpharmacological treatment of heart failure
Q. Write a short note on implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD).
Device therapy
–   Implantable cardioverter defibrillator (ICD):  Patients with symptomatic ventricular
arrhythmias and heart failure have a very bad prognosis. Irrespective of their response to anti-
arrhythmic drug therapy, implantation of a cardiac defibrillator improves survival of all these
patients. It is indicated in nonischemic or ischemic heart disease (at least 40 days post-MI) with
LVEF of ≤35% with NYHA class II or III symptoms or NYHA 1 with EF ≤30% on chronic
medical therapy, who have reasonable expectation of meaningful survival for more than 1 year.
–   Cardiac resynchronization therapy (CRT):
♦   Indicated for patients who have LVEF of 35% or less, sinus rhythm, left bundle-branch
block (LBBB) with a QRS duration of 150 ms or greater, and NYHA class II, III, or
ambulatory IV symptoms.
♦   In this, both the LV and RV are paced simultaneously to generate a more coordinated left
ventricular contraction and improve cardiac output. It improves symptoms and survival.Coronary revascularization:  Coronary artery disease is the most common cause of heart failure.
Patients with angina and left ventricular dysfunction have a higher mortality from surgery (10–
20%), but most patients’ symptoms and prognosis are improved. Coronary artery bypass surgery
or percutaneous coronary intervention may improve function in region of the myocardium that is
‘hibernating’ because of inadequate blood supply. The ‘hibernating’ myocardium can be identified
by stress echocardiography and specialized nuclear or MR imaging. Before recommending for
surgery factors such as age, symptoms and evidence for reversible myocardial ischemia must be
considered.
–   Hibernating myocardium and myocardial stunning
♦   Hibernating myocardium  is the reversible left ventricular dysfunction with decreased
myocardial perfusion, which is just sufficient to maintain viability of the heart muscle. It is
due to an underlying chronic coronary artery disease. Myocardial hibernation is produced
due to repetitive episodes of cardiac stunning which may occur, e.g. with repeated exercise
in a patient with coronary artery disease. It responds positively to inotropic stress and
indicates the presence of viable heart muscle that may recover after revascularization.
♦   Myocardial stunning is reversible ventricular dysfunction that persists following an
episode of ischemia when the blood flow has returned to normal. This is due to a mismatch
between flow and function.Heart (Cardiac) transplantation
–   Cardiac transplantation is an established and successful treatment of choice for younger
patients with severe intractable heart failure, whose life expectancy is <6 months.
–   Indications:  Usually reserved for young patients with severe symptoms despite optimal
therapy. Most common indications are coronary artery disease and dilated cardiomyopathy.

–   Contraindication:  Patients with pulmonary vascular disease due to long-standing left heart
failure, complex congenital heart disease (e.g. Eisenmenger’s syndrome) or primary pulmonary
hypertension.
Ventricular assist devices (VADs)
–   There is limited supply of donor organs and VADs takes over pumping for the ventricles.
Hence, VADs are used as (1) a bridge to cardiac transplantation, (2) potential long-term
therapy, (3) short-term restoration therapy following a potentially reversible insult (e.g. viral
myocarditis).
Figure 7.47 shows ACC/AHA guidelines (four stages of heart failure and treatment options for
systolic heart failure).
Newer Agents in Heart Failure ManagementQ. Discuss newer agents in heart failure management.
Nesiritide (recombinant analog of BNP)
–   Actions: (1) Increase natriuresis, diuresis, and cardiac index. (2) Reduce pulmonary capillary
wedge pressure, pulmonary artery pressure, pulmonary vascular resistance, and systemic blood
pressure in a dose-dependent manner. (3) Reversal of the deleterious neurohormonal response
associated with heart failure. (4) Reduces levels of endothelin 1, aldosterone and
norepinephrine.
–   Advantages:  Does not require ICU admission or invasive monitoring, lower incidence of
tachycardia and proarrhythmic effects, and lessen the need for supportive therapies such as
diuretics.Endopeptidase inhibitor (ACE + neutral peptidases), e.g. omapatrilat.
Calcium sensitizer:  For example, levosimendan. Levosimendan is a novel agent with inotropic
properties developed specifically for the management of ADHF (acute decompensated heart
failure). It acts by sensitizing troponin C to calcium.
Endothelin receptor antagonist:  For example, bosentan, tezosentan. Effective in acute coronary
syndromes, acute renal failure and acute heart failure. Indirectly improve contractility while
decreasing pulmonary capillary wedge pressure.
Vasopressin antagonists (V2 RA):  For example, tolvaptan, lixivaptan, conivaptan. It can be used
as adjuvant to diuretic in advanced heart failure.
Enoximone:  Type 3 phosphodiesterase inhibitor.
Angiotensin receptor-neprilysin inhibitor:  Sacubitril-valsartan for NYHA class II to IV heart
failure with reduced ejection fraction.
Management of heart failure based on symptoms, cardiac output and
pulmonary capillary wedge pressure is depicted in Figure 7.48.
Refractory Heart Failure
Q. Write short note on refractory heart failure and its management.
Optimal ‘triple therapy’ for patients with chronic congestive heart failure
(CHF) includes diuretics, digoxin, and either angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitors or hydralazine plus nitrates.
Refractory CHF is defined as symptoms of CHF at rest or repeated

exacerbations of CHF despite ‘optimal’ triple-drug therapy.
Management: It is managed as end stage heart failure, i.e. stage D (Fig.
7.47). Novel agents and nonpharmacological agents can be tried.
Fig. 7.47:  ACC/AHA guidelines (four stages of heart failure and treatment options for systolic heart
failure).

Fig. 7.48:  Management of heart failure based on symptoms, cardiac output and pulmonary capillary
wedge pressure.
Brain Natriuretic Peptide
Q. Write short essay on brain natriuretic peptide (BNP).
It is called so because it was first discovered in porcine brain. It is a 32-
amino acid peptide predominantly secreted by the left ventricles (as a
response to left ventricular stretching or wall tension); along with an
inactive 76-amino acid N-terminal fragment (NT-proBNP).It is activated only after a prolonged period of volume overload. It has an
action similar to that of ANP but greater diagnostic and prognostic value
as it has a longer half-life.Utility: Normal values of BNP: <50 pg/mL or <50 ng/L.
–   Diagnostic and prognostic utility: BNP levels are raised in conditions
associated with left ventricular systolic dysfunction. It is used in the
diagnosis of congestive heart failure and useful in patients presenting
in the emergency room when the clinical diagnosis of heart failure is
uncertain. BNP measurement is used to assess prognosis and monitor
response to therapy in patients with heart failure. Raised levels of BNP
in heart failure may be associated with an increased risk of death or
cardiovascular events.
–   Other conditions with raised BNP levels: Renal failure (due to
decreased clearance), pulmonary embolism, pulmonary hypertension,

chronic hypoxia, atrial fibrillations, acute myocardial infarction, obese
patients and sepsis.
Pulmonary Edema
Q. Describe the clinical features, diagnosis and management of acute
pulmonary edema.
Q. Define pulmonary edema. Enumerate the causes of pulmonary
edema.
Q. Discuss the etiology, clinical presentation, investigations and
management of cardiogenic pulmonary edema. Add a note on the
pathophysiology.
Q. Discuss the etiology/causes, clinical features, and management of
acute left ventricular failure.
Q. Define pulmonary edema.
Definition: Pulmonary edema is a condition characterized by accumulation
of excess fluid in interstitium and alveoli of the lung as a result of an
alteration in one or more of starling forces.
Table 7.83 Various causes of pulmonary edema.
Cardiogenic pulmonary edema (CPE) Non cardiogenic pulmonary edema NCPE
[other name of NCPE = ARDS (Acute
respiratory distress syndrome)]
Cardiac disorders:  Atrial outflow obstruction,
LV systolic dysfunction, LV diastolic
dysfunction
Dysrhythmias
LV hypertrophy and cardiomyopathies
LV volume overload
Myocardial infarction
LV outflow obstructionDirect injury to lung:  Chest trauma, pneumonia,
pulmonary embolism
Indirect injury to lung:  Sepsis, multiple
transfusions, cardiopulmonary bypass,
pancreatitis, toxins
Lung injury plus increased hydrostatic
pressure:  Neurogenic pulmonary edema, high
altitude pulmonary edema, re-expansion
pulmonary edema
Classification and Causes of Pulmonary Edema (Table 7.83)Q. Write short note on the causes of pulmonary edema.

Q. Write short essay/note on noncardiac causes of pulmonary edema.
Pulmonary edema can result from hemodynamic disturbances (hemodynamic
or cardiogenic pulmonary edema) or from direct increases in capillary
permeability (non-cardiogenic pulmonary edema due to microvascular
injury). Based on underlying cause it can be classified as:Cardiogenic pulmonary edema is defined as a high pulmonary capillary
hydrostatic pressure (as estimated clinically from the pulmonary capillary
wedge pressure—PCWP) is responsible for abnormal fluid accumulation
in alveoli of the lung.Noncardiogenic pulmonary edema is caused by various disorders in
which factors other than elevated pulmonary capillary pressure are
responsible for protein and fluid accumulation in the alveoli.
Stages in DevelopmentInterstitial edema: This is an early stage where edema is limited to
interstitium of lung.
Alveolar edema: This occurs later, and characterized by the movement of
edema fluid, macromolecules and red blood cells into the alveoli.
Clinical Features of Acute Pulmonary Edema
Cardiogenic pulmonary edema (CPE)
Clinical features of left heart (acute ventricular) failure: Extreme
breathlessness, shortness of breath orthopnea, and paroxysmal nocturnal
dyspnea, anxiety, and feelings of drowning. Cough, pink frothy sputum.
Physical findings:
–   Tachypnea and tachycardia
–   Hypertension
–   Cool extremities may indicate low cardiac output
–   Auscultation reveals fine, crepitations or wheezes
–   CVS findings: S3, accentuation of pulmonic component of S2, jugular
venous distention.
–   Patients with (RV) failure may present with hepatomegaly, sustained
hepatojugular reflux, and peripheral edema. Change in mental status,
caused by hypoxia or hypercapnia.

Differences between CPE and NCPE
CPE: A history of an acute cardiac event is usually present. Physical
examination shows an S3 gallop, jugular venous distention, and crackles
on auscultation.
NCPE: They have a warm periphery, a bounding pulse, and no S3 gallop
or jugular venous distention. Definite differentiation is based on
pulmonary capillary wedge pressure (PCWP) measurements. The PCWP
is generally >18 mm Hg in CPE and <18 mm Hg in NCPE.
Unusual Type Pulmonary EdemaNeurogenic pulmonary edema: Seen in patients with central nervous
system disorders and without apparent pre-existing LV dysfunction.
Re-expansion pulmonary edema: Develops after removal of air or fluid
that has been in pleural space for some time, post-thoracocentesis. Patients
may develop hypotension or oliguria resulting from rapid fluid shifts into
lung.High altitude pulmonary edema: Occurs in young individuals who have
quickly ascended to altitudes above 2700 m (8000 feet) and who then
engage in strenuous physical exercise at that altitude, before they have
become acclimatized. Reversible in less than 48 hours.Investigations
Same as heart/cardiac failure (refer pages 487-8). ARDS discussed on page
369.
Q. Write short essay/note on treatment of acute pulmonary edema/acute
left ventricular failure.
Q. Write short essay/note on treatment of acute pulmonary edema.
Treatment of acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema
Initial management: ABCs of resuscitation, i.e. airway, breathing, and circulation.
Medical treatment of CPE focuses on three main goals:
1. Reduction of pulmonary venous return (preload reduction).
2. Reduction of systemic vascular resistance (afterload reduction).
3. Inotropic support.
Oxygenation:  Oxygen should be administered to all patients to keep oxygen saturation at greater
than 90%. Methods of oxygen delivery include the use of a face mask [noninvasive ventilation
which includes (BiPAP) and (CPAP)], and intubation and mechanical ventilation. Oxygen corrects

hypoxia and positive pressure raises intra-alveolar pressure reducing transudation of fluid.
Preload reduction  decreases pulmonary capillary hydrostatic pressure and reduces fluid
transudation into the pulmonary interstitium and alveoli. Nitroglycerin oral or I/V 10–100 µg/min
Diuretics:  They reduce the circulating blood volume and hasten the relief of pulmonary edema.
Intravenous furosemide has a venodilator action by which it reduces venous return. This effect
occurs within a few minutes while diuresis may take 30 minutes.
Morphine sulfate:  Morphine 2–5 mg intravenously slowly, and repeated if necessary, reduces
anxiety and reduces venous return.
Afterload reduction  increases cardiac output and improves renal perfusion, which allows for
diuresis in the patient with fluid overload.
–   ACE inhibitors:  Enalapril 1.25 mg IV or captopril 25 mg sublingually.
–   Angiotensin II receptor blockers.
–   Nitroprusside for 3–4 µg/kg/min IV infusion
Inotropic agents:  Dobutamine, dopamine
Intra-aortic balloon pumping (IABP)
–   The IABP is inserted percutaneously through the femoral artery to descending aorta using a
modified technique. Fluoroscopy may be used for correct positioning of the balloon, and
Helium gas is used to inflate the balloon.
–   The IABP decreases afterload as the pump deflates; during diastole the pump inflates to
improve coronary blood flow.
Ultrafiltration  is a fluid removal procedure that is particularly useful in patients with renal
dysfunction and expected diuretic resistance.
Correction of precipitating causes, e.g. infection or arrhythmias.
Treatment of underlying cause.
CARDIAC ARRHYTHMIAS
Q. Write short note on definition of cardiac arrhythmias.
Definition: An abnormality (disturbance) of either rate or electrical rhythm
of contraction of the heart is called a cardiac arrhythmia.
Arrhythmias are usually due to structural disease of the heart but may also
occur because of abnormal conduction or depolarization in an otherwise
healthy heart.
Main Types of ArrhythmiaBradyarrhythmia: The heart rate is slow and less than 60/min during the
day or less than 50/min at night.
Tachyarrhythmia: The heart rate is fast and more than 100/min.
Sinus Arrhythmia

Q. Write short essay on sinus arrhythmia.
Sinus arrhythmia is a normal physiological phenomenon and involves
cyclic changes in the heart rate during breathing. Normal variation (phasic
changes) of the heart rate in relation to breathing (during respiration) may
occur due to fluctuations of normal parasympathetic nervous system
(autonomic) activity/tone. During inspiration, parasympathetic tone falls
and the heart rate increases, and on expiration the heart rate decreases.
This variation is normal, especially in children and young adults.The non-respiratory form may occur in diseased hearts and sometimes
confused with sinus arrest (also known as ‘sinus pause’).
Typically sinus arrhythmia results in predictable irregularities of the pulse.
Significance: It is the most common arrhythmia and is manifestation of
normal autonomic nervous activity. Absence of this normal variation in
heart rate with breathing (sinus arrhythmia) or with changes in posture
may be seen in autonomic neuropathy and cardiac failure.
Treatment  is not usually needed unless symptomatic bradycardia is present.
Ectopic Beats (Extrasystoles; Premature Beats)
Q. Write short essay/note on ectopic beats (extrasystoles; premature
beats).
Definition: Ectopic beat is a heartbeat occurring as a result of an impulse
originating in an area other than the sinoatrial (SA) node.
Classification of ectopic beats is based on the site of origin of the
impulse (ectopic focus).
–   Supraventricular: Atrial ectopics, atrial premature beats arising from
atrium
–   Junctional: Arising from AV junction
–   Ventricular: Arising from ventricular muscle
Symptoms: Extra beats, thumping beats or missed beats.
Signs: Irregularity in rhythm, missing of beats, post-ectopic bounding beat
and cannon waves on JVP.
Supraventricular Ectopics (Atrial Ectopics; Atrial Premature
Beats)

Q. Write short essay/note on supraventricular ectopics (atrial ectopics;
atrial premature beats).
Atrial premature complexes (APCs) can be found on 24-h holter
monitoring in over 60% of normal adults. They are usually asymptomatic
and benign.
Causes: Idiopathic in healthy individuals, anxiety, excessive coffee, tea or
tobacco, ischemic and valvular heart disease
Electrocardiogram (ECG) shows early abnormal p waves with a
morphology that differs from the sinus p waves. It may be inverted if it
originates near the AV node. R-R interval preceding and following the
ectopic beat is less than twice the basal R-R interval (i.e. pause following
the ectopic is not fully compensated).Supraventricular ectopics sometimes may precipitate atrial tachycardia,
flutter and fibrillation.
Treatment:  Treatment is useful only if they cause palpitations. Treatment of the underlying cause.
Trigger for paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardias (e.g. alcohol, tobacco, or adrenergic stimulants)
should be identified and eliminated. In their absence, mild sedation or beta blocker may be tried.
Ventricular Premature Complexes (VPCs)/ Ventricular
Premature Beats (VPB)/Ventricular Ectopics
Q. Write short essay/note on ventricular ectopics [ventricular
extrasystoles; ventricular premature beats, premature ventricular
contractions (PVC)].
Of adult males, ≥60% will exhibit VPCs during a 24 hours holter
monitoring.
In patients with previous MI, if frequent (>10 per hour) or complex VPCs
are present, they are associated with increased mortality.
Causes: Idiopathic in healthy individuals, excessive tea, coffee and
alcohol, acute myocardial infarction, myocardial ischemia, myocarditis,
digitals toxicity, hypokalemia, mitral valve prolapse.
Electrocardiogram
These premature beats have wide, bizarre QRS complex, more than 0.12
seconds in duration and usually without a preceding P wave. They arise
from an abnormal (ectopic) site in the ventricular myocardium.

Usually following a premature beat there is complete compensatory pause
because the AV node or ventricle is refractory to the next sinus impulse.
The pause is fully compensated so that the sum R-R intervals preceding
and following the ectopic QRS equals double the normal sinus R-R
interval.When a VPC depolarizes the ventricles at a similar time as a conducted
atrial beat, a fusion beat is observed.
The term bigeminy refers to a normal complex followed by premature
complex; trigeminy indicates a premature complex that follows two
normal beats; a premature complex that occurs after three normal beats is
called quadrigeminy. Two successive VPCs are known as a couplet,
whereas three successive VPCs are called a triplet. Arbitrarily, three or
more successive PVCs are termed Salvos/ventricular tachycardia. VPCs
having different contours are often called multifocal.
TreatmentIn the absence of cardiac disease, isolated asymptomatic VPCs regardless of configuration and
frequency, does not require any treatment.
Beta blockers are useful in symptomatic VPCs that occur mainly in the daytime or under stressful
situations and in specific settings such as thyrotoxicosis and mitral valve prolapse.
Implantable cardiac defibrillator (ICD) placement improve prognosis in patients with inducible
VT and LV dysfunction.
Tachycardia
Q. Write short note on tachycardia/narrow-complex and wide-complex
tachycardia. Write a note on tachycardia.
Definition: Tachycardia is defined as a heart rate of more than 100/minute.
Classification
Depending on origin:
–   Supraventricular tachycardia is a tachycardias which utilize atrial or
AV nodal tissue as part of its mechanism (i.e. originating above the
bundle of His)
–   Ventricular tachycardia: Originate below the level of bundle of His.
Depending on QRS complex:
–   Narrow-complex (QRS complex <0.12 seconds) tachycardia: Usually
tachycardia that originates from or above AV node generally produces

narrow QRS complexes.
–   Wide-complex (QRS >0.12 seconds) tachycardia: Usually,
tachycardias that originate below the AV node produce wide QRS
complexes.
Table 7.84: Various causes of supraventricular tachycardia (SVT).
Tachycardia ECG findings
Sinus tachycardia P wave is similar to sinus rhythm preceding QRS
AV nodal re-entry tachycardia (AVNRT) also
referred as paroxysmal SVTsNo visible P wave, or inverted P wave
immediately before or after QRS complex
AV reciprocating tachycardia (AVRT) complexes P wave visible between QRS and T wave
Atrial fibrillation Irregularly irregular RR intervals and no
organized atrial activity
Atrial flutter Visible flutter waves at 300/min (saw tooth
appearance) usually with a 2 : 1 AV conduction
Atrial tachycardia Organized atrial activity with P wave appear
morphological different from sinus rhythm
preceding QRS
Multifocal atrial tachycardia Multiple P wave morphologies (≥3) and irregular
RR intervals
Accelerated junctional tachycardia ECG similar to AVNRT

Supraventricular Tachycardia
Q. What do you understand by the term supraventricular tachycardia?
Name various supraventricular tachycardia.
Q. Write short note on paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia
(PSVT).
Supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) is an arrhythmia and the term
commonly used to describe regular tachycardia (heart rate exceeding 100
beats/minute) that arise from the atrium or the atrioventricular junction. Its
conduction is via the His–Purkinje system. Hence, on ECG the QRS shape
during tachycardia is usually similar to that seen in the same patient during
baseline rhythm. Various causes of supraventricular tachycardia are
presented in Table 7.84.These are usually associated with a narrow QRS complex and are
characterized by a re-entry circuit or automatic focus involving the atria.
The term SVT is misleading, as, in many cases, the ventricles also form
part of the re-entry circuit, such as in patients with AV re-entrant
tachycardia.
Sinus TachycardiaQ. Write short note on sinus tachycardia.
Definition: It is characterized by a heart rate of more than 100/minute with
normal P waves, P-R interval and QRS complexes.
If rate-dependent blocks appear or an accessory path is present, there may
be widened QRS complexes.
Causes: It is usually due to an increase in sympathetic activity associated
with exercise, emotion, or pregnancy, Pathological causes, include
anemia, thyrotoxicosis, anxiety, fever, heart failure, pheochromocytoma,
drugs, e.g. β-agonists (bronchodilators) embolism and shock.
TreatmentIdentification and treatment of the underlying cause.
If the tachycardia produces myocardial ischemia treat with β-blockers.
AV Node Re-entry Tachycardia (AVNRT)

AVNRT is the most common cause of paroxysmal supraventricular
tachycardia (PSVT). AVNRT produces a regular tachycardia with a rate of
120–240/min.
Mechanism: AVNRT is due to re-entry in a circuit involving the AV node
and there are two functionally and anatomically different right atrial input
pathways.
1. Superior ‘fast’ pathway has a longer effective refractory period and
conducts faster.
2. Inferior ‘slow’ pathway characterized by a short effective refractory period
and slow conduction.
If the atrial impulse occurs early (e.g. an atrial premature beat) when the fast
pathway is still refractory, the slow pathway takes over in propagating this
atrial impulse to the ventricles. It then travels back through the fast pathway
which has already recovered its excitability. Thus, initiating the most
common ‘slow fast’, or typical, AVNRT.
Clinical featuresIt is common in women than men (F:M = 2:1).
It usually occurs suddenly without any structural heart disease or obvious
provocation. However, exertion, coffee, tea and alcohol may aggravate or
induce the arrhythmia.
Episodes/attack may last from a few seconds to many hours and may stop
spontaneously or may continue indefinitely until medical intervention.
During the attack, the patient is usually aware of a rapid, very forceful,
regular heart beat and may experience chest discomfort, lightheadedness
or breathlessness. Sometimes polyuria (due to the release of atrial
natriuretic peptide) may develop.
ECG: Usually shows a tachycardia at a rate of 140–240/minute with normal
regular QRS complexes. Occasionally, the QRS complexes will show typical
bundle branch block.
ManagementTreatment is not always required.
Episode/attack may be terminated in patients without hypotension by carotid sinus pressure or
by the Valsalva maneuver.
If these maneuvers are unsuccessful, adenosine (3–12 mg rapidly IV in incremental doses until
tachycardia stops) or verapamil  (5 mg IV over 1 min) will restore sinus rhythm in most of the

patients. Intravenous β-blocker or flecainide may be helpful.
Rarely, when there is severe hemodynamic compromise, the tachycardia should be terminated by
DC cardioversion.
Recurrent SVT: Catheter ablation will permanently prevent SVT in more than 90% of cases.
Atrial Fibrillation
Q. Discuss the etiology, pathophysiology, clinical features,
complications, diagnosis and management of atrial fibrillation.
Definition
Atrial fibrillation (AF) is an arrhythmia characterized by disorganized
atria and produces multiple atrial foci fire impulses at a rate of 350–
600/minute. There is no atrial contraction but only fibrillation. The
ventricles respond at irregular intervals, usually at a rate of 100–
140/minute.It is the most common cause of sustained cardiac arrhythmia.
Etiology (Table 7.85)
Any condition that raises the atrial pressure, increases atrial muscle mass,
causes atrial fibrosis, or inflammation and infiltration of the atrium, may
produce atrial fibrillation. Many genetic (gene defects linked to chromosomes
10, 6, 5 and 4) and systemic causes also may be responsible for atrial
fibrillation.Mechanisms of Atrial Fibrillation (Fig. 7.49)
AF is a complex arrhythmia. It is characterized by (1) abnormal automatic
firing at a rate of 350–600/minute and (2) the presence of multiple
interacting re-entry circuits looping around the atria.Episodes of atrial fibrillation are initiated by rapid bursts of depolarizing
automatic ectopic beats arising from conducting tissue in the pulmonary
veins or from diseased atrial tissue. The atria respond electrically at this
rapid rate. Many of them reach the AV node during its refractory period,
and hence not conducted.AF becomes maintained by continuous, rapid (300–600/min) activation of
the atria by multiple re-entrant conduction within the atria or sometimes
because of continuous ectopic firing. Re-entry occurs in enlarged atria or
in which conduction is slow (occurs in many forms of heart disease).

Table 7.85 Causes of atrial fibrillation.
Cardiac Noncardiac
Hypertensive heart disease
Valvular heart disease (e.g. rheumatic heart
disease)
Ischemic heart disease
Heart failure
Cardiomyopathy
Pericarditis
Congenital heart disease
Postcardiac surgeryPulmonary: Pneumonia, COPD, pulmonary
embolism
Hyperthyroidism/thyrotoxicosis
Excess catecholamine/sympathetic activity
Drugs and alcohol
Significant electrolyte imbalance
Lone atrial fibrillation Reversible/transient AF
Younger patients <60
No underlying cause
Usually not much symptoms
Normal heart structure
No associated co-morbiditiesAcute upper respiratory tract infections
(URTI), chest infection AMI, pericarditis,
thyrotoxicosis, pulmonary embolism, after
CABG, holiday heart syndrome
Fig. 7.49:  Mechanisms of atrial fibrillation. (1) Ectopic beats, originating from the pulmonary veins
usually trigger atrial fibrillation. (2) Re-entry within the atria maintains atrial fibrillation.
Clinical Features
Symptoms
Usual symptoms include palpitations, fatigue, syncope, angina and symptoms

of cardiac failure and thromboembolism.
Cardinal signs
Irregularly irregular pulse, varying volumes of pulse, pulse deficit (apex
pulse deficit)
Blood pressure: Hypotension, mean of three recordings to be taken
Absence of a waves on JVP.
Varying intensity of the first heart sound, disappearance of the fourth heart
sound and disappearance of the PSA of the mid-diastolic murmur of mitral
stenosis (MS) in a few.
Investigations
Q. Write short note on ECG changes in atrial fibrillation.
Electrocardiogram (Box 7.49)
2D ECHO to look for LA size, thrombus, LV function
Holter monitoring: For paroxysmal AF
Exercise stress test: Ischemic heart disease (IHD)
Catheterization: Before ablation
Thyroid function tests and serum electrolytes in all patients.
Chest X-ray
Fasting lipid profile.
Box 7.49: ECG changes in atrial fibrillation.
No clear P waves
Fine very irregular, disorganized atrial fibrillatory or F waves, coarse fibrillary waves indicate
LAE.
F waves: Several independent re-entrant wavelets within atria, which may be fine or coarse
Atrial rate: 350–500 bpm
Ventricular rate:  Irregularly irregular, conduction of AV node
QRS complexes:  Rhythm is rapid and irregular, narrow/broad. Broad-BBB, aberrant conduction,
pre-excitation
Long R-R interval is followed by short R-R intervals. Atrial impulse may find the RBBB still
refractory. Ashman phenomenon  is characterized by wide QRS complexes with a short cycle
following long cycle commonly seen in ASD.
Q. Write short note on complications of atrial fibrillation.

Complications: Thromboembolism, precipitation/worsening of cardiac
failure, syncope, hypotension, angina, precipitation of pulmonary edema in
mitral stenosis.
Management/treatment
Goals of management
Hemodynamic stabilization
Heart rate control or restoration of sinus rhythm.
–  Minimize symptoms associated with excessive heart rates.
–  Prevent tachycardia-associated cardiomyopathy.
Prevention of recurrent AF
Reduction of the risk of thromboembolism:  Anticoagulation prevents embolic complications.
Treatment of underlying cause:  When atrial fibrillation develops as a complication of acute
precipitating event (e.g. alcohol toxicity, chest infection, pulmonary embolism or
hyperthyroidism), the provoking primary disorder/ cause should be effectively treated. It will often
restore sinus rhythm.
Strategies for the acute management of AF:
Ventricular rate control  is achieved by drugs which block the AV node.
Cardioversion (± anticoagulation): Cardioversion  is procedure by which an abnormally fast
heart rate (tachycardia) or cardiac arrhythmia is converted to normal rhythm using electricity or
drugs. Cardioversion is achieved electrically by DC shock or medically antiarrhythmic drug either
by intravenous infusion (e.g. flecainide, propafenone, vernakalant or amiodarone) or orally
(flecainide or propafenone). Oral agent is administered to a particular patient who is previously
tested in hospital and found to be safe (‘pill in pocket ‘approach).
Long-term management of atrial fibrillation
Clinical classification of atrial fibrillation is presented in Table 7.86.
Long-term management of persistent atrial fibrillation has two options:
1. Rhythm control  is an attempt to restore and maintain normal sinus rhythm by antiarrhythmic
drugs plus DC cardioversion plus oral anticoagulation.
–  Pharmacological cardioversion:  By quinidine, ibutilide, flecainide, propafenone or
amiodarone. The dose of amiodarone 5–7 mg/kg intravenously over 1 hour followed by 1.2–
1.8 g/24-hour infusion.
–  Electric cardioversion:  If there is failure of medical cardioversion, electric cardioversion is
done after 3 weeks of warfarin therapy which is continued further for another 4 weeks after
cardioversion. Anticoagulation is to be given to these patients.
2. Rate control:  If sinus rhythm cannot be restored, treatment is aimed to control the ventricular rate
to less than 100/minute and to prevent embolic complications. This is achieved by AV nodal
slowing agents plus oral anticoagulation.Calcium channel blockers (calcium antagonists)
–  Verapamil:  5–10 mg intravenously over 2 minutes. If required repeat in 30 minutes.
–  Diltiazem:  10 mg intravenously over 2 minutes. If required repeat same dose in 15 minutes. An
infusion at 10–15 mg/hour is started to maintain ventricular rate below 100/minute.
β-blockers:  Propranolol 1 mg intravenously over 2 minutes. Dose is repeated every 5 minutes up
to a maximum of 5 mg.
Digoxin:  0.25–0.5 mg intravenously, then 0.25 mg after 4–6 hours and another after 12 hours. At

present less commonly used.
Amiodarone:  150 mg over 10 minutes followed by 1 mg/minute over 6 hours and then 0.5
mg/minutes for next 18 hours. Adverse effects include: hepatic toxicity (hepatitis that can progress
to cirrhosis), pulmonary toxicity (cough and dyspnea), thyroid dysfunction (hypothyroidism,
hyperthyroidism), sun sensitivity and ocular symptoms.
Prevention of recurrence:
After restoring the sinus rhythm (either by electric or pharmacological cardioversion), recurrence
is prevented by quinidine, amiodarnone or dronedarone (safer than amiodarone).
When cardioversion is unsuccessful or if atrial fibrillation is likely to recur, following treatment is
given:
–  Allow the patient to remain in atrial fibrillation but reduce the ventricular rate by digitals,
diltiazem, verapamil or propranolol.
–  Chronic anticoagulation
–  Reduction in stroke risk; by warfarin or antiplatelet agents.
Reduction of the risk (prevention) of thromboembolism (Anticoagulation)
One of the complications of atrial fibrillation is embolism. First step is to determine the need for
anticoagulation. A scoring system known as CHA 2DS2- VASc (Table 7.87) is used to assess the risk
of embolism.
Indications:  Atrial fibrillation in patients with rheumatic mitral stenosis or with mechanical
prosthetic heart valve. Other indications include:Transesophageal echocardiography should be done in patients with atrial fibrillation to exclude an
atrial thrombus.
–  If no atrial thrombi: Heparin is given before cardioversion (if conversion to sinus rhythm) and
followed by warfarin for 4 weeks.
–  If atrial thrombi present: Warfarin is given for 3 weeks prior to cardioversion and is continued
for another 4 weeks after cardioversion.
If cardioversion is unsuccessful and patient remains in atrial fibrillation, long-term warfarin should
be given.
Anticoagulants:  With warfarin, the INR should be maintained between 2.0 and 3.0 (2.5 and 3.5 in
case of underlying valvular lesion). Newer oral anticoagulants include dabigatran (a direct thrombin
inhibitor in the dose of 150 mg BID), apixaban (5 mg BID), and rivaroxaban (20 mg OD).
Aspirin:  In the dose of 325 mg/day may be used as an alternative to warfarin when patient is allergic
to warfarin or is contraindicated, patient <75 years of age with no previous stroke or transient
ischemic attack without hypertension, diabetes or heart failure.
Radiofrequency ablation (RF) ablation therapy:  Indications are:Very symptomatic patients who refuse antiarrhythmic drug therapy.
Young patients where only effective antiarrhythmic drug is amiodarone.
Patients with significant bradycardia for whom antiarrhythmic drug therapy will require
pacemaker.
Surgical procedure for AF  is the ‘cut-and-sew’ maze procedure.
Table 7.86 Clinical classification of atrial fibrillation and choice of
treatment.

Terminology Clinical features Treatment
Initial event (first detected
episode)Symptomatic/asymptomatic.
Onset unknownRhythm/rate control
Paroxysmal (may be vagotonic
AF or adrenergic AF)Intermittent episodes that
stops spontaneously (self-
termination) within 7 days
and most often <48 hoursRhythm control. Vagotonic AF
responds to digitalis,
disopyramide while beta blockers
are helpful for adrenergic AF
Persistent Prolonged, not self-
terminating, lasting >7 days
which requires termination
by electrical or chemical
cardioversionRhythm/rate control
Permanent (‘accepted’) Not spontaneously
terminated or terminated but
relapsed, no cardioversion
attemptRate controlNote: Atrial fibrillation may be asymptomatic and the first detected episode
should not be considered as the true onset.
Table 7.87: CHA2DS2-VASc stroke risk scoring system for non-valvular
atrial fibrillation.
Risk factor Score
C: Congestive heart failure 1 0 points: Low-risk  (no
prophylaxis required)
1–2 points: Moderate-risk
(oral anticoagulant or aspirin
recommended)
>3 points: High-risk  (oral
anticoagulant
recommended)H: Hypertension 1
A: Age ≥75 years 2
D: Diabetes mellitus 1
S2: Prior stroke or TIA 2
V: Vascular disease 1
A: Age 65–74 years old 1
Sc: Sex category (female) 1
Atrial Flutter
Q. Define atrial flutter. Discuss the causes, electrocardiographic
features and management of atrial flutter.
Definition: Atrial flutter is a cardiac arrhythmia usually characterized by an
organized, regular, rapid atrial rate between 250–350/minute. The ventricles
respond to every second, third or fourth beat (2:1, 3:1 or 4:1 AV block).

Common Causes
Cardiac causes: Organic heart diseases (e.g. ischemic, rheumatic,
congenital), pericarditis, following open heart surgery (1st week).
Acute respiratory failure.
ECG: Characteristic saw-toothed flutter waves (‘F’ waves) between QRS
complexes. QRS complexes are regular.
Management
Restoration to sinus rhythm:  Treatment of a symptomatic acute paroxysm is direct electrical
cardioversion. Atrial flutter of more than 1–2 days should be treated similar to atrial fibrillation
and anticoagulated for 3 weeks prior to cardioversion.
Control of ventricular rate:  By using digoxin, β-blockers or verapamil/diltiazem followed by
conversion to sinus rhythm using quinidine, amiodarone, disopyramide or flecainide.
Prevention of recurrences:  Recurrent paroxysms can be prevented by class III antiarrhythmic
agents (refer Table 7.91) such as quinidine, amiodarone, disopyramide or flecainide. Treatment of
choice for patients with recurrent atrial flutter is catheter ablation.
Prevention of stroke:  Risk of stroke is similar to that of atrial fibrillation and the management is
almost identical but anticoagulants may be stopped earlier after successful ablation.
Wolff-Parkinson-White Syndrome (WPW Syndrome)
Q. Write short essay on Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome.
Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome is an extra electrical (accessory)
pathway (Bundle of Kent) between atria and ventricles and causes
tachycardia.
Accessory pathways: Extra electrical pathway consists of an abnormal band
of rapidly conducting fibers which connects the atria and ventricles. These
conducting fibers resemble Purkinje tissue, in that they conduct very rapidly
and are rich in sodium channels. Accessory pathways may be of two types.1. Concealed accessory pathway: About 50% of cases, this pathway only
conducts in the retrograde direction (from ventricles to atria) and thus does
not change the appearance of the ECG in sinus rhythm. It is called as a
concealed accessory pathway.2. Manifest accessory pathway: In remaining 50%, the pathway conducts
anterograde direction (from atria to ventricles). Thus, AV conduction in
sinus rhythm is mediated via both the AV node and the accessory pathway
and distorts the QRS complex. Premature ventricular activation via this
pathway shortens the PR interval and produces a ‘slurred’ initial deflection

of the QRS complex, and is called a delta wave. This manifests as
accessory pathway. Because AV node and accessory pathway have
different conduction speeds and refractory periods, a re-entry circuit can
develop, producing tachycardia. When this is associated with symptoms,
it is termed as Wolff–Parkinson–White (WPW) syndrome.
Fig. 7.50:  ECG findings in Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome.
ECG (Fig. 7.50):  During tachycardia is indistinguishable from that of AVNRT.
Short PR interval (<0.12 sec)
Slurred upstroke of the QRS complex (Delta wave)
Wide QRS complex.
Complications: Atrial flutter, atrial fibrillation, supraventricular tachycardia,
ventricular tachycardia, ventricular fibrillation and death.
Treatment
Carotid sinus pressure or intravenous adenosine used for termination of the tachycardia.
Acute episodes of PSVT in Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome are treated similar to that of
PSVT.
Life-threatening atrial fibrillation is treated as an emergency with DC cardioversion.
In non-life-threatening atrial fibrillation (AF), lidocaine (3–5 mg/kg) or procainamide (15 mg/kg)
administered IV over 15–20 minutes will usually show the ventricular response. Ibutilie can also
be used.Avoid IV verapamil and digitalis in WPW and AF, because they can increase ventricular response
(by shortening the refractory period of accessory pathway). Beta blockers are of no use in
controlling ventricular response during AF when conduction proceeds over the bypass tract.Catheter ablation of bypass tracts is possible in >90% of the patients and is the treatment of choice
in patients with symptomatic arrhythmias. Surgical ablation may be required in an occasional
patient in whom catheter ablation fails.

Sick-Sinus Syndrome
Q. Write short essay on sick-sinus syndrome.
It comprises a number of abnormalities namely sinus bradycardia, sinus
arrest, combinations of sinoatrial and AV blocks, tachycardia-bradycardia
and supraventricular tachycardia.
Characterized by sinus node dysfunction with an atrial rate inappropriate
for physiologic requirements.
Cause: Usually due to ischemia, fibrosis, drug induced or autonomic
dysfunction.
Clinical Features
Majority are asymptomatic.
Clinical features are due to cerebral hypoperfusion and reduced cardiac
output. These include syncope, palpitations and dizziness. There may be
symptoms caused due to worsening of underlying conditions (e.g.
congestive heart failure, angina pectoris, and cerebrovascular accident).A slow heart rate, fever, left ventricular failure or pulmonary edema
suggests sick-sinus syndrome.
Treatment  of recurrent symptomatic bradycardia or prolonged pauses by implantation of a
permanent pacemaker.
Ventricular Tachycardia (VT)
Q. Write short essay on ventricular tachycardia.
Most common cause of wide complex tachycardia (80%).
VT heart rate is 100–200 bpm and if more than rate >220 bpm it is
ventricular fibrillation (VF).
Major cause of morbidity and mortality in patients with structural heart
disease.
Major cause of sudden cardiac death –60% cases on holter monitoring.
Relatively organized tachyarrhythmias with discrete QRS complexes.
Recurrence is more common in less than one year of onset.
The occurrence of three or more VPC complexes with a rate of > 120 bpm
in succession is called as VT.

Table 7.88: Causes of ventricular tachycardia.
Ischemic heart disease: Acute MI, after
chronic infarction
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Post CABG, post TOF surgery
Idiopathic
Specific etiology—geneticReversible causes of VT
Hypoxia
Hyperthyroidism, catecholamines
Electrolyte abnormalities: Hypokalemia,
hypomagnesemia, hypocalcemia, metabolic
acidosisDrugs, alcohol, starvation
Types of VT
Non-sustained VT  is termination of VT by self less than 30 seconds.
Sustained  VT is presence of VT for >30 seconds or hemodynamically
unstable but terminated in less than 30 seconds.
Slow VT: Heart rate >100 < 120 bpm.
Pulseless VT: VT with hemodynamic collapse that requires DC
cardioversion.
Refractory VT: VT that does not revert to sinus rhythm on medication
use or use of three shocks.
VT storm: Repeated VT episodes requiring the DC shocks/ICD shocks.
Table 7.89: Clinical features of ventricular tachycardia.
Asymptomatic
May have palpitations-transient/sustained
Chest pain: Angina
Syncope/dizzinessPresyncope
Cannon a waves
Absent pulse
Hypotension
Variable S 1
Etiology (Table 7.88)
Re-entry is the most common mechanism.
Clinical Features (Table 7.89)
Diagnosis
ECG: 12 lead with long rhythm strip of lead II.
24 hour holter monitoring in case of transient episode.
2D echo for the etiology.

Routine investigations, serum electrolytes, calcium, magnesium, ABG.
Treatment
Prompt restoration of sinus rhythm  followed by prophylactic therapy.
Hemodynamically unstable patients: Synchronized DC cardioversion is the treatment of choice
(if systolic BP is below 90 mm Hg).
If the patient is stable and arrhythmia is well tolerated:  With preserved left ventricular
function IV procainamide 50 mg/min. In presence of left ventricular dysfunction, IV 150 mg
amiodarone given as a bolus, followed by a continuous infusion. IV lidocaine can be used but
may depress left ventricular function, causing hypotension or acute heart failure.
Correction of electrolyte or acid-base imbalance, e.g. hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, acidosis
and hypoxemia.
Prevention of VT:  Beta-blockers reducing ventricular automaticity and amiodarone can be added
if additional control is needed. Do not use class Ic anti-arrhythmic drugs in patients with coronary
artery disease or heart failure because they depress myocardial function and can be proarrhythmic
(increases the possibility of a fatal arrhythmia).Implantable cardiac defibrillator is the absolute indication in presence of LVEF <30% and is
recommended for patients with high risk of arrhythmic death (e.g. poor left ventricular function, or
associated with hemodynamic compromise). Rarely, surgery (e.g. aneurysm resection) or catheter
ablation may be required for patients with VT associated with a myocardial infarct scar.
Torsades De PointesA special type of ventricular tachycardia (VT) characterized by
polymorphic QRS complexes that change in amplitude and cycle
length, giving the appearance of oscillations around the baseline. This is
associated with QT prolongation.QT prolongation  may result from electrolyte disturbances (particularly
hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia), antiarrhythmic drugs (quinidine),
phenothiazines, tricyclic agents, and bradyarrhythmias. It may be due to
congenital long QT syndrome (Andersen-Tawil syndrome, Romano-Ward
syndrome, Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome).The electrocardiographic hallmark is polymorphic VT preceded by
marked QT prolongation, often in excess of 0.60 second.
Treatment
Correct electrolyte abnormalities or underlying cause.
Intravenous magnesium  (8 mmol over 15 minutes, then 72 mmol over 24 hours) should be given
in all patients.
Avoid class IA and class III antiarrhythmic agents.
Lidocaine does not prolong QT interval. Isoproterenol bridge before temporary pacemaker.
Phenytoin 100 mg every 5 minutes maximum dose of 500 mg.
Temporary pacemaker

Beta blockers (BBs) to be used to prevent syncope in patients with congenital QTc prolongation
syndrome.
Brugada Syndrome
Named by the Spanish cardiologists Pedro Brugada and Josep Brugada.
Major cause of sudden unexpected death syndrome (SUDS), and is the
most common cause of sudden death in young men without known
underlying cardiac disease in Thailand and Laos.
Genetic abnormality of the cardiac sodium channels, leading to
ventricular tachycardia and/or sudden cardiac death.
Hereditary: 60% of Brugada patients have a family history of SCD.
Mutations of SCN5a genes resulting in diminished inward sodium current
in the region of the RV outflow tract epicardium appear responsible for
this syndrome.The large potential difference between the normal endocardium and
rapidly depolarized RV outflow epicardium gives rise to ST segment
elevation in V1 to V3 in sinus rhythm and predisposes to local re-entry
and life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias in the absence of structural
heart disease.Arrhythmias frequently occur during sleep. Affects relatively young and
predominant in males.
Treatment
No benefit from beta blockers.
Implantable cardiac defibrillator (ICD) treatment to manage recurrences. A history of syncope
spontaneous ST segment elevation and inducibility of VT with programmed stimulation may
identify family members also at risk of SCD who warrant prophylactic ICD therapy.
Ventricular Fibrillation
Q. Write short note/essay on causes, diagnosis and treatment of
ventricular fibrillation.
Characterized by very rapid, irregular and uncoordinated movement of the
ventricles with no mechanical effect.
Patient is pulseless and becomes rapidly unconscious, and respiration
ceases (cardiac arrest).
ECG: Shows shapeless/bizarre, rapid oscillations.

Ventricular fibrillation rarely reverses spontaneously.
Treatment:  Electrical defibrillation.
Atrioventricular Blocks
Q. Discuss the causes, clinical features and management of
atrioventricular blocks and AV conduction disturbances.
Heart block or conduction block  may develop at any level in the
conducting system. Block in either the AV node or the His bundle produces
AV block, whereas block lower in the conduction system results in bundle
branch block.
Types: Atrioventricular block consists of three forms: (1) first degree AV
block, (2) second degree AV block and (3) third degree (complete) AV block.
First Degree Atrioventricular (AV) Block
In this type of block AV conduction is delayed.
ECG shows simple prolongation of the PR interval to >0.22 seconds.
Every atrial depolarization is followed by conduction to the ventricles but
occurs with delay. So, all the P waves are conducted and the QRS is
normal as the delay is most often in the AV mode.
Second Degree Atrioventricular (AV) Block
In this type of AV block, dropped beats occur because some impulses from
the atria fail to conduct to the ventricles.
TypesMobitz type I second-degree AV block  (Wenckebach block
phenomenon): Characterized by progressive slowing of AV conduction
until it is totally blocked. ECG shows progressive lengthening of
successive PR intervals until a P wave fails to conduct (culminating in a
dropped beat).Mobitz type II second-degree AV block: In this type, the PR interval
remains constant but some atrial impulses (P waves) are not conducted. It
occurs when a dropped QRS complex is not preceded by progressive PR
interval prolongation. The QRS complex is usually wide (>0.12 s).2: 1 or 3: 1 (advanced) block: Occurs when every second or third P wave

conducts to the ventricles. The block is defined by a ratio in which the first
digit represents the total number of P waves, and the second digit
represents the number of P waves conducted (i.e. the number of QRS
complexes). This form of second degree block is neither Mobitz I nor II.
Third-degree (Complete) Atrioventricular Block
Q. Write short essay on complete heart block.
Complete heart block occurs when all the atrial activities fails to conduct (AV
conduction fails completely) to ventricles and both the atria and ventricles
beat independently (AV dissociation). In this ventricular activity (and the
life) is maintained by spontaneous escape rhythm arising in the AV node or
bundle of His (narrow QRS complexes) or the distal Purkinje tissues (broad
QRS complexes). Distal escape rhythms are slower and less reliable. Causes
of complete heart block are listed in Box 7.50.
Box 7.50: Causes of heart block.
Congenital
AcquiredMyocardial ischemia or infarction
Idiopathic fibrosis
Inflammation
–   Acute (e.g. aortic root abscess in infective endocarditis)
–   Chronic (e.g. sarcoidosis, Chagas’ disease)
Trauma (e.g. intracardiac surgery)
Drugs (e.g. digoxin intoxication, β-blocker)
Tumors and infections involving the conducting system
Infections: Rheumatic autoimmune disease, neuromuscular diseases
Lev’s disease
Lenegre’s disease
Clinical features of complete heart block
Regular (except in congenital complete AV block), high volume slow
pulse (25–50/minute) which does not vary with exercise. Usually there is a
compensatory increase in stroke volume and produces a large-volume
pulse.Irregular cannon waves on JVP in the neck.
Stokes- Adams attacks

Varying intensity of first heart sound.
ECG: Constant P-P and R-R intervals, complete AV dissociation (i.e. the
atria and ventricles beat independently) and there is no relation between the P
waves and the QRS complexes.
Adams-Stokes Attacks (Stokes-Adams-Morgagni Attacks)
Q. Write short essay on Adams-Stokes attacks (Stokes-Adams-
Morgagni attacks) and their clinical features.
Stokes-Adams attack is characterized by a recurrent episode of sudden loss of
consciousness unrelated to posture with or without convulsions due to a
disorder of heart rhythm in which there is bradycardia or absent pulse.
Etiology
Episodes of ventricular asystole may complicate intermittent high-grade AV
block (Mobitz type II or complete heart block), profound bradycardia or
ventricular standstill. Sinoatrial disease and neurocardiogenic syncope may
produce similar symptoms.
Clinical FeaturesProdrome preceding the attack may be observed in few patients.
Sudden loss of consciousness: Patient may fall to the ground with sudden
loss of consciousness without warning and results in collapse. During the
attack, patient is pale with a death-like appearance and deeply
unconscious. The pulse is usually very slow or absent. Recovery is rapid
and after a few seconds the patient recovers consciousness with
characteristic flush as the heart starts beating again and pulse quickens.Occasionally, brief anoxic generalized convulsions/seizures and death may
occur if there is prolonged asystole or severe prolonged bradycardia (more
than 10 seconds) causing cerebral hypoxia/ischemia. Prolonged
bradycardia may produce cyanosis.Usually there are no sequelae, but patients may injure themselves due to
the sudden fall.
Treatment of heart block:  (1) removal of offending agent, (2) injection atropine/injection
isoprenaline if symptomatic, and (3) Pacemaker insertion.
Therapeutic Procedures

Defibrillation and Cardioversion
Q. Write short note on defibrillation and cardioversion.
Introduction
By the passage of sufficiently large electrical current (from an external
source) through the heart, it can be completely depolarized. This will
interrupt any arrhythmia and produce a short period of asystole and is
usually followed by the resumption of normal sinus rhythm.Cardioversion is a procedure by which an abnormally fast heart rate
(tachycardia) or cardiac arrhythmia is converted to a normal rhythm using
electricity (defibrillation) or drugs.
Defibrillation
In this technique ventricular fibrillation is converted to sinus rhythm by
defibrillators which deliver direct current (DC). When the defibrillator is
discharged, a high-voltage field electric shock of short duration is
delivered to the heart. This electric shock envelopes the heart and
depolarizes the myocardium which causes an organized heart rhythm to
emerge.Method: Defibrillators deliver a DC, high-electrical energy, short-
duration shock through two large electrodes or paddles coated with
conducting jelly or a gel pad. One electrode is positioned over the upper
right sternal edge and the other over the cardiac apex. Present-day modern
units deliver a biphasic shock. Advantage is that the shock polarity is
reversed during mid-shock and this decreases the total shock energy
needed to depolarize the heart.DC cardioversion (DCC)
Transthoracic electric shock: It is used to convert sinus rhythm in
tachyarrhythmias which do not respond to medical treatment or that are
associated with hemodynamic compromise (e.g. hypotension, worsening
heart failure).Precautions:
–   A short acting general anesthetic or powerful sedation is used in
elective cardioversion.
–   Withdraw digitalis therapy at least 36 hours before cardioversion.

–   Patients with long-standing (>48 hours) atrial fibrillation or flutter
should be anticoagulated adequately for at least 3 weeks before
cardioversion to reduce the risk of embolization.
–   Levels of cardiac enzyme may rise after a cardioversion.
Difference between defibrillation and cardioversion: A nonsynchronize
shock is used to defibrillate and accidental defibrillation (in patient who
do not need it) may itself precipitate ventricular fibrillation. A
synchronized shock (i.e. one delivered during the QRS complex) is used
for all cardioversions except for very rapid ventricular tachyarrhythmias,
such as ventricular flutter or VF.Indications for DCC: Ventricular fibrillation, sustained ventricular
tachycardia, atrial fibrillation/flutter and supraventricular tachycardia.
Cardiac Pacemakers
Q. Write short note on types of cardiac pacemakers and its indications.
Temporary Pacing
It involves delivery of an electrical impulse into the heart to initiate
depolarization and to trigger cardiac contraction.
Indication: Transient AV block, arrhythmias complicating acute MI or
cardiac surgery, to maintain the rhythm in other situations of reversible
bradycardia (i.e. due to metabolic disturbance or drug overdose), or as a
bridge to permanent pacing.
Table 7.90: Indication of permanent pacing.Acquired AV block in adults
–   Complete heart block associated with any one of the following:
♦   Symptomatic bradycardia
♦   CHF
♦   Asystole >3 second
♦   Escape rate <40 beats per minute
♦   Post AV junction ablation, myotonic dystrophy.
–   Second degree AV block with symptomatic bradycardia
–   Atrial fibrillation, atrial flutter, or rare cases of supraventricular tachycardia with complete
heart block, bradycardia or any of the conditions listed under above.After myocardial infarction
–   Persistent advanced second-degree AV block or complete heart block with block in His
Purkinje system.

–   Transient advance AV block with associated bundle branch block
Bifascicular trifascicular block
–   Bifascicular block with intermittent complete heart block associated with symptomatic
bradycardia
–   Bifascicular or trifascicular block with intermittent type II second-degree AV block without
symptoms
Sinus node dysfunction with documented symptomatic bradycardia: Commonest indication of
pacing
Hypersensitive carotid sinus, recurrent syncope associated with clear, spontaneous events
provoked by carotid sinus stimulation.
Transvenous pacing: It is done in patients with symptomatic bradycardias.
In this procedure under the guidance of cardiac fluoroscopic imaging, a thin
(French gauge 5 or 6), bipolar pacing electrode wire is inserted via an internaljugular vein, a femoral vein or a subclavian vein and is positioned at the apex
of right ventricle. The electrode is connected to an external pacemaker with
an adjustable energy output and pacing rate usually about 60–80/minute.
Complications: Pneumothorax, brachial plexus or subclavian artery
injury, local infection or septicemia (usually Staphylococcus, aureus), and
pericarditis.
Transcutaneous pacing is performed in selected patients with asymptomatic
bradycardia or conduction abnormalities. It may be lifesaving for patients
with cardiac arrest precipitated by bradycardia. This method consists of
depolarizing the myocardium by current flow between two large adhesive
electrodes positioned anteriorly and posteriorly on the chest wall.Permanent pacing
Pacing electrodes (leads) can be placed via the subclavian or cephalic veins
and are designed to both pace and sense either the ventricles or the atria or
more commonly, both chambers.
Indication for permanent pacing (Table 7.90)
Antiarrhythmic Drugs (Table 7.91)
Q. Write short essay on antiarrhythmic drugs.
Therapy of Various Arrhythmias (Table 7.92)
Amiodarone
Q. Write short note on amiodarone and its use in clinical practice.

Amiodarone is an unusual iodine containing highly lipophilic long-acting
antiarrhythmic drug.
Table 7.91: Vaughan-Williams classification of antiarrhythmic drugs.
Class Mechanism of action Examples
I. Na+ channel
blockerChange the slope of phase 0 Ia: Quinidine, diisopyramide,
procainamide, moricizine
Ib: Lidocaine, phenytoin, Mexiletine
Ic: Flecainide, propafenone
II. β blocker ↓heart rate and conduction velocity Propranolol, metoprolol, esmolol,
acebutolol
III. K+ channel
blocker↑action potential duration (APD) or
effective refractory period (ERP)Amiadarone, sotalol, bretylium,
dronedarone
Delay repolarization Vernakalant, azimilide, tedisamil
IV. Ca++ channel
blockerSlowing the rate of rise in phase 4 of
SA node.Verapamil, diltiazem
Others Adenosine, magnesium, digitalis
Table 7.92 Various types of arrhythmias and their therapy.
Arrhythmias Acute therapy Chronic therapy
First choice Alternatives First choice Alternatives
Atrial
fibrillation/atrial
flutterEsmolol Verapamil, Digoxin Propranolol
Paroxysmal
supraventricular
tachycardia
(PSVT)Adenosine Esmolol, diltizem,
verapamilDigoxin,
verapamil,
propranololPropafenone
Ventricular
tachycardia (VT)Lidocaine
CardioversionProcainamide,
mexiletine,
amiodaroneAmiodarone
DofetilideMexiletine,
propranolol,
propafenone
Torsades de
pointesPacing Isoprenaline,
magnesiumPropranolol Pacing
Ventricular
fibrillation (VF)Electrical
defibrillationLidocaine,
amiodaroneAmiodarone Procainamide,
dofetilide
Wolff-Parkinson-
White (WPW)
syndromeCardioversion Amiodarone,
propafenone,
procainamideAmiodarone,
propranololQuinidine,
propafenone
Indications: Useful in wide range of ventricular and supraventricular

arrhythmias.
Resistant ventricular tachycardia/pulseless VT
Recurrent ventricular fibrillation
To maintain sinus rhythm in atrial flutter when other drugs have failed.
For patients with heart failure or left ventricular hypertrophy only
amiodarone is recommended.
Duration of action: Long. Hence suitable for long-term prophylactic therapy
Adverse reactions: These are dose-related and increase with duration of
therapy. These reactions include fall in blood pressure, bradycardia, and
myocardial depression on IV injection and on drug cumulation. Nausea,
gastrointestinal upset with oral medication, Photosensitization and bluish skin
discoloration pigmentation may develop in about 10% of patients. Pulmonary
alveolitis and fibrosis are serious adverse reactions. Cirrhosis occurs
uncommonly. Neurologic dysfunction, and hyperthyroidism (1–2%) or
hypothyroidism (2–4%) can be seen.
Dose:Oral 400–600 mg/day for few weeks, followed by 100–200 mg for
maintenance therapy.
Slow IV injection of 100–300 mg (5 mg/kg) over 30–60 minutes.
DISEASES OF THE MYOCARDIUM
Myocarditis
Q. Write short essay/note on acute myocarditis.
Acute myocarditis is an acute inflammatory disease of the myocardium
(heart muscle).
Myocarditis may present with a wide range of symptoms, ranging from
mild dyspnea or chest pain that resolves without specific therapy to
cardiogenic shock and death.Major long-term sequelae of myocarditis is DCM (dilated
cardiomyopathy) with chronic heart failure.
Three distinct forms of inflammatory cardiomyopathy (myocarditis
associated with cardiac dysfunction) are recognized: Idiopathic,

autoimmune and infectious.
Etiology (Table 7.93)
Table 7.93: Causes of myocarditis.
Infections
Viral:  Most common cause. Coxsackie A and B, influenza, HIV, dengue virus, parvovirus B19,
hepatitis C, Epstein-Barr virus
Bacterial:  Diphtheria, Staph. aureus, Mycoplasma pneumoniae
Protozoal:  Trypanosomiasis ( Trypanosoma cruzi), toxoplasmosis
Spirochetal:  Lyme disease (( Borrelia burgdorferi )
Fungal
Toxic
Direct injury:  Drugs (e.g. cocaine, lithium and anti-cancer drugs, such as doxorubicin)
Hypersensitivity reactions  and associated myocarditis:
–   Drugs: Penicillins and sulfonamides
–   Lead and carbon monoxide
–   Others: Bee venom, wasp venom, scorpion venom, snake venom
Autoimmune conditions: Systemic lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis
Others:  Acute rheumatic fever, chemical agents, radiation, giant cell myocarditis (thymoma, Crohn’s
disease)
Q. Write short essay/note on causes of myocarditis.
Clinical Features of Myocarditis
Range from an asymptomatic or present with fatigue, palpitations, chest
pain, dyspnea and fulminant congestive cardiac failure depending on the
type of myocarditis.
Classification: Depending on the clinical presentations, myocarditis can be
classified into four groups:1. Fulminant myocarditis: Has abrupt onset and follows a viral prodrome
(fever, chills, myalgia and constitutional symptoms) or influenza-like
illness, and produces severe acute heart failure or cardiogenic shock.
Prognosis is good.2. Acute myocarditis: It presents with heart failure, acute myocardial
infarction or sudden cardiac death. It may progress to dilated
cardiomyopathy and chronic heart failure. More common in
children/teenagers.

3. Chronic active myocarditis: It is rare and have insidious onset. It is seen
in older adults and microscopically shows chronic inflammation of the
myocardium.
4. Chronic persistent myocarditis: It shows focal myocardial infiltrates and
cause chest pain and arrhythmia without causing ventricular dysfunction.
Physical examination  may be normal or present with soft muffled heart
sounds, a prominent third sound, inappropriate tachycardia, arrhythmias
including conduction blocks, signs of congestive heart failure and pericardial
friction rub (associated with pericarditis).Investigations
Chest X-ray: May show mild cardiac enlargement.
ECG  changes are common but nonspecific. May show standard T wave
abnormalities and arrhythmias. Heart block may develop in diphtheritic
myocarditis, Lyme disease and Chagas’ disease.
Cardiac enzymes: Biochemical markers of myocardial injury such as
troponin I and T, creatine kinase may be raised during the early phases.
Echocardiography: May show left ventricular dysfunction, and global
hypokinesia with or without pericardial effusion.
Cardiac magnetic resonance imaging: MRI may show myocardial
inflammation or infiltration. May show increased myocardial T2 signal on
inversion recovery sequence and delayed contrast enhancement after
gadolinium-DTPA infusion.Viral antibody titers: May be increased.
Endomyocardial biopsy is sometimes useful to confirm the diagnosis and
may show acute inflammation. Although controversial, still the current
gold-standard test for diagnosis. It should be considered when there is
suspicious of giant cell myocarditis, hypersensitivity/eosinophilic
myocarditis, and cardiac involvement in a systemic disease.Viral RNA, DNA: Genome by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) or in situ
hybridization.
Blood: Leukocytosis, elevated ESR or eosinophilia.
Complications: Ventricular arrhythmia, heart block, congestive heart failure,
acute pericarditis, progression to chronic myocarditis or chronic dilated
cardiomyopathy (e.g. Chagas disease).

Management
Identify, treat, eliminate or avoid the underlying cause.
Prolonged bed rest during the acute phase of the illness and restriction of physical activities for 6
months (till ECG is normal). Because physical activities can induce potentially fatal ventricular
arrhythmias.
Treatment of heart failure with diuretics, ACE inhibitors/AII receptor antagonists, β-blockers,
spironolactone ± digoxin. Arrhythmias are treated by amiodarone and β-blockers. Digoxin should
be used with caution.Antibiotics:  Specific antimicrobial therapy if a causative organism has been identified.
NSAIDs should not be given in the acute phase but may be given in the late phase.
Corticosteroids and immunosuppressive agents use is controversial.
Immunoglobulin:  High-dose intravenous immunoglobulin appears to hasten the resolution of the
left ventricular dysfunction and improved survival.
Refractory patients may rarely need cardiac transplantation or temporary circulatory support (with
a mechanical ventricular assist device).
Cardiomyopathy
Q. Define and classify cardiomyopathy.
Definition
Cardiomyopathies are a heterogeneous group of diseases of the myocardium
that affects the mechanical or electrical function of the heart.
The term cardiomyopathy should be restricted to the conditions which
primarily affect the myocardium. It does not include myocardial
involvement due to congenital, acquired valvular, hypertensive, and
coronary arterial or pericardial abnormalities.Etiology: They can be genetic/inherited or have infective, toxic causes or
idiopathic.
Classification
Cardiomyopathies may be classified according to a variety of criteria,
including the underlying genetic basis of dysfunction. Two fundamental
forms of cardiomyopathy (Box 7.51) are:1. Primary cardiomyopathy: Consists of heart muscle disease predominantly
involving the myocardium and/or of unknown cause.
2. Secondary cardiomyopathy: Consists of myocardial disease of unknown
cause or cardiomyopathy associated with systemic disease (e.g. chronic
alcohol use, amyloidosis).

Box 7.51: Etiologic classification of cardiomyopathy.
Primary cardiomyopathy
Idiopathic (D, R, H)
Familial (D, R, H)
Eosinophilic endomyocardial fibrosis (R)
Endomyocardial fibrosis (R)
Secondary cardiomyopathy
Infective (D):  Viral, bacterial, fungal, protozoal, metazoal, rickettsial, spirochetal myocarditis.
Metabolic (D):  Familial storage disease (D, R): Glycogen storage disease, mucopolysaccharidosis,
hemochromatosis, Fabry’s disease
Deficiency (D):  Electrolytes, nutritional
Autoimmune disease:  Systemic lupus erythematosus, polyarteritis nodosa, rheumatoid arthritis
Infiltrations and granulomas diseases (R, D):  Amyloidosis, sarcoidosis, malignancy
Neuromuscular: Muscular dystrophy, myotonic dystrophy, Friedrich’s ataxia (H, D)
Sensitivity and toxic reaction (D):  Alcohol, drugs, radiation
Peripartum heart disease Takotsubo (stress) cardiomyopathy
D, dilated cardiomyopathy; H, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; R, restrictive cardiomyopathy
Clinical Classification of Cardiomyopathy (Fig. 7.51 and Table
7.94)
Table 7.94: Salient features of three major clinical types of
cardiomyopathies.
Functional type (Left
ventricular ejection
fraction)Abnormality Dysfunction
Structural Functional
Dilated/congestive
(<40%)Dilatation of
ventriclePoor ventricular
contractionSystolic dysfunction
Hypertrophic (50–
80%)Hypertrophy of
left ventricle
generalized or
involves the
upper portion of
interventricular
septumImpairment of ventricular
filling and left ventricular
ejection due to outflow
tract obstructionPredominantly diastolic
dysfunction
Restrictive/obliterative
(45–90%)Small ventricle
with” stiff wall”Impairment of ventricular
fillingDiastolic dysfunctionDilated (Congestive) Cardiomyopathy (DCM)

Q. Write short essay/note on dilated cardiomyopathy (congestive
cardiomyopathy).
DCM is characterized by dilatation/enlargement of the ventricular
chambers and systolic dysfunction (impaired contraction of left and/or
right ventricular) with preserved wall thickness.
Left ventricular mass is increased but thickness of wall is normal or
reduced. Dilatation of the valve rings may cause functional incompetence
of mitral and tricuspid valves.Most common of all cardiomyopathies.
Responsible for about one in three cases of heart failure and third most
common cause of heart failure.
Fig. 7.51:  Clinical classification of cardiomyopathy.
(AO: aorta; LA: left atrium; LV: left ventricle)
Etiology
Familial DCM: One-fifth to one-third of patients has familial forms of
DCM. It is inherited as an autosomal dominant disorder and is associated
with more than 20 varieties of single-gene mutations. Most of these
mutations involve genes encoding the cytoskeleton of the myocyte
(dystrophin, lamin A and C, emerin and metavinculin). Most of the X-
linked inherited skeletal muscular dystrophies (e.g. Becker and Duchenne)
are associated with cardiomyopathy.Sporadic DCM: Causes include:
–   Myocarditis: Coxsackie, adenoviruses, HIV, bacteria, fungal,
mycobacteria, parasitic (Chagas disease)

–   Toxins: Alcohol, chemotherapy (e.g. adriamycin, trastuzumab,
cyclophosphamide), metals (cobalt, lead, mercury, arsenic)
–   Autoimmune diseases (SLE, systemic sclerosis, dermatomyositis)
–   Endocrine: Diabetes mellitus, thyrotoxicosis, hypothyroidism
–   Neuromuscular: Muscular dystrophies, Friedrich’s ataxia, myotonic
dystrophy
Clinical features
It is three times more common in men than women and the peak incidence
is in middle age.
Symptoms may be gradual in onset or may cause sudden cardiac death due
to arrhythmias. Thromboembolism, conduction defects and sporadic chest
pain may be present.Symptoms/signs of heart failure
–   Fatigue and weakness
–   Pulmonary congestion (left heart failure), dyspnea (rest, exertional,
nocturnal), orthopnea.
–   Systemic congestion (right heart failure), edema, nausea, abdominal
pain, nocturia.
–   Low cardiac output
–   Hypotension, tachycardia, tachypnea
–   Narrow pulse pressure
–   Elevated jugular venous pressure (JVP)
–   Arrhythmia: Atrial fibrillation, conduction delays, complex PVCs,
sudden death. Investigations
Chest X-ray: Generalized enlargement of heart, CHF
Electrocardiogram: ECG shows tachycardia, conduction abnormalities
(AV block, LBBB), diffuse nonspecific ST segment and T wave changes,
arrhythmias (i.e. atrial fibrillation, ventricular premature contractions or
ventricular tachycardia)24-hour Holter monitor: If lightheadedness, palpitation, syncope
Echocardiogram, CTI, CMRI: Show left ventricular dilation with
normal or minimally thickened or, thinned walls, global hypokinesia, low

EF
Elevated BNP
Cardiac catheterization to rule out coronary artery disease
Myocardial biopsy, rarely necessary.
Treatment
Control and conventional management of heart failure:  Salt restriction, fluid restriction and
initiate standard treatment of heart failure. Medical therapy consists of ACE inhibitors, diuretics,
digoxin and hydralazine/nitrate combination. L-carnitine, antioxidants and chelating agents have
been tried.
Anticoagulation prophylaxis
Implantation of a cardiac defibrillator and/or cardiac resynchronization therapy in some patients.
Cardiac transplantation in certain patients.
Prognosis: Majority particularly >50 years die within 4 years of onset.
Spontaneous improvement or stabilization occurs in 25% of cases. Death is
due to progressive heart failure, ventricular tachycardia. SCD is a constant
threat.
Alcoholic Cardiomyopathy
Individuals who consumes >90 g/day of alcohol for many years.
Clinical picture resembling idiopathic or familial DCM.
Partially genetically predetermined (ALDH2).
Abstention may halt the progression or may even reverse.
Peripartum Cardiomyopathy
Cardiac dilatation with CHF develops during last trimester or within 6
months of delivery.
Typically present in multiparous of age >30 years.
Unknown cause
Inflammatory myocarditis, immune activation, multiple gestations have
been incriminated.
Symptoms, signs and management are that of IDCM
Further pregnancy should be discouraged.
Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy

Q. Write short essay/note on hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM).
HCM is characterized by left ventricular hypertrophy, typically of a non-
dilated chamber, without any obvious cause.
Two significant features are:
–   Asymmetric myocardial hypertrophy of the left ventricle with
greater hypertrophy of the interventricular septum.
–   A dynamic left ventricular outflow tract pressure gradient, related to
narrowing of the sub aortic area which may produce LV outflow tract
obstruction.
It is familial and transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait.
Clinical features
Asymptomatic: Echocardiographic finding only and family history may be
positive.
Symptomatic: Dyspnea in 90%. Other symptoms include effort-related
such as angina and breathlessness, arrhythmia and sudden death.
Signs
Rapidly rising carotid pulse (‘jerky’ ‘spike and dome’)/bisferiens pulse
(two systolic peaks).
Double apical impulse.
Reversed pulsus paradoxus on arterial pulse with Bernheim a wave in
JVP.
Harsh ejection systolic murmur best heard at the lower-left sternal border
as well as the apex due to left ventricular outflow tract obstruction. This
murmur increases during standing and Valsalva maneuver (which reduce
ventricular preload) but decreases during squatting and sustained hand
grip (which increase afterload), and also by leg rising (which increases
preload).Pansystolic murmur at mitral area due to mitral regurgitation.
Investigations
Electrocardiogram: Abnormal in 85–90% of cases. Shows left ventricular
hypertrophy, abnormal ST-Ts, giant T-wave inversions, abnormal Q’
waves, bundle branch block (BBB).Chest X-ray: Normal or shows mild-to-moderate cardiac enlargement.

Echocardiography is diagnostic. Increased LV wall thickness ≥15 mm,
systolic anterior motion  (SAM) of the mitral valve and dynamic LV
outflow tract obstruction.
Genetic testing for evaluation of family members.
Treatment
Avoid:  Dehydration, digitalis, diuretics, dihydropins, and vasodilators.
Drug therapy:  Beta-adrenergic blockers, calcium-channel blockers (verapamil, diltiazem, etc.),
disopyramide and anti-arrhythmics (amiodarone).
Implantable cardiac defibrillator (ICD).
Myectomy (partial surgical resection of septum) may improve outflow tract obstruction.
Iatrogenic infarction of the basal septum (septal ablation) using a catheter delivered alcohol
solution.
Transplantation.
Prognosis
Risk of SCD higher in children. Clinical deterioration usually is slow.
Poor prognosis in males, young age of onset, family history of SCD,
history of syncope, exercise induced hypotension (worst).
Progression to DCM occurs in 10–15%.
Restrictive (Obliterative) Cardiomyopathy
Q. Write short essay/note on restrictive cardiomyopathy (obliterative
cardiomyopathy).
Rare condition in which ventricular filling is impaired because of the stif f
ventricles. Hallmark is an abnormal diastolic function.
It resemblances constrictive pericarditis, and it is important to differentiate
because constrictive pericarditis is an operable disease.
Much less common than DCM or HCM outside the tropics, but frequent
cause of death in Africa, India, South and Central America and Asia
primarily because of the high incidence of endomyocardial fibrosis in
those regions.
CausesIdiopathic
Myocardial:
–   Noninfiltrative: Idiopathic, scleroderma

–   Infiltrative: Amyloidosis, sarcoidosis, Gaucher’s disease, Hurler
disease
–   Storage disease: Hemochromatosis, Fabry disease, glycogen storage
diseases.
Endomyocardial: Tropical endomyocardial fibrosis, hypereosinophilic
syndrome, carcinoid, metastatic malignancies, radiation, anthracycline
drugs.
Clinical features
Symptoms of right and left heart failure. Exercise intolerance, dyspnea,
peripheral edema, ascites and enlarged tender liver.
Systemic embolism may develop in about 25% cases.
Jugular venous pressure may be raised with diastolic collapse and positive
Kussmaul’s sign.
Mild cardiac enlargement, the cardiac apex is easily palpable, and a mitral
regurgitation murmur may be heard (not found in constrictive pericarditis).
Heart sounds are soft and third and fourth heart sounds may be heard.
Investigations
Electrocardiogram: Shows non-specific ST-T wave changes, low
voltage, arrhythmias
Chest X-ray: Shows mild cardiomegaly.
Doppler echocardiography: Abnormal mitral inflow pattern,
symmetrically thickened LV walls and systolic dysfunction, prominent E
wave (rapid diastolic filling), reduced deceleration time (increased left
atrial pressure).Cardiac MRI and CT: Show symmetrically thickening of left ventricle
wall, and normal or slightly reduced ventricular volumes and systolic
function. These findings are useful in differentiating it from constrictive
pericarditis.Cardiac catheterization: Shows increased ventricular filling pressures
with dip-and-plateau pattern.
Treatment
No satisfactory medical therapy.
Drug therapy must be used with caution.
–   Diuretics for extremely high-filling pressures.

–   Chronic anticoagulation is often recommended.
–   Vasodilators may decrease filling pressure.
–   Calcium-channel blockers to improve diastolic compliance.
–   Digitalis and other inotropic agents are not indicated.Transplantation may be indicated.
Table 7.95: Classification of congenital heart diseases.
Acyanotic Cyanotic
With (left to right) shunts
Ventricular septal defect
Atrial septal defect
Patent ductus arteriosus
Without shunts (obstructive lesions)
Aortic stenosis
Coarctation of aortaWith (right to left) shunts
Tetralogy of Fallot
Tricuspid atresia
Ebstein’s anomaly
Transposition of great vessels
Truncus arteriosus
Without shunts (obstructive lesions)
Pulmonary stenosis
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASES
Q. Write short note on:
Common congenital heart diseases seen in adults.
Enumerate cyanotic heart diseases.
Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most common group of structural
malformations in children. CHD occurs in 8 per 1000 infants. About 1 in 10
stillborn infants have a cardiac anomaly.
Classification of Congenital Heart Diseases
Classification of congenital heart diseases is summarized in Table 7.95.
Acyanotic Congenital Heart Diseases
Persistent Ductus Arteriosus (Patent Ductus Arteriosus, PDA)
Q. Write short essay on persistent ductus arteriosus (patent ductus
arteriosus).
Etiology
Rubella infection during the first trimester of pregnancy and fetal valproate
syndrome is associated with a high incidence of PDA. Patent (persistent)

ductus arteriosus (PDA) is a congenital anomaly in which the ductus
arteriosus remains open after birth. This produces a persistent
communication between the proximal left pulmonary artery and the
descending aorta. Since the pressure in the aorta is higher than that in the
pulmonary artery, it produces a continuous arteriovenous left to right shunt
the volume of which depends on the size of the ductus. About 50% of the left
ventricular output is recirculated through the lungs, with a consequent
increase in the work of the heart. PDAs may occur as an isolated anomaly
(about 90%), or associated with  other abnormalities such as VSD,
coarctation of the aorta, or pulmonary or aortic valve stenosis.
Clinical features
SymptomsMore common in females with female to male ratio of about 2:1.
When the shunt is small, then it may be asymptomatic for years.
If the shunt is moderate-to-large, there is retardation of growth and
development. It produces left heart volume overload. Cardiac failure may
develop producing dyspnea. In some cases, it may raise pulmonary artery
pressure resulting in pulmonary hypertension and Eisenmenger’s
syndrome.Q. Write short essay on differential cyanosis.
Persistent ductus with reversed shunting: When the pulmonary vascular
resistance increases, pulmonary artery pressure may rise until it equals or
exceeds aortic pressure. Then the shunt through the patent ductus arteriosus
may reverse causing Eisenmenger’s syndrome. Patients with Eisenmenger’s
syndrome are cyanotic and may have differential cyanosis. It is
characterized by cyanosis and clubbing of the toes but not the fingers because
the right-to-left ductal shunting is distal to the subclavian arteries.
SignsQ. Write short essay on cardiac findings in patent ductus arteriosus.
Bounding pulse: Pulses are increased in volume.
Apex beat is shifted down and out and hyperdynamic.
PDA produces a characteristic continuous harsh murmur known as
‘machinery-like’/Gibson’s murmur. It is heard with late systolic

accentuation and maximal in the first left intercostal space below the
clavicle and frequently accompanied by a continuous thrill at the upper-
left sternal edge. However, in a large PDA when pulmonary hypertension
develops the murmur becomes softer.First heart sound is loud (due to loud mitral component).
Graham Steell murmur of pulmonary hypertension will be present.
Investigations
Chest X-ray shows enlargement of the pulmonary artery with increased
vascular markings (plethoric fields).
ECG  is usually normal with smaller ductal shunts. It may demonstrate left
atrial enlargement, left ventricular hypertrophy, sinus tachycardia or atrial
fibrillation in patients with moderate or large shunts.
Echocardiogram and color Doppler shows PDA and the amount of
blood flow through the ductus arteriosus.
Magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomography: It can assess
the degree of calcification, which is important, if surgical therapy is
considered.
Complications: Cardiac failure, hypertensive pulmonary vascular disease,
endarteritis, paradoxical embolism.
ManagementSmall ductus arteriosus may predispose to endarteritis and ductus closure should be done unless
clinically silent.
Ductus closure is indicated for any child or adult who is symptomatic from significant left-to-right
shunting through the PDA.
Transcatheter-occluding devices (e.g. coils, buttons and umbrellas) are increasingly used.
Video-assisted thoracoscopic clip closure.
Surgical ligation or division of the PDA remains the treatment of choice for the rare very large
ductus arteriosus.
Symptomatic patients with PDA usually improve with a medical regimen of diuretics, digoxin and
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition, antidysarrhythmia medications with anticoagulation
may be useful in patients with atrial fibrillation or flutter.Pharmacological treatment in the neonatal period: In the first week of life, if the ductus is
patent; a prostaglandin synthetase inhibitor (e.g. indomethacin or ibuprofen) may be used to
induce its closure. However, if there is an impaired lung perfusion (e.g. severe pulmonary stenosis
and left-to right shunt through the ductus), the ductus must be kept open with prostaglandin
treatment to improve oxygenation.
Coarctation of Aorta

Q. Write short essay on coarctation of aorta.
Coarctation of the aorta (COA) is narrowing of the lumen of the aorta at the
region or just distal to the insertion of the ductus arteriosus distal to (just
below) the origin of the left subclavian artery.
Etiology: It is congenital heart disease associated with other abnormalities,
such as bicuspid aortic valve (80% of cases) and ‘berry’ aneurysms in the
circle of Willis, Turner’s syndrome. Other lesions that may be associated
include patent ductus arteriosus, ventricular septal defect and patent ductus
arteriosus, mitral stenosis or regurgitation.
Types: Two classic forms.1. Infantile (preductal) form: Characterized by tubular hypoplasia of the
aortic arch proximal to a patent ductus arteriosus. It produces symptoms in
early childhood.
2. Adult (postductal) form: Shows narrowing of the aorta, opposite the
closed ductus arteriosus (ligamentum arteriosum) distal to the arch vessels.
Clinical features
Symptoms
It is twice common in men compared to women.
It may present as cardiac failure in the newborn but often asymptomatic
for many years when detected in older children or adults.
May present with headaches and epistaxis/nosebleeds due to hypertension
proximal to the coarctation.
Occasionally present with weakness or cramps/claudication in the legs and
cold legs due to decreased blood flow to the lower part of the body limbs.
Signs
Q. Write short note on radiofemoral delay and Suzman’s sign.
Pulse: The femoral pulses and pulses in the lower limbs are weak, delayed
(radiofemoral delay) in comparison with the radial pulse. If coarctation is
proximal to the left subclavian artery, asynchronous radial pulses in right
and left arms are observed. Prominent pulsations in the neck. In severe
coarctation, pulses are poor.BP: It is raised in the upper limbs, but normal/low in the legs (difference
>20 mm Hg).

Heart sounds and murmurs:
–   Ejection systolic murmur (ESM): Systolic murmur is heard posteriorly,
over the spine due to coarctation.
–   Systolic or continuous murmurs over lateral thoracic wall due to
collaterals.
–   An ejection click and systolic murmur in the aortic area, if associated
with bicuspid aortic valve. Heaving apical impulse.
Bruits: Aortic narrowing causes formation of collaterals mainly in the
periscapular, internal mammary and intercostal arteries, and may produce
localized bruits.Suzman’s sign: It is characterized by dilated, tortuous, pulsatile arteries
around the scapulae and intercostals regions in the back. It is seen better
when the patient bends forwards with hands hanging down.Corkscrew-shaped retinal arteries. Absence of papilledema despite high
BP.
Investigations
Chest X-ray: In early childhood, it is often normal. Later, it may show
post-stenotic dilatation of aorta and indentation of the descending aorta at
the site of the coarctation. This produces an aorta shaped like a ‘figure 3’
(due to combination of dilated left subclavian artery above, stenosed,
coarcted segment in the middle and dilated poststenotic aorta below in the
upper right mediastinum. Tortuous and dilated collaterals may erode the
undersurfaces of the ribs producing notching of the under-surfaces of the
posterior ribs (‘rib notching’ or ‘Dock’sign’)  extending from third to
ninth ribs. It may be unilateral or bilateral, and found only after 6 years of
age.CT, MRI and CMR scanning is the best imaging method to accurately
demonstrate the coarctation and quantify flow.
ECG: May demonstrate left ventricular hypertrophy.
Echocardiography sometimes shows the coarctation and other associated
anomalies. It confirms left ventricular hypertrophy.
Complications: Hypertension, left ventricular/congestive heart failure,
infective endocarditis (at the site of coarctation, bicuspid aortic valve or
collateral channels), cerebral hemorrhage due to rupture of Berry aneurysm
and rupture or dissection of aorta.

Treatment
If untreated, death may occur due to complications (e.g. left ventricular failure, dissection of the
aorta or cerebral hemorrhage).
Treat hypertension and congestive heart failure. Avoid ACE inhibitors and angiotensin II receptor
antagonists because they may lead to inadequate perfusion of lower-body and may precipitate
renal failure.Surgical correction:  Intervention is needed if there is a peak–peak gradient across the coarctation
of >20 mm Hg and/or proximal hypertension. In neonates surgical repair is required. In older
children and adults, balloon dilatation and stenting or surgery is advisable. Recurrence of stenosis
may occur as the child grows. A balloon dilatation is preferred for recoarctation (sometimes
stenting).
Atrial Septal Defect
Q. Write short essay on atrial septal defect.
An atrial septal defect (ASD) is an abnormal, fixed opening in the atrial
septum. It is due to incomplete formation of the atrial septum.
Types of ASD
Ostium secundum defects (75–85% of ASDs) are located in the region of
the midseptum (fossa ovalis).
Ostium primum (atrioventricular septal)  defects ( 10–15%) are located
in the lower portion of the atrial septum.
Sinus venosus defects:
–   Superior sinus venosus type defect (5–10%): Defects are located in
the superior part of the septum near the orifice of the superior vena
cava (SVC).
–   Inferior sinus venosus (IVC) type defect (1%): Defects are located
on the inferior part of the septum near the inferior vena cava (IVC)
entry point.Coronary sinus (1%) septal defect (in which a defect between the
coronary sinus and the left atrium allows a left-to-right shunt to occur
through an ‘unroofed’ coronary sinus).
Hemodynamics
In ASD flow of blood is between the left and right atria. Normal RV is more
compliant than the LV and initially a large volume of blood shunts through
the atrial defect from the left atrium to right atrium and then to right ventricle.
This increases right ventricular output and markedly increased pulmonary

blood flow through the pulmonary arteries. As a result, there is progressive
enlargement of right atrium, right ventricle and pulmonary arteries.
Eventually, pulmonary hypertension develops and sometimes reversal of the
shunt from right to left (tend to occur later in life).
Clinical Features
Symptoms
ASDs are often asymptomatic till adulthood .
Two to three times more common in women than in men.
Symptoms include easy fatigability, recurrent chest infection, exertional
dyspnea, palpitations related to arrhythmias (especially atrial fibrillation),
platypnea-orthodeoxia-dyspnea with standing, relieved by restand cardiac
failure.After 40 years: Deterioration due to atrial fibrillation, increased left to
right shunt due to hypertension and coronary artery disease (CAD) which
decrease left ventricular (LV) compliance.
SignsPulse: No variation in rate or volume with Valsalva, irregularly irregular
pulse with AF.
JVP: (1) a and v waves have equal height that is reflection of LA waves
and (2) a wave becomes taller when pulmonary hypertension develops or
associated mitral stenosis (MS).Systolic pulsations in second and third left intercostals space due to dilated
pulmonary artery.
Characteristic physical signs due to the volume overload of the right
ventricle:
–   S2- wide fixed split: Wide, fixed splitting of the second heart sound
(S2).
♦   Wide due to (1) increased RV ejection time (delay in right
ventricular ejection) and (2) increased pulmonary hangout interval.
♦   Fixed because the atrial septal defect equalizes left and right atrial
pressures throughout the respiratory cycle.
–   A systolic flow murmur over the pulmonary valve not due to atrial
septal defect.
–   Diastolic flow murmur over the tricuspid valve may be heard in

children with a large shunt.
S1-loud and P2 is loud (due to increased recoil of the dilated PA and close
proximity of dilated PA to chest wall).
Ventricular heave/parasternal impulse present.
Investigations
Chest X-ray (Fig. 7.52): It shows enlargement of the heart (right atrium,
right ventricle) and prominent pulmonary arteries (Jug handle appearance)
with pulmonary plethora. Hilar dance on fluroscopy is characteristic.
ECG: Incomplete right bundle branch block (RBBB due to right
ventricular depolarization) and right axis deviation (due to dilatation of the
right ventricle). Ostium primum defects may show left axis deviation.Echocardiography: May show hypertrophy and dilatation of the right
heart and pulmonary arteries.
Subcostal views with 2D and color Doppler demonstrates the ASD and
helps in calculation of the left right shunt (QP: QS ratio).
CMR and CT  helps to assess for anomalous pulmonary venous drainage.
MRI: Can be used to identify size and location of defect, A major
advantage of MRI is the ability to quantify right ventricular size, volume,
and function along with the ability to identify the systemic and pulmonary
venous return.Cardiac catheterization: In non-restrictive ASD, pressure gradient
between atria is less than 3 mm Hg.
Complications: Congestive heart failure (in neonates), paradoxical
embolism, atrial fibrillation. Others include pulmonary hypertension (late),
Eisenmenger’s syndrome (very late) and very rarely infective endocarditis.

Fig. 7.52:  Chest X-ray of atrial septal defect showing jug handle appearance.
Management
Prompt treatment of respiratory infections.
Indications for intervention
–   ASD with significant left to right shunting resulting in right atrial/ventricular enlargement
irrespective of symptoms.
–   Atrial septal defects in which pulmonary flow is increased 50% above systemic flow (i.e. flow
ratio of 1.5 : 1).
–   Thromboembolic events.
Contraindications to surgery:  Severe pulmonary hypertension and shunt reversal.
Surgical options available are:
–   Median sternotomy with direct closure of small to moderate defect.
–   Larger defects closed with autologous pericardium or synthetic patches like polyester polymer
(Dacron) or polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE).
–   Surgical closure of the defect is done in patients above 3 years of age, provided there are no
signs of pulmonary hypertension and the pulmonary flow is 50% more than the systemic blood
flow (Qp:Qs>1.5/1).
–   A transcatheter septal clamshell device closure may be used for most secundum ASDs (if

suitable size).
Uncorrected ASD does not require antibiotic prophylaxis for endocarditis unless other high-risk
conditions are present (refer infective endocarditis on page 481).
Prognosis: Long-term prognosis thereafter is excellent after surgical
intervention.
Patent Foramen Ovale
Q. Write short note on patent foramen ovale.
It may be found in >25% of adult population and is hemodynamically
insignificant.
Usually asymptomatic but may be associated with paradoxical emboli and
increased incidence of embolic stroke.
Ventricular Septal Defect
Q. Write short essay on ventricular septal defect.
Ventricular septal defect (VSD) is the most common congenital heart disease
(2 per 1000 live births).
Etiology
Congenital ventricular septal defect are due to incomplete septation of the
ventricles. Embryologically, the interventricular septum has two portions
namely (1) a membranous and (2) a muscular portion (which is further
divided into inflow, trabecular and outflow portions). Most congenital
ventricular defects are ‘perimembranous’, i.e. at the junction of the
membranous and muscular portions. Congenital ventricular septal defect
may be isolated or may be associated with other congenital heart disease.Causes of acquired ventricular septal defect: Ventricular septal rupture
as a complication of acute MI, infective endocarditis or rarely from
trauma/cardiac catheterization.
Hemodynamic consequences
Left ventricular pressure is higher than right ventricle. Therefore, blood
flows from left to right ventricle and this causes a volume overload of the
right ventricle and increased pulmonary blood flow.The shunt volume in a VSD depends on the shunt size of the defect and
the pulmonary vascular resistance. If the defect is large (at a later stage),

large volumes of blood flows through the pulmonary vasculature leading
to pulmonary hypertension. When the right ventricular pressure becomes
higher than left, the blood starts to shunt from right to left leading to
Eisenmenger’s complex. It is characterized by cyanosis.
Clinical features
Symptoms
Symptoms depend on the size of the defect and severity the shunt.
In patients with large VSD, symptoms develop soon after birth. It includes
dyspnea, repeated pulmonary infection, hepatomegaly, sweating, and
failure to thrive. Irreversible pulmonary vascular disease after 1–2 years of
age.Some children with isolated VSD develop subpulmonic stenosis: Patient
not at risk of pulmonary vascular disease.
Signs
Q. Write short note on Maladie de Roger.
Pulse pressure is relatively wide.
Murmur:
–   Blood flow from the high-pressure left ventricle to the low-pressure
right ventricle during systole produces a pansystolic murmur (PSM).
It is usually heard best at the left sternal edge (3rd, 4th and 5th
intercostal space) and radiates all over the precordium. S1and S2 are
masked by a pansystolic murmur.
–   A small defect usually produces a loud  PSM murmur (maladie de
Roger) presenting in older children when there is no other
hemodynamic disturbance.
–   Large defect produces a softer murmur , especially when the right
ventricular pressure is raised. This can be detected immediately after
birth, while pulmonary vascular resistance is high, or when the shunt is
reversed as in Eisenmenger’s syndrome.Precordium is hyperkinetic with a systolic thrill at left sternal border
(LSB).
Prominent parasternal pulsation, tachypnea and indrawing of the lower
ribs on inspiration.

Mortality—27% by 20 years and 69% by 60 years.
Investigations
Chest X-ray: Shows cardiomegaly proportional to the volume overload.
Mainly LV, LA and RV enlargement. Increased pulmonary blood flow,
PAH.
Electrocardiogram: May show right/left or combined ventricular
hypertrophy. RBBB is common. Katz Watchtel sign, i.e. large equiphasic
QRS in V2-V4 suggestive of biventricular hypertrophy.
Doppler echocardiography is useful to determine location of VSD,
morphology of LV outflow, aortic valve involvement.
Cardiac catheterization  to assess pulmonary vascular resistance in
complicated VSD.
Complications: These include congestive heart failure, pulmonary
hypertension, Eisenmenger’s syndrome, right ventricular outflow tract
obstruction, infective endocarditis.
Natural history
Spontaneous closure occurs in about 40% of cases.
Development of RVOT obstruction/infundibular stenosis (Gasul’s
transformation) may occur in 5% of the defects. Though patient requires
surgery, it prevents development of pulmonary vascular obstructive
disease.Aortic insufficiency develops in approximately 5% of patients. This may
either be related to prolapse of an aortic valve cusp into VSD or lack of
support to the aortic root.
ManagementSmall VSD:  No medication or surgery needed if asymptomatic. About 75–80% closes by 2 years
and it needs observation.
Cardiac failure in infancy:  It is initially managed with digoxin and diuretics. If failure persists
surgical repair of the defect should be performed.
Moderate/large VSD:  Repair by intervention
–   Large hemodynamically significant VSD: L to R shunting with Qp/Qs ≥ 2:1, even if
asymptomatic, ideally before 1 year.
–   Growth failure, unresponsive to medical therapy is an indication for surgery.
Surgical closure is contraindicated in fully developed Eisenmenger’s syndrome. These patients
may be treated by heart–lung transplantation.

Eisenmenger’s Syndrome
Q. Write short essay on Eisenmenger’s syndrome.
Eisenmenger syndrome characterized by an untreated congenital cardiac
defect with intracardiac communication that leads to pulmonary
hypertension, reversal of flow, and cyanosis.
It develops as a consequence of the reversal of a left-to-right shunt to a
right-to-left shunt. It develops in patients with congenital heart disease
such as patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), ventricular septal defect (VSD),
and atrial septal defect (ASD).VSD Eisenmenger is called as Eisenmenger complex.
Clinical features
Symptoms
Dyspnea, fatigue, dizziness and syncope.
Signs
Central cyanosis and clubbing: It develops due to the mixing of
deoxygenated blood with oxygenated blood. It is generalized in ASD and
VSD reversal, whereas it is differential (only lower limbs) in PDA with
reversal.Signs of pulmonary hypertension and its sequelae (refer ‘pulmonary
hypertension’).
Heart sounds: S2 is loud with palpable P2.
–   In ASD with reversal: S2 fixed but narrowly split
–   In VSD with reversal: S2 single
–   In PDA with reversal: S2 mobile but narrowly split
–   Right ventricular S4 and pulmonary ejection click appear.
Murmurs: The murmurs of the underlying cause (ASD, VSD, PDA)
decrease in intensity, duration and finally disappear with the development
of Eisenmenger’s syndrome. Early diastolic murmur at pulmonary area
and pansystolic murmur of TR appear.
Complications: Right heart failure, infective endocarditis, pulmonary
infections, severe hemoptysis, secondary polycythemia, pulmonary
thrombosis with infarction, brain abscess, cerebral stroke and ventricular

arrhythmias.
Treatment
Surgical correction of underlying defect (refer treatment of ASD, VSD and PDA).
Do not advise vasodilator therapy using calcium channel blockers. It causes systemic
vasodilatation and increases right-to-left shunt.
Long-term oxygen inhalation may be useful to relieve symptoms.
Phlebotomy when hyperviscosity syndrome develops due to polycythemia.
Heart-lung transplantation is the only curative treatment.
Relief of symptoms: By drugs such as prostanoids (e.g. epoprostenol, iloprost, treprostinil),
endothelin receptor antagonists (e.g. bosentan) and phosphodiesteraase-5 inhibitors (e.g. sildenafil,
tadalafil).
Cyanotic Congenital Heart Diseases
Tetralogy of Fallot
Q. Write short essay on Fallot’s tetralogy or Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF).
It is the most common congenital cyanotic heart disease in adults (75%). It
consists of four features (Fig. 7.53A):
1. Ventricular septal defect usually large and similar in aperture to the aortic
orifice.
2. Pulmonary stenosis: Right ventricular outflow tract obstruction mostly
subvalvular (infundibular) but may be valvular, supravalvular or a
combination of these.
3. Overriding of dextroposed aorta
4. Right ventricular hypertrophy
Presence of ASD along with TOF is known as pentalogy of Fallot.
Etiology
It occurs in about 1 in 2000 births and is the most common cause of
cyanosis in infancy after the first year of life.
It is due to abnormal development of the bulbar septum that separates the
ascending aorta from the pulmonary artery.
Pathophysiology
When RV and LV pressures become identical, there is little or no left to
right shunt. Hence, VSD is silent.
Right ventricle empties into pulmonary artery across pulmonic stenosis

producing ejection systolic murmur. Hence, the more severe the
pulmonary stenosis, more is the left to right shunt and less is the flow into
the pulmonary artery and the ejection systolic murmur is shorter.
When tetralogy causes elevation of right ventricular pressure, right-to-left
shunting of cyanotic blood across the ventricular septal defect occurs.
Congestive failure usually does not develop because right ventricle is
effectively decompressed by ventricular septal defect.


Figs. 7.53A and B:  (A) Diagrammatic representation of tetralogy of Fallot. Four components are: (1)
ventricular septal defect; (2) subpulmonic stenosis/pulmonary valvular stenosis; (3) aorta overriding the
VSD and (4) right ventricular hypertrophy; (B) X-ray shows an abnormally small pulmonary artery,
large right ventricle and a ‘boot-shaped’ heart.
Clinical Features
Symptoms
Symptoms depend on the severity of pulmonary stenosis and may present
any time after birth.
Paroxysmal attacks of dyspnea, anoxic spells, predominantly after waking
up. Child cries becomes blue (cyanosis due to increased right sided
pressures, resulting in a right to left shunt), lose consciousness and may
develop convulsion. Frequency varies from once a few days to many
attack everyday.Squatting is common
Fallot’s spell (‘tet spell’): It is lethal, unpredictable, episodes in which the
child suddenly becomes increasingly cyanosed usually during feeding,
crying, fever or exercise and may become apnoeic and unconscious. This
is because of spasm of the subpulmonary muscle (infundibular septum),

systemic vasodilatation producing increased right-to-left shunting across
VSD and acute increase right ventricular outlet obstruction.
–  Progression of spell may lead to metabolic acidosis which further
reduces systemic resistance and increases pulmonary vascular
resistance. This can cause sudden death.
–   Fallot’s spell  can be relieved by increasing systemic/peripheral
resistance. This diminishes (reduces) right-to-left shunting, increases
systemic venous return and increases pulmonary blood flow. Example
of postural maneuver that increases peripheral/systemic resistance is
sitting posture/squatting (Fallot sign).Adults have growth retardation, fatigue and dyspnea on exertion but
cyanotic spells are not usual. Secondary polycythemia due to chronic
hypoxia and can produce thrombotic strokes.
SignsCombination of cyanosis with a loud ejection systolic murmur: In the
pulmonary area (as for pulmonary stenosis) is the most characteristic
feature. The ejection systolic murmur is heard in the second and third left
intercostal spaces and is due to pulmonary outflow obstruction. Intensity
and duration of ejection systolic murmur is inversely proportional to
severity of right ventricular outflow tract obstruction. However, cyanosis
may not be seen in the newborn or in patients with only mild right
ventricular outflow obstruction (‘acyanotic tetralogy of Fallot’).Second heart sound: Pulmonary obstruction results in delayed P2 and P2
become soft or inaudible (too soft to be heard). Since P2 is inaudible,
hence S2 = A2 (S2 is single loud second heart sound).
Aorta is displaced anteriory too, A2 becomes loud. Ascending aorta in
TOF is large, results in an aortic ejection click.
Other signs include clubbing, parasternal heave, systolic thrill.
Investigations
Chest X-ray (Fig. 7.53B): Shows an abnormally small pulmonary artery,
large right ventricle and a ‘boot-shaped’ heart (“Coeur en Sabot”).
ECG: Shows right ventricular hypertrophy.
Echocardiography: It is diagnostic and highly sensitive. It shows that the
aorta is not continuous with the anterior ventricular septum.

Cardiac catheterization is rarely required.
Complications: These include (1) intravascular thrombosis, cerebrovascular
accidents and embolism secondary to polycythemia, (2) brain abscess and (3)
infective endocarditis.
Treatment
Definitive management:  Consists of total correction of the defect by surgical means (relief of the
pulmonary stenosis and closure of the ventricular septal defect) in infants and children prior to 5
years of age.
Blalock–Taussig shunt:  It is a shunt/anastomosis between a subclavian artery and pulmonary
artery on the same side. In babies with severely hypoplastic pulmonary arteries (severe pulmonary
stenosis), initially palliation in the form of a Blalock–Taussig shunt may be performed. This
increases pulmonary blood flow and pulmonary artery development, and may facilitate later
definitive correction.Treatment of cyanotic spells:
–   Patient is asking to assume squatting (knee-to-chest) position.
–   Oxygen administration
–   Intravenous fluids to increase venous return.
–  Morphine IV in the dose of 0.1 mg/kg reduces the release of catecholamines. This increases the
period of right ventricular filling.
–   Propranolol IV in the dose of 0.01 mg/kg followed by oral dose of 3–5 mg/kg/day in divided
doses.Antibiotic prophylaxis for prevention of endocarditis.
Ebstein Anomaly
Ebstein’s anomaly is a cyanotic congenital heart disease that is
characterized by abnormalities of the tricuspid valve and atrialization of
right ventricle. It is associated with maternal lithium consumption.
Clinical features: Patients present with episodic tachyarrhythmia’s
(associated WPW syndrome) and cyanosis. They are prone to develop
paradoxical embolism, brain abscess and sudden cardiac death.On examination, there is central cyanosis and clubbing, prominent a waves
in JVP and hepatomegaly. On auscultation patient will have a split first
heart sound, split second heart sound, S3 and S4. Pansystolic murmur of
TR is present.ECG reveals right axis deviation, ‘Himalayan’ giant P waves, RBBB, pre-
exictation pattern. CXR reveals gross cardiomegaly often called as wall to
wall heart or the box heart.Doppler echocardiography is diagnostic.

Management
Medical management include treatment of arrhythmias, embolism and nitric oxide. Surgical repair
includes tricuspid replacement, selective plication of the atrialized right ventricle and closure of
intracardiac shunt (Danielson repair, Carpentier technique).
Prognosis: After total surgical correction is good (especially if the operation
is performed in childhood). About 66% live to one year, 49% to 3 years, and
24% to 10 years.
Box 7.52: Common causes of pericarditis.
Idiopathic
Infections
–   Viral (Coxsackie A and B, Echovirus, HIV)
–   Pyogenic ( Pneumococcus, Staphylococcus, Legionella)
–   Tuberculosis: Most common cause in India
–   Fungal (Histoplasmosis, Candida)
–   Syphilis, parasiticAcute myocardial infarction
Metastatic neoplasm
Hypothyroidism
Radiation therapy (up to 20 years earlier)
Chronic renal failure
Connective tissue disorder (RA, SLE)
Drug reaction (Procainamide, hydralazine)
Autoimmune following heart surgery and MI (Dressler’s syndrome)
Trauma
DISEASES OF THE PERICARDIUM
Acute Pericarditis
Q. Write short essay/note on:
Acute pericarditis.
Causes and management of pericarditis.
Definition: Acute pericarditis is defined as an acute inflammation of the
pericardium.
Etiology

Q. Write short note on causes of pericarditis.
Various common causes of pericarditis are listed in Box 7.52.
Classification
Depending on the duration: Pericarditis is classified as acute (<6 weeks),
subacute (6 weeks to 6 months) and chronic (>6 months).
Depending on the nature of inflammation: Pericarditis may be
associated with pericardial effusion and also may coexist with
myocarditis. Depending on the nature of pericardial inflammation, it may
be classified as serous, hemorrhagic or purulent pericarditis.
–   Fibrinous pericarditis: Fibrinous exudate may heal and form varying
degrees of adhesion formation.
–   Serous pericarditis: Produces a large effusion of turbid, straw colored
fluid with high protein content.
–   Hemorrhagic pericarditis is usually due to malignant disease (e.g.
carcinoma of the breast or bronchus, and lymphoma).
–   Purulent pericarditis: May develop as a complication of septicemia, by
direct spread from an intrathoracic infection, or from a penetrating
injury.
Clinical FeaturesPericardial Pain
Pericardial inflammation produces characteristic pericardial pain. It is
sharp, retrosternal (central) chest pain which radiates to the shoulders and
neck. Radiation of pain to trapezius muscle ridges is a feature that favors
pericardial pain.Pain may be steady and constrictive. Typically aggravated by deep
breathing, movement, and a change of position /lying down, coughing
exercise and swallowing.Typically relieved by sitting up and leaning forward.
Nonspecific Symptoms
Low-grade fever, and malaise. Myocarditis may be associated with
pericarditis.
Large pericardial effusion can compress adjacent bronchi and lung and

produce dyspnea (Ewart’s sign).
Pericardial Friction Rub
Pericardial friction rub is a high-pitched superficial scratching or
crunching sound, produced by movement of the inflamed pericardium. It
is diagnostic of pericarditis.
Best heard by applying firm pressure with the diaphragm of stethoscope at
the lower left sternal edge at the end of expiration with the patients sitting
upright and leaning forward. Usually heard in systole but may also be
audible in diastole.It has a ‘to-and fro’, leathery quality. It is usually transitory, repeatedly
disappearing and re-appearing.
Three phase: Classical pericardial friction rub has three phases
corresponding to movement of heart during three phases of cardiac cycle
namely (1) atrial systole, (2) ventricular systole and (3) ventricular
diastole (rapid ventricular filling during early diastole). However, in some
it may be heard as only one (monophasic) or two (biphasic) rubs.
Other FeaturesPulsus paradoxus (paradoxical pulse) is characterized by
weakness/disappearance of arterial pulse during inspiration.
Cardiac tamponade: Characterized by the accumulation of pericardial
fluid under pressure.
Constrictive pericarditis: Results from scarring and consequent loss of
elasticity of the pericardial sac. Typically pericardium is thicker than
normal and shows chronic inflammation, sometimes with calcification.Effusive-constrictive pericarditis: Characterized by constrictive
physiology with a coexisting pericardial effusion, usually with tamponade.
Investigations
Blood: Leukocytosis (bacterial pericarditis) or lymphocytosis (viral
pericarditis) and raised ESR.
Cardiac enzymes (CPK-MB, troponin T): Normal unless associated
with myocarditis.
Electrocardiogram: ECG is diagnostic and changes may be found over
the affected area, which may be widespread. These are as follows:

–   Widespread concave upwards (saddle shaped/smiling face) ST
elevation in multiple leads (particularly leads I, II, aVL, aVF and V1-
V3) and reciprocal ST depression in leads aVR and V.
–   PR segment depression is a characteristic feature of acute pericarditis.
–   The above changes evolve over time and later followed by resolution
of the ST elevation, T wave flattening/inversion (due to myocarditis)
and finally T wave normalization.
–   Finally ECG becomes normal.
–   When there pericardial effusion QRS voltage is reduced. Electrical
alternans is seen with effusion.
Differential Diagnosis
Myocardial infarction (Table 7.96): The early ECG changes observed in
pericarditis should be differentiated from the ST elevation observed in
myocardial infarction (limited to the infarcted area, e.g. anterior or
inferior). Most reliable feature may be the ratio of ST segment elevation
(in millimeters) to T-wave amplitude in lead V6; ratio > 0.24.Chest X-ray:
–   May be normal in pericarditis without effusion. Stenciled borders of
heart.
–   Rapid increase in the size of the cardiac shadow (cardiomegaly-pear-
shaped) may be seen in pericarditis with effusion. (money bag/water-
bottle appearance). Oreo cookie sign/epicardial fat pad sign can be
seen on lateral X-ray chest.Echocardiography used for confirmation of the pericardial effusion.
CT and cardiac MR may be useful when there is thickening (>4 mm) or
inflammation of pericardium and myocardium.
Paracentesis: Diagnostic paracentesis is performed when there is
pericardial effusion.
Table 7.96: Differences in ECG changes between acute pericarditis and
acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction.
ECG finding Acute pericarditis Acute ST-elevation MI
Shape of ST-segment Concave upward Convex upward
Reciprocal ST-segment changes – +

Location of ST-segment changes Diffuse (except aVR and
V1)Depends on coronary artery
affected
Q waves – +
Depression of PR-segment + –
Concomitant presence of ST and
T changes– (T wave inversion occurs
after ST segments have
normalized)+
Q. Write short note on management of pericarditis.
Treatment
Treatment of the underlying cause (e.g. tuberculosis, uremia, autoimmune disease).
Bed rest and avoid physical activity.
Analgesics:  The pain is usually relieved by oral NSAIDs (high dose aspirin indomethacin or
ibuprofen). It also decreases the inflammation in idiopathic or viral pericarditis.
–   Aspirin  in the dose of 600 mg 4 hourly is the drug of choice for patients with a recent
myocardial infarction. Ibuprofen 300–800 mg 3 times daily may also be used. They can be
given till pain and pericardial effusion disappears and ESR, CRP values return normal. It
usually takes 7 to 10 days.
–   Indomethacin is a more potent anti-inflammatory drug and can be given in the dose of 25 mg 3
times daily. It should be avoided in elderly patients because it can decrease the coronary blood
flow.
–   Colchicine 0.5 mg twice a day is also effective in combination with NSAIDs.
–   Corticosteroids (10–30 mg/day for 2-4 weeks) should be reserved for patients with an immune
cause or patients who do not respond to NSAIDs. Because their use is associated with an
increased rate of recurrence. Colchicine or corticosteroids reduce the symptoms but does not
hasten the cure.Purulent pericarditis:  Antimicrobial therapy, pericardiocentesis and surgical drainage (if
required).
Indications for hospitalization:  Fever (38 °C), leukocytosis, large pericardial effusion, lack of
response to NSAIDs after 1 week of therapy acute trauma, cardiac tamponade, immunosuppressed
state, recurrent pericarditis.
Pericardial Effusion
Q. Write short essay/note on pericardial effusion and its causes.
Definition: Pericardial effusion is an accumulation of fluid within the
potential space of the serous pericardial sac.
Slowly developing pericardial effusions may be asymptomatic. If it
develops over a short period, and volume of effusion is large, it may lead
to compromisation of ventricular filling leading to embarrassment of the
circulation. This is known as cardiac tamponade.

Type: Pericardial effusion may be transudate (hydropericardium), exudate
(pyopericardium) or hemopericardium.
Etiology: It commonly develops during an episode of acute pericarditis
(refer Box 7.52).
Clinical Signs
Symptoms commonly reflect the underlying pericarditis. Sometimes a
sensation of retrosternal oppression may be present.
Signs
Cardiovascular examination is normal except if the effusion is large, apex
beat/impulse is not palpable (sometimes palpable medial to the left border
of cardiac dullness).
Increase in cardiac dullness on percussion.
Heart sounds are faint, soft, distant or muffled.
A pericardial friction rub due to pericarditis may be audible in the early
stages. It becomes quieter as fluid accumulates and pushes the layers of
the pericardium apart.Ewart’s sign: Rarely, large effusion may compress the base of the left
lung. It produces an area of dullness to percussion and tubular breath
sounds on auscultation in the left axilla or left base (below the angle of the
left scapula) and termed as Ewart’s sign.
Investigations
Q. Write short note on radiological findings in pericardial effusion.
Chest X-ray:  Shows increased size of the cardiac silhouette, large
globular or pear shaped heart or water-bottle appearance with sharp
outlines and lucent pericardial fat lines. Typically, the pulmonary veins are
not distended Oreo cookie sign/Epicardial fat pad sign.Electrocardiogram: ECG often shows low voltage QRS complexes (<0.5
mV in limb leads) in the presence of large effusions with sinus
tachycardia. Electric alternans characterized by alternation of QRS
amplitude or axis between beats) due to a to-and-fro motion of the heart
within the fluid-filled pericardial sac may be observed.Echocardiography is the most useful investigation for demonstrating the

pericardial effusion. It is also useful to monitor the size of the effusion and
its effect on cardiac function.
Cardiac CT or MRI is advisable if loculated pericardial effusions are
suspected (postcardiac surgery).
Pericardial aspiration (pericardiocentesis): It is aspiration of pericardial
fluid effusion with aseptic technique under echocardiographic guidance. A
needle is inserted medial to the cardiac apex or below the xiphoid process,
directed upwards towards the left shoulder. It is indicated for diagnostic
purposes (e.g. tuberculous, malignant or purulent effusion) or for the
treatment of cardiac tamponade. Complications of pericardiocentesis
include arrhythmias, damage to myocardium and coronary vessels, air
embolism, and pneumothorax. The pericardial fluid is can be sent for
investigations such as:
–   Cell counts, protein, glucose and LDH to differentiate exudates from
transudates, Gram’s stains and AFB stain.
–   Cytology for malignant cells
–   Mycobacterium culturePericardial biopsy may be advisable if when tuberculosis is suspected
and pericardiocentesis is not diagnostic.
Other tests: Depending on the underlying causes, e.g. blood cultures,
autoantibody screen.
Treatment
Treat the underlying cause if possible.
Anti-inflammatory drugs (aspirin or indomethacin). Most effusions resolve spontaneously, but
rapid effusion may produce cardiac tamponade.
Therapeutic pericardiocentesis:  Indicated to relieve the pressure and a pig-tail catheter drain
may be left in temporarily to allow sufficient release of fluid.
Pericardial fenestration: If pericardial effusions accumulate (e.g. malignancy), it may be treated
by pericardial fenestration. This procedure consists of creating a window in the pericardium to
allow the slow release of fluid into the surrounding tissues. It may be performed either
transcutaneously under local anesthetic or by a conventional surgical approach.Intrapericardial instillation of chemotherapeutic agents  may be useful in malignant effusion.
Cardiac Tamponade
Q. Write short essay/note on clinical features, signs and management of
pericardial tamponade.

Cardiac tamponade is the term used for acute heart failure that results from
large or rapidly developing pericardial effusion which compresses the
heart and impair diastolic filling.
Minimum amount of pericardial fluid necessary for the development of
cardiac tamponade depends on the speed of its accumulation. About 250
mL in rapidly developing effusions and more than 2000 mL in slowly
developing effusions.
Etiology: Pericardial effusion (refer Box 7.52).
Clinical Features
SymptomsDue to reduced cardiac output: Dyspnea, orthopnea, substernal chest
discomfort radiating to neck and jaw.
Due to systemic venous congestion: Pain in the right upper quadrant and
pedal edema in slowly developing cardiac tamponade (subacute
tamponade).
SignsFriedreich’s sign: Markedly raised jugular venous pressure with sharp rise
and y descent.
Pulsus paradoxus or paradoxical pulse: An exaggeration in the normal
variation in pulse pressure seen with inspiration. There is drop in systolic
blood pressure of ≥10 mm Hg. Pulsus paradoxus is the hallmark of cardiac
tamponade.Q. Write short note on Kussmaul’s sign.
Kussmaul’s sign: Rise in JVP/increased neck vein distension during
inspiration.
Others: Reduced cardiac output, hypotension, tachycardia, and oliguria.
Beck’s triad of hypotension, muffled heart sounds, and elevated
jugular venous pressure  remains a useful clue to the presence of severe
tamponade.
Investigations
Chest X-ray: Discussed earlier in pericarditis.

Electrocardiogram: May show sinus tachycardia, reduction in QRS
voltage, non-specific ST-T changes and electrical alternans (alternation of
QRS complex amplitude or axis between beats).
Echocardiography: A pericardial effusion appears as a lucent separation
between parietal and visceral pericardium and shows separation visceral
and parietal layers for the entire cardiac cycle.
–   Small effusions are first evident over the posteriobasal left ventricle.
–   Early diastolic collapse of the right ventricle and collapse of the right
atrium (which occurs during ventricular diastole) are sensitive and
specific signs.
–   Right atrial collapse is considered more sensitive.
–   RV collapse more specific for tamponade.
ManagementEmergency pericardiocentesis is necessary.
If patient is hypotensive, as a temporary measure expansion of blood volume by saline, blood,
plasma, and dextran.
Avoid positive pressure mechanic ventilation in acute tamponade because it reduces cardiac filling
further.
Treatment of underlying cause.
Chronic Constrictive Pericarditis
Q. Write short essay/note on chronic constrictive pericarditis.
Constrictive pericarditis is an end stage inflammatory process involving
pericardium.
It is characterized by progressive thickening, fibrosis, and calcification of
the pericardium and visceral and parietal pericardium usually becomes
adherent resulting in obliteration of the pericardial space. In some cases,
the constricting process is formed by the visceral pericardium
(epicardium) alone.
Pathophysiology: The heart is encased in a solid shell and cannot fill
properly. The calcification may extend into the myocardium and may impair
myocardial contraction. Following features develop:Restricted diastolic filling of the heart by fibrotic pericardium.
Limitation of venous return to the heart → reduced ventricular filling →
inability to maintain adequate preload.

Filling pressures of the heart tend to become equal in both the ventricles
and the atria.
Systolic function is rarely affected until late in the course of the disease.
Preservation of myocardial function in early diastole aids in
distinguishing constrictive pericarditis from restrictive
cardiomyopathy.
Etiology (Box 7.53)
Box 7.53:  Causes of constrictive pericarditis.
Idiopathic
Infectious:
–   Tuberculosis
–   Viral especially Coxsackie B
–   Bacterial
–   Fungal
–   Parasitic
–   PostradiotherapyPostcardiac surgery
Post-traumatic
Neoplastic
Connective tissue diseases (e.g. rheumatoid arthritis and SLE)
Toxic/metabolic: Uremia, chylous pericardium, methysergide
Post myocardial infarction
Familial
Clinical Features
The symptoms and signs are due to:
–  Reduced ventricular filling which is similar to cardiac tamponade (i.e.
Kussmaul’s sign, Friedreich’s sign, pulsus paradoxus—refer pages
521-2).
–  Systemic venous congestion: Symptoms consistent with CCF
(especially right-sided heart failure) such as ascites, dependent edema,
hepatomegaly and raised JVP.
–  Reduced cardiac output: Inability of the heart to increase stroke volume
produces fatigue, hypotension, and reflex tachycardia.
–  Rapid ventricular filling: Pericardial knock (occurs 0.09–0.12 second

after A2) can be heard in early diastole at the lower left sternal border.
–  Rarely pulmonary venous congestion causing dyspnea, cough,
orthopnea.
Investigations
ECG: Rarely normal, nonspecific and highly variable. Atrial arrhythmias
are frequent, with atrial fibrillation occurring late in course. Low voltage
(<50% cases) and LA enlargement (19–37%).
Chest X-ray:  Pulmonary venous congestion and pleural effusions (late in
the disease). Calcified pericardium  is highly suggestive of constrictive
pericarditis when present in a patient with constrictive/restrictive
physiology.
Echocardiography: Pericardial thickening better seen through
transesophageal echo, normal RV and LV chamber size, LA and RA
enlargement, abnormal septal and posterior wall motion, paradoxical
septal motion, premature opening of the pulmonic valve and dilated
IVC without respiratory variation.Magnetic resonance imaging/CT scan can confirm pericardial
thickening. Pericardial thickening >4 mm assists in differentiating
constrictive disease from restrictive cardiomyopathy, and thickening >6
mm adds even more specific for constriction. Normal pericardial thickness
does not exclude pericardial constriction, and the clinical situation must
always be taken in account.Cardiac catheterization: Ventricular pressure initially decreases rapidly
(steep y descent on RA pressure waveform tracings) and then increases
abruptly to a level that is sustained until systole (the ‘dip-and-plateau
waveform’ or ‘square root sign’ seen on RV or LV pressure waveform
tracings).
TreatmentPericardiectomy (resection of the pericardium) is the only definitive treatment.
Pharmacologic therapy
–   Steroids for subacute constrictive pericarditis (before pericardial fibrosis occurs).
–  Diuretics to relieve congestion and optimize clinical volume status (may decrease preload to
the point of reducing cardiac output).
–  Treatment of the causative disease (e.g. antituberculosis medication).
–  Avoid beta-blockers and calcium channel blockers (CCBs).

PULMONARY HYPERTENSION
Q. Write short essay/note on pulmonary hypertension.
Definition (WHO)
Pulmonary hypertension (PH) is defined as an increase in blood pressure
in pulmonary circulation (either in the arteries, or both in arteries and
veins).
Normal pressure as measured at right heart catheterization is 14–18 mm
Hg at rest and 20–25 mm Hg on exercise. Hemodynamically it is defined
as an increase in mean pulmonary arterial pressure to 25 mm Hg at rest.Definition may be refined by giving consideration of the pulmonary
wedge pressure; the cardiac output and the transpulmonary pressure
gradient (mean PAP – mean PWP).
Table 7.97: WHO classifications of pulmonary hypertension-2008 (Dana
point).
Pulmonary arterial hypertension
–  Idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension (IPAH)
–  Familial: BMPR2, ALK 1, unknown
–  Associated with PAH
♦   Connective tissue disease: Scleroderma, SLE, rheumatoid arthritis
♦   Congenital heart disease
♦   Portal hypertension (5–7% of patients)
♦   HIV (0.5% of patients)
♦   Drugs/toxins: aminorex, dexfenfluramine, or fenfluramine-containing products, cocaine,
methamphetamine
♦   Others: Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia, hemoglobinopathies, myeloproliferative
disorders, splenectomy
–  Associated with venous/capillary involvement
♦   Pulmonary veno-occlusive disease (evidence of pulmonary vascular congestion)
♦   Pulmonary capillary hemangiomatosis
–  Persistent PH of newbornPulmonary hypertension owing to left heart disease:  Systolic dysfunction, diastolic dysfunction
and valvular disease.
PH secondary to chronic hypoxemia:  Chronic obstructive lung disease, interstitial lung disease,
sleep disordered breathing, alveolar hypoventilation disorders, chronic exposure to high altitude,
developmental abnormalities
Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH): Thromboembolic obstruction of
proximal or distal pulmonary arteries

Miscellaneous (usually extrinsic compression of pulmonary arteries):  Sarcoidosis,
histiocytosis X, lymphangiomyomatosis, compression of pulmonary vessels (adenopathy, tumor,
fibrosing mediastinitis, thyroid disorders, glycogen storage disease, Gaucher’s disease
WHO Classifications of Pulmonary Hypertension (Table 7.97)
Q. Write short essay/note on causes of pulmonary hypertension.
Clinical Features
Symptoms: Insidious in onset and is usually diagnosed late. Usual symptoms
include exertional breathlessness/dyspnea (60%), fatigue (19%), palpitation
and near syncope/syncope (13%), chest pain (7%), palpitations (5%), LE
edema (3%), and hoarseness of voice (2%).
Signs: These include:Cold extremities, peripheral edema, cyanosis and rarely clubbing
Raised jugular venous pulse, prominent v wave if tricuspid regurgitation is
present
Left parasternal lift/heave due to right ventricular hypertrophy.
Large pulsatile liver
Auscultatory signs in pulmonary hypertension (Box 7.54)
Signs of underlying cause, e.g. interstitial lung disease or cardiac, liver or
connective tissue disease.
Box 7.54:  Auscultatory signs in pulmonary hypertension.
Pulmonary ejection sound (ES)
Abnormal second heart sound (S 2): Loud P 2, narrow splitting
Right atrial fourth heart sound (S 4)
Right ventricular third heart sound (S 3)
Pulmonary ejection systolic murmur (ESM)
Pulmonary early diastolic murmur (EDM): Graham Steel murmur
Tricuspid pansystolic murmur (PSM)
Investigations
Chest X-ray
–  Enlargement of the pulmonary artery and its main branches
–  Peripheral “pruning” of vascular shadows
–  Enlarged right atrium, and right ventricle

–  Findings of underlying lung or cardiac pathology
Electrocardiogram: Shows right axis deviation, R/S wave ratio greater
than one in lead V1, right bundle branch block (incomplete or complete)
and increased P wave amplitude in lead II (due to right atrial
enlargement).Echocardiography: Most useful for detecting pulmonary hypertension
and excluding cardiac disease. It shows tricuspid regurgitation, right atrial
and ventricular hypertrophy, flattening of interventricular septum, small
LV dimension, dilated pulmonary artery and secondary causes (if any).Transthoracic echocardiography: Doppler assessment of the tricuspid
regurgitant jet is a non-invasive method of determining the pressure of
pulmonary artery.Right heart catheterization: Mean PAP pressure at rest >25 mm Hg,
with exercise >30 mm Hg, wedge pressure <15 mm Hg.
Other tests
–  Complete blood counts, prothrombin time, partial thromboplastin time
and liver function tests.
–  Autoantibodies if autoimmune disease is suspected.
–  HIV-ELISA if the patient has risk factors.
–  Arterial blood gas to exclude hypoxia and acidosis as contributors to
pulmonary hypertension.
–  Sleep studies if sleep apnea suspected.
–  Pulmonary function tests to establish airflow obstruction or restrictive
lung disease.
–  High-resolution computed tomography of chest to exclude occult
interstitial lung disease.
–  Helical CT to detect pulmonary thromboembolism.
– Ventilation-perfusion scanning to differentiate chronic
thromboembolism from primary pulmonary hypertension.
TreatmentEarly recognition and treatment of the underlying cause.
Medical:  Diuretics mainly to treat edema from right heart failure, digoxin (for atrial
tachyarrhythmias), oxygen (keep oxygen saturation ≥90%) and anticoagulants (IPAH) to keep
INR 2.0–2.5.
PAH specific therapy

–  Calcium channel blockers: Indicated in patients who respond to vasodilators during
catheterization. High doses required, e.g. nifedipine 240 mg/day, or amlodipine, 20 mg/day.
–  Oral endothelin receptor antagonists (ERAs):  For example, bosentan, sitaxsentan,
ambrisentan. Liver function be monitored monthly throughout the duration of use.
♦   Bosentan initiated at 62.5 mg BD for first month and increased to 125 mg BD.
♦   Ambrisentan initiated as 5 mg OD and can be increased to 10 mg daily.
–  Phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors (PDE 5-I): For example, sildenafil, tadalafil, vardenafil.
The most common side effect is headache. Effective dose for sildenafil is 20–80 mg TID and
for tadalafil is 40 mg OD.
– Prostaglandins:  For example, epoprostenol (prostacyclin), treprostinil, iloprost, prostacyclin 1P
receptor antagonist (Selexipag).
–  Guanylatecyclase stimulant: For example, riociguat.
Pneumococcal and influenza vaccination.
Surgical therapy
–  Atrial septostomy (the creation of a right-to-left shunt).
–  Lung transplantation
– Pulmonary thromboendarterectomy for chronic proximal thromboembolic pulmonary
hypertension.

SUDDEN CARDIAC DEATH
Q. Write a short note on sudden cardiac death.
Sudden cardiac arrest (SCA) and sudden cardiac death (SCD) refer to the
sudden cessation of cardiac activity with hemodynamic collapse.
Sudden cardiac death  is defined as an unexpected, nontraumatic, natural
death due to cardiac causes occurring in a short period (within 1 hour of
symptom onset) in an individual with or without any previously identified
heart disease but in whom the time and mode of death are unexpected.It has four temporal elements: (1) prodromes, (2) onset of terminal event,
(3) cardiac arrest, and (4) biologic death.
Bimodal age distribution with one peak between birth and 6 months of age
and another after 65 years of age. It is a male preponderance.
Box 7.55: Causes of sudden cardiac death.
Coronary artery disease:  Coronary atherosclerosis, developmental anomalies, coronary artery
embolism, others (e.g. vasculitis, dissection)
Myocardial diseases:  Cardiomyopathies, myocarditis and other infiltrative processes, right
ventricular dysplasia
Valvular diseases:  Mitral valve prolapse, aortic stenosis and other forms of left ventricular outflow
obstruction, endocarditis
Conduction system abnormalities:  Wolff-Parkinson-White (WPW) syndrome, Brugada syndrome,
long QT syndromes
Causes (Box 7.55)
TreatmentIdentifying individuals at high risk of SCD: Combination of factors more useful, most important
parameter is left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF).
Pharmacological agents
–  Beta blockers, ACEI, amiodarone
–  Revascularization
–  ICD/CRT.
CARDIAC ARREST
Definition: Cardiac arrest is a sudden loss of cardiac pump function which
can reversed by a prompt intervention, without which it lead to death.

Causes of Cardiac Arrest (Box 7.56)
Q. Write short note on causes of cardiac arrest.
Diagnosis of cardiac arrest (TRIAD): (1) Loss of consciousness, (2) loss of
apical and central pulsations (carotid, femoral) and (3) apnea.
ECG: Three basic patterns
1. Ventricular tachyarrhythmia: Ventricular fibrillation (VF)/sustained type
of pulseless ventricular tachycardia.
2. Ventricular asystole or a brady-asystolic rhythm with an extremely slow
rate.
3. Pulseless electrical activity (PEA) previously referred to as
electromechanical dissociation.
Box 7.56: Causes of cardiac arrest (6 H and 4 T).
Hypoxia
Hypotension
Hypothermia
Hypoglycemia
Acidosis ( H+)
Hyperkalemia (electrolyte disturbance)
Cardiac Tamponade
Tension pneumothorax
Thromboembolism (pulmonary, coronary)
Toxicity (e.g. digoxin, local anesthetics, insecticides)
Q. Write short essay/note on management of cardiac arrest.
Management
Chain of Survival
It refers to the sequence of events that is required to maximize the chances of survival in a patient
with cardiac arrest. Survival is most likely if all links in the chain are strong. The chain of survival
consists of following links namely:Immediate identification of cardiac arrest and activation of the emergency response system (ERS)
by a trained individual.
Immediate CPR with chest compressions.
Quick defibrillation.
Effective advanced life support (ALS).
Integrated post-cardiac arrest care.
Immediate Identification and Activation of Emergency Response System (ERS)

Immediate identification of cardiac arrest: Assessment is of crucial importance. It includes: (1)
unresponsiveness (check the individual for a response, gently shake shoulders and ask ‘are you all
right?’), (2) no breathing or no normal breathing (i.e. only gasping) and (3) no pulse felt within 10
seconds.Activation of ERS: After activation of the ERS, all rescuers should immediately begin CPR.
Q. Write short essay/note on cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR).
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR)
–  It provides artificial ventilation and perfusion to the vital organs, particularly heart and brain
until spontaneous cardiopulmonary function is restored. It consists of both basic life supports
(BLS) and advanced life support (ALS). BLS provides adequate oxygen and perfusion to vital
organs (brain and heart) until advanced cardiac life support is available (Table 7.98).
Table 7.98: Phases of life support and its steps.
Phases Steps
Phase-1: Basic life support (BLS) C = Circulation, A = Airway, B = Breathing
Phase-2: Advance life support (ALS) D = Drugs, E = ECG, F = Fibrillation
Phase-3: Prolonged life support Postresuscitation care
Basic life support (BLS)  consists of maneuver purpose of which is to maintain a low level of
circulation until more definitive treatment with advanced life support can be provided.Change from A-B-C to C-A-B:  CPR includes four sequential: Circulation, Airway and Breathing
(CAB) and defibrillation. Previously, the sequence used to be Airway, Breathing and Circulation
(ABC).
–  Circulation:  The brain cannot survive for more than 3 minutes without circulation. Hence, start
chest compressions immediately for a patient without central pulsations.
♦   Chest compressions (cardiac massage):
◊   Place the patient on a hard surface (wooden board).
◊   The palm of one hand is placed in the concavity of the lower half of the sternum 2
fingers above the xiphoid process (avoid xiphisternal junction → fracture and injury).
The other hand is placed over the hand on the sternum.
◊   Shoulders should be positioned directly over the hands with the elbows  locked straight
and arms extended. Use your upper body weight to compress.
◊   Sternum must be depressed at least 5 cm  in adults, and 2–4 cm  in children, 1–2 cm  in
infants.
◊   Push hard and push fast. Must be performed at a rate of 100–120/min.
◊   During CPR the ratio of chest compressions to ventilation should be: single rescuer =
30:2 and in the presence of 2 rescuers, chest compressions must not be interrupted
for ventilation.
◊   Chest compressions must be continued for 2 minutes before reassessment of cardiac
rhythm (2 minutes = equivalent to 5 cycles 30:2).
♦  Assessment of the adequacy of chest compressions:  Systolic BP = 60–80 mm Hg, diastolic
BP (>40 mm Hg) and COP = 30% of normal.
♦ Complications of chest compressions:  Fractures of rib/sternum, rib separation,

pneumothorax, hemothorax, contusions of lung, lacerations of liver, fat emboli.
–  Airway:  Loss of consciousness usually produces obstruction of airway due to loss of the
muscle tone in the airway and falling back of the tongue. Hence, clear the airway. Basic
techniques for airway patency:
♦  Head tilt, chin lift:  Place one hand on the forehead and the other on the chin. The head is
tilted upwards to displace the tongue anteriorly.
♦  Jaw thrust method:  In this angles of mandible are grasped with both hands and the
mandible is lifted forward.
♦  Finger sweep:  Sweep out foreign body in the mouth by index finger in unconscious patients
and not in a conscious or convulsing patient .
♦  Heimlich maneuver:  Useful to remove the foreign body in a conscious patient. It is done
while the patient is standing up or lying down. In this subdiaphragmatic abdominal thrust
elevates the diaphragm and expels a blast of air from the lungs that displaces the foreign
body. In infants this is performed by a series of blows on the back and chest thrusts.
–  Breathing:  Rescue breathing can be mouth-to-mouth breathing or mouth-to-nose breathing (if
there is serious injury of the mouth or it cannot be opened). With the airway open (using the
head-tilt, chin-lift maneuver), pinch the nostrils shut for mouth-to-mouth breathing and cover
the person’s mouth with rescuer making a seal.
♦  Mouth-to-mouth breathing:  With the airway held open, pinch the nostrils closed, take a
deep breath and seal your lips over the patients mouth. Blow steadily into the patient’s
mouth watching the chest rise as if the patient was taking a deep breath. Volume of each
rescue breath should produce visible chest rise.
♦  Mouth-to-nose breathing:  Seal the mouth shut and breathe steadily through the nose.
♦  Mouth-to-mouth and nose:  It is used in infants and small children.
–  Assessment of restoration of breathing and circulation:  Contraction of pupil, improved color
of the skin, free movement of the chest wall, swallowing attempts and struggling movements.
–  Indications for termination of BLS:  Pulse and respiration returns, emergency medical help
arrives, physician declared patient is deceased, in a non-health setting, another indication to
stop BLS would be that the rescuer was exhausted and physically unable to continue to
perform BLS.Advanced life support (ALS):  The purpose is to restore normal cardiac rhythm by defibrillation
when the cause is tachyarrhythmia, or to restore cardiac output by correcting other reversible
causes of cardiac arrest. It includes:
–  Circulation by cardiac massage.
–  Airway management by equipment.
–  Breathing by advanced techniques.
–  Defibrillation by manual defibrillator.
–  Drugs.
Advanced techniques for airway patency:  (1) face mask, (2) oropharyngeal airway, (3)
nasopharyngeal airway, (4) laryngeal mask airway, (5) endotracheal intubation, (6) combitube, (7)
cricothyrotomy, (8) tracheostomy.
Advanced breathing:  Expired air contains 16% O 2 so supplemental 100% O 2 should be used as
soon as possible. Successful breathing is achieved by delivery of a tidal volume of 800–1200 mL in
adults at a rate of 10–12 breaths/min  in adults. Advanced techniques include: (1) Self-inflating
resuscitation bag (Ambu bag), (2) Mechanical ventilator or in ICU.
Advanced circulation

It consists of continuation of chest compression and establishing an intravenous access, attaching a
cardiac monitor/defibrillator, assessing the rhythm, defibrillation and administering appropriate
drugs for rhythm as well as the condition.
Continuous chest compression is performed at the rate of 100/minute and ventilation is provided at
8–10 breaths/minute (1 breath/6–8 seconds).
Rhythm in cardiac arrest
It may be (1) shockable rhythm (ventricular tachycardia/ventricular fibrillation) and (2) nonshockable
rhythm (asystole and pulseless electrical activity).
Rhythm checks should be performed done only after 2 minutes of CPR and not immediately
following a defibrillation attempt.
Shockable rhythms: Ventricular fibrillation or pulseless ventricular tachycardia (VT).
Defibrillation:  Completely depolarize all myocardial cells so SA node can re-establish as pacemaker.
Voltage of electricity discharge High from 150 J to 360 J (biphasic) 360 J (monophasic). Continue
CPR for 2 minutes and briefly check the monitor for rhythm. If VT/VF persists give second shock
and immediately resume CPR and continue for 2 minutes, and repeat this cycle.
Drugs:Adrenaline:  Given as a vasopressor α-1 effect (not as an inotrope). Dose is 1 mg ( 0.01 mg/kg)
IV every 4 minutes (alternating cycles) while continuing CPR.
–  Given: (1) Immediately in nonshockable rhythm (non-VT/VF), (2) In VF or VT given after the
3rd shock.
–  Repeated  in alternate cycles (every 4 minutes).
–  Once adrenaline → always adrenaline.
Amiodarone: Given  in shockable rhythm after the 3rd shock . If unavailable give lidocaine 100
mg IV (1–1.5 mg/kg). Dose is 300 mg IV bolus (5 mg/kg).
Vasopressin  (ADH):  40 IU single dose once.
Magnesium: Given  (1) VF/ VT with hypomagnesemia, (2) Torsade de pointes, (3) Digoxin
toxicity. Dose is 2 g IV.
Calcium: Dose is 10 mL of 10% calcium chloride IV.
–  Indications:  PEA caused by hyperkalemia, hypocalcemia, hypermagnesemia, and overdose of
calcium channel blockers.
–  Calcium solutions and NaHCO 3 should not be given simultaneously by the same route.
Thrombolytics:  Fibrinolytic therapy is considered when cardiac arrest is caused by proven or
suspected acute pulmonary embolism . If a fibrinolytic drug is used in these circumstances
consider performing CPR for at least 60–90 minutes before termination of resuscitation attempts.
Example: Alteplase, tenecteplase (old generation: streptokinase).
Sodium bicarbonate:  Used in (1) severe metabolic acidosis (pH < 7.1), (2) life-threatening
hyperkalemia, (3) tricyclic antidepressant overdose.
–  Dose: (half correction) 1/2 base deficit × 1/3 body weight
–  Adverse drug reactions: (1) Increases CO 2 load, (2) inhibits release of O 2 to tissues, (3) impairs
myocardial contractility and (4) causes hypernatremia.
Atropine:  Its routine use in pulseless electrical activity (PEA) and asystole is not useful.
Indicated  in sinus bradycardia or AV block causing hemodynamic instability. Dose is 0.5 mg IV.
Repeated up to a maximum of 3 mg ( full atropinization ).
Nonshockable rhythms: Pulseless electrical activity (PEA) and asystole.
PEA is characterized by cardiac electrical activity in the absence of any palpable pulse. They

usually have some very weak mechanical myocardial contractions and does not produce a
detectable pulse.
Start CPR. Begin with chest compressions, and continue for 2 minutes before the rhythm check is
repeated.
Give 1 mg adrenaline IV immediately and re-check rhythm after 2 minutes of CPR.
If PEA or asystole persists, continue CPR and re-check rhythm every 2 minutes. Administer
adrenaline every 3–5 minutes. Do not give atropine.
Check rhythm. If it shows change, check for pulse. If pulse appears, start post-resuscitation care. If
there is still no pulse, continue CPR with rhythm check every 2 minutes and adrenaline every 3–5
minutes. If the rhythm develops into VF/VT, defibrillate the patient.
IV fluids:  Infuse fluids rapidly if hypovolemia is suspected. Use normal saline (0.9% NaCl) or
Ringer’s solution. Avoid dextrose which is redistributed away from the intravascular space rapidly
and causes hyperglycemia which may worsen neurological outcome after cardiac arrest. Dextrose is
indicated only if there is documented hypoglycemia.
Postresuscitation careMaintain adequate airway and support breathing.
Continue cardiac monitoring.
Vasoactive medications (norepinephrine, dobutamine and epinephrine) and IV fluids to support
circulation.
Avoid hyperthermia, hyperglycemia (maintain blood sugar <200 mg/dL).
Treating the precipitating cause of cardiac arrest.
Syncope
Q. Write short essay/note on cardiac syncope/syncope.
Definition: Syncope is defined as a transient loss of consciousness due to
inadequate cerebral blood flow with loss of postural tone.
It is associated with loss of postural tone, with spontaneous return to
baseline neurologic function without any resuscitative efforts.
Presyncope is the term used for lightheadedness in which the individual
thinks he/she may black out.
Classical vasovagal syncope: Syncope triggered by emotional or
orthostatic stress such as venipuncture (experienced or witnessed), painful
or noxious stimuli, fear of bodily injury, prolonged standing, heat
exposure, or exertion.
Mechanism: Global hypoperfusion of cerebral cortices or focal
hypoperfusion of the reticular activating system.About 1/3 of individuals may develop a syncopal episode during their
lifetime.
Its incidence increases with age (sharp rise at age 70 years).

Cardiac syncope has a high incidence (about 24%) of subsequent cardiac
arrest.
Table 7.99: Causes of syncope.
Cardiac causes
Cardiac arrhythmias:  Ventricular tachycardia, paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia, long
QT syndrome, Brugada syndrome, bradycardia (Mobitz type II or 3rd degree heart block)
Structural cardiac or cardiopulmonary disease:  Cardiac valvular disease (AS, MS, PS),
obstructive cardiomyopathy, atrial myxoma, acute aortic dissection, pericardial
disease/tamponade, pulmonary embolus/pulmonary hypertension, acute myocardial
infarction/ischemia
Noncardiac causes
Neurocardiogenic syncope ‘vasovagal or vasodepressor syncope’: Classical vasovagal
syncope, situational syncope, carotid sinus syncope, glossopharyngeal neuralgia, micturation
syncopeOrthostatic hypotension:  Autonomic failure which may be primary (e.g. pure autonomic failure,
multiple system atrophy, Parkinson’s disease with autonomic failure) or secondary (e.g. diabetic
neuropathy)
Neurovascular syncope:  Vascular steal syndromes
Causes of Syncope (Table 7.99)
Causes of nonsyncopal attacks (Box 7.57): Episodes that may be confused
with syncope include disorders without impairment of consciousness and
disorders with partial or complete loss of consciousness.
Box 7.57: Causes of nonsyncopal attacks.
Seizures.
Metabolic or toxic abnormalities:  Hypoglycemia and encephalitis rarely syncope.
Neurologic syncope:  Subarachnoid hemorrhage, transient ischemic attack, complex migraine
headache.
Psychiatric syncope
Drug induced loss of consciousness:  Drugs of abuse and alcohol.
Investigations
Electrocardiogram (ECG): Factors that suggests arrhythmia-induced
syncope are prolonged intervals (QRS, QTc), severe bradycardia, pre-
excitation, evidence of myocardial infarction.
Holter monitoring
Echocardiography

Neurological: CT brain and MRI, EEG
Laboratory evaluation: FBC and hematocrit, RBS, electrolytes, pregnancy
test.
Head up tilt table test.
COR PULMONALE
Q. Discuss the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features, investigations
and management of chronic cor pulmonale.
Cor pulmonale is a Latin word means ‘pulmonary heart’ and is defined as
symptoms and signs of fluid overload secondary to lung disease.
Cor pulmonale is a disease of the right ventricle characterized by its
hypertrophy and dilation with or without failure secondary to diseases
directly affecting the lung parenchyma, pulmonary vasculature, chest
bellows or central. This excludes pulmonary alterations produced due to
diseases that primarily affect the left side of the heart (e.g. congenital heart
diseases).
Types of Cor PulmonaleQ. Write short essay/note on types and causes of cor pulmonale.
Q. Write short essay/note on acute cor pulmonale.
According to rate of development: Acute or chronic.
Acute cor pulmonale develops due to a sudden increase in right
ventricular pressure. It usually follows acute massive pulmonary
embolism that is sufficient enough to obstruct more than 60% of
pulmonary circulation. It leads to acute pulmonary hypertension, acute
right ventricular dilatation and failure. Other example is acute respiratory
distress syndrome.Chronic cor pulmonale: It can be further divided hypoxic type or
vascular obliterans type.
–  Hypoxic subtype: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is
the most common disease associated with hypoxic subtype.
–  Obliterans subtype: Most common process associated with this
subtype is pulmonary thromboembolic disease.

Box 7.58: Causes of cor pulmonale.
Diseases of lung: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD, e.g. chronic bronchitis and
emphysema), pulmonary tuberculosis, interstitial lung disease, high altitude dwelling, cystic fibrosis,
pleural fibrosis
Diseases of pulmonary circulation: Recurrent pulmonary thromboembolism, primary pulmonary
hypertension, collagen vascular diseases, chronic liver disease
Diseases of thorax:  Kyphoscoliosis, neuromuscular diseases, sleep apnea syndrome, obesity
Diseases of respiratory control:  Brainstem lesions, central sleep apnea—Ondine’s curse.
Etiology (Box 7.58)
Clinical Features
Usually the signs and symptoms are minimal except in the advanced stage.
Mostly the clinicians focus on the disease producing cor pulmonale rather
than on cor pulmonale itself.
SymptomsSimilar to those of right side heart failure:  Fatigability, dyspnea on
exertion, syncope, chest pain, palpitation, abdominal distension, edema of
the lower extremity, exercise-induced peripheral cyanosis and excessive
daytime somnolence.
Signs
Pedal edema
Accentuated A wave of the jugular venous pulsations and prominent
jugular V wave, indicating the presence of tricuspid regurgitation.
Palpable left parasternal lift.
Accentuated pulmonic component of the second heart sound, right sided
S4 heart sound, ejection systolic murmur in the pulmonary area. In
addition there may be pansystolic murmur of tricuspid regurgitation or
early-diastolic murmur of pulmonary regurgitation.Overt right side heart failure: In a patient with chronic cor pulmonale
reveal following signs:
–  Increasing peripheral edema
–  Jugular venous pressure: Raised and hepatojugular reflux positive
–  Tender hepatomegaly and enlargement of heart
–  Right ventricular third heart sound and a gallop rhythm, and right sided

fourth heart sound.
Investigations
Chest X-ray
–  Enlarged pulmonary artery and right ventricle, distended azygous or
other central vein.
–  In pulmonary embolism Westermark sign ‘oligemia of lung lobe or
entire lung’. Hampton’s hump ‘wedge-shaped opacity’
–  In COPD anterior-posterior diameter increased, diaphragm flattened,
honeycombing and hyperlucency of lung.
Electrocardiogram: Right axis deviation, P pulmonale (large P wave) in
the inferior and anterior leads ‘right atrial enlargement’, right bundle
branch block, right precordial T-wave inversions, delayed intrinsicoid
deflection of right precordial leads, RVH, S1 Q3 T3 pattern and QR
pattern in lead V1 or V3R.Arterial blood gas analysis: Hypoxia, hypercapnia.
BNP: Used as biomarker for pulmonary hypertension in COPD patients.
Echocardiography: Hypertrophy and dilatation of right ventricle.
Others: CECT/HRCT chest, nuclear scan for detecting pulmonary
embolism, rarely right heart catheterization.
Management of Chronic Cor Pulmonale
These include (1) general measures, (2) additional measures in cor pulmonale due to COPD and (3)
surgical treatment.
General measures
–  Nonpharmacological treatment:
♦  Oxygen therapy.
♦  Phlebotomy.
♦  Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation (NIPPV).
–  Pharmacological treatment:
♦  Diuretics.
♦  Anticoagulation.
♦  VasodilatorsTreatment to decrease pulmonary hypertension  (refer page 524)
–  Treatment of underlying disease.
–  Oxygen therapy is the most important treatment for reducing pulmonary hypertension. The
long-term oxygen therapy retards its progression of pulmonary hypertension and oxygen
therapy should be started if the arterial oxygen tension is 55 mm Hg or less.
Treatment of right heart failure

–  Restriction of salt intake
–  Digoxin: Role not clear
–  Diuretics
Chronic anticoagulation  with Warfarin may benefit patients with cor pulmonale due to thrombo-
occlusive pulmonary disease.
Surgical treatment
–  Pulmonary embolectomy: If pulmonary emboli are not resolved.
–  Heart lung transplantation: For primary pulmonary hypertension.
DISEASES OF VESSELS
Aortic Aneurysms
Q. Write short note on aneurysm of aorta.
Definition of aneurysm: It is an abnormal permanent focal dilatation of a
blood vessel/artery to 1.5 times its normal diameter.
Classification of Aortic Aneurysm
Q. Write short note on classification of aortic aneurysms and its
common causes.
Depending on the gross appearance: (1) Fusiform aneurysm and (2)
saccular aneurysm, (3) cylindrical and (4) arterial dissection.
Depending on the sites/region involved: (1) Thoracic part of aorta, (2)
ascending aorta, (3) arch of aorta, (4) descending aorta, (5) abdominal
aorta (commonest site is infrarenal portion).Depending on the etiology: Atherosclerosis (commonest cause), cystic
medial necrosis, syphilis (aneurysm of ascending aorta), rheumatic
aortitis, and trauma.
Aortic Dissection
Q. Write short note on aortic dissection.
Definition: Aortic dissection develops when blood from the aortic lumen
enters into the aortic wall  through a breach in the integrity of the aortic
wall.
Blood enters the media, split it into two layers and travels along the layers
of the media creating a ‘false blood-filled lumen’ alongside the existing or

‘true lumen’.
Usually, the false lumen re-enters the true lumen, producing a double-
barreled aorta. However, it may rupture into the surrounding structures
(e.g. left pleural cavity, pericardium) with fatal consequences.
Dissection may damage aortic valve and compromise the branches of the
aorta.
Affects males more than females during 5th to 7th decades. Men/Female
ratio 2:1 to 5:1. Proximal dissection peak age is 50–55 years and distal
dissection peak age is 60–70 years.Dissection in younger patients is usually associated with Marfan’s
syndrome, pregnancy or trauma.
Box 7.59: Predisposing factors for aortic dissection.
Systemic hypertension  (~80%)
Aortic diseases:  Aortic atherosclerosis, dilatation, nonspecific aneurysm, arteritis, coarctation,
bicuspid aortic valve. Previous aortic surgery (e.g. CABG, aortic valve replacement)
Trauma
–  Direct iatrogenic, e.g. cardiac catheterization, intra-aortic balloon pumping
–  Indirect trauma, e.g. sudden deceleration
Hereditary connective tissue diseases, e.g. Marfan syndrome, Ehler-Danlos syndrome
Chromosomal aberrations: Turner’s syndrome, Noonan’s syndrome
Others: Third trimester of pregnancy or first stage of labor, giant cell arteritis, Behçet’s disease,
and syphilis
Predisposing Factors (Box 7.59)
Classification (Fig. 7.54)
Stanford anatomical classification
–  Type A dissections (66%): Dissection involving either both the
ascending and descending aorta or only the ascending aorta (types I
and II of the DeBakey classification). It is more common but
dangerous.
–  Type B dissections: They have dissection limited to descending aorta
(usually begin distal to the subclavian artery) and do not involve the
ascending part and (DeBakey type III).DeBakey classification  (Fig. 7.54)
–  Type I: Involves ascending to descending aorta

–  Type II: Limited to ascending or arch of aorta
–  Type III: Involves descending aorta only.
According to the timing of diagnosis from the initial onset of symptoms:
–  Acute diagnosis is made <2 weeks of symptoms
–  Subacute 2–8 weeks of symptoms
–  Chronic >8 weeks of symptoms.
Fig. 7.54:  Classification of aortic dissections. Type A (proximal) involves the ascending aorta
(DeBakey I and II). Type B (distal or DeBakey III) dissections arise beyond the subclavian artery.
Clinical Features
Symptoms
Sudden (abrupt) onset of severe, tearing, migratory pain, beginning in the
anterior chest, radiating to the back between the scapulae (interscapular
area), and moving downward as the dissection progresses. Pain may be
misdiagnosed as that of myocardial infarction. Usually anterior chest pain
develops when there is involvement of the ascending aorta, pain is
intrascapular when descending aorta is involved. Collapse is common.Others: Syncope, dyspnea, weakness, hypertension or hypotension.
Signs
Asymmetry of pulses and blood pressure:  It may produce asymmetry of
the brachial, carotid or femoral pulses and blood pressure.

Signs of aortic regurgitation.
Signs of occlusion of branches of aorta: It may occlude orifices of
branches of aorta and cause MI (coronary), stroke (carotid) paraplegia
(spinal), mesenteric infarction with an acute abdomen (celiac and superior
mesenteric), renal failure (renal) paraplegia (spinal cord) and ischemia of
limb (usually leg).Others: Pulmonary edema, hemopericardium, cardiac tamponade.
Investigations
Chest X-ray: May show widening/broadening of superior mediastinum
and distortion of the aortic ‘knuckle’ but these may be absent in 10% of
cases. A small left-sided pleural effusion may be found.Electrocardiogram: ECG may show left ventricular hypertrophy in
patients with hypertension (33% of cases). ECG is necessary to rule out
any ischemic changes or MI. Rarely changes of acute MI (usually inferior)
may be evident.Doppler echocardiography: It may reveal aortic regurgitation, and
dilated aortic root.
Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE): May be useful since it can
show images of the first 3–4 cm of the ascending aorta (sensitivity 98–
99% and specificity 94–95%).CT and MRI angiography: Highly (98–100%) specific and sensitive
MRI is the gold standard for diagnosis.
Management/Treatment
Mortality rate of acute aortic dissection if untreated is 1–5% /hour and 90% within 3 months. Hence
urgent treatment is needed.
Goal: Reduction of systolic blood pressure (100–120) and diminution of dp/dt  (reflects force
of LV ejection) through use of a beta blocker. Therapy is targeted to halt the progression of the
dissection. The course of the tear rather than the tear itself leads to compromise of vasculature or
rupture.Initial medical management consists of control of pain and antihypertensive treatment .
About 50% of patients are hypertensive and they are given urgent antihypertensive medication to
reduce systolic blood pressure to below 120 mm Hg. This may be achieved by
–  Intravenous beta-blockers (e.g. labetalol, metoprolol) and vasodilators (GTN).
–  Intravenous calcium channel blockers (e.g. verapamil or diltiazem) are used if β-blockers are
contraindicated.
–  If the above drugs fail to control BP adequately, sodium nitroprusside may be given.
Type A dissections need emergency surgery to replace the ascending aorta (arch replacement) if
fit enough, because medical management has a high mortality (50% within 2 weeks).

Better prognosis with type B dissections and have a survival of 89% at 1 month. They are initially
treated medically unless they develop complications such as actual or impending external rupture,
or vital organ (gut, kidneys) or limb ischemia. In these patients very high morbidity and mortality
rate associated with surgery.Surgical therapy:  Percutaneous or minimal access endoluminal repair and involves either
‘fenestrating’ (perforating) the intimal flap or endovascular implantation of a stent graft placed
from the femoral artery.
Cause of death: Acute aortic regurgitation, major branch vessel obstruction,
aortic rupture (into pericardium, left pleural cavity, or mediastinum).
Marfan’s Syndrome
Q. Write short note on Marfan’s syndrome and its clinical features.
It is an autosomal dominant disorder of connective tissue characterized by
mutations in the fibrillin gene on chromosome 15.
Systems affected
Cardiovascular system: Weakening of the media of the aortic root cause
dilatation (Fig. 7.55D), regurgitation and dissection. Mitral valve prolapse,
mitral regurgitation.
Skeletal system: Tall stature, arachnodactyly, wrist (Fig. 7.55A)
and/thumb sign (Fig. 7.55B), joint hypermobility, scoliosis, chest
deformity and high arched palate (Fig. 7.55C).Eyes: Dislocation of the lens (superior and temporal).
Figs. 7.55A to D:  Features of Marfan’s syndrome: (A) Wrist sign with right pneumothorax on
intercostal drainage;(B) Thumb sign; (C) High arched palate; (D) Chest X-ray showing aortic root
dilatation.
Investigations: Chest X-ray (Fig. 7.55D), echocardiography, MRI or CT
may detect aortic dilatation.

Treatment:  β-blockers reduces the rate of aortic dilatation and risk of rupture. Elective replacement
of the ascending aorta: in patients with progressive aortic dilatation.
RAYNAUD’S PHENOMENON AND RAYNAUD’S
DISEASE
Q. Write short note on Raynaud’s phenomenon, its causes and
Raynaud’s disease.
Raynaud’s phenomenon: Chronic episodic attacks of digital ischemia
due to spasm of the digital arteries usually precipitated by exposure to cold
or emotional stress and relieved by heat. An underlying disease or cause is
present and most commonly connective tissue disease such as systemic
sclerosis. If there is no underlying cause, it is termed Raynaud’s disease
(primary or idiopathic Raynaud’s phenomenon).Affects 5–10% of population.
Table 7.100: Causes of Raynaud’s phenomenon (Secondary Raynaud’s).
Connective tissue disease and vasculitis, e.g.
systemic sclerosis, SLE, rheumatoid arthritis,
Sjögren’s syndrome, Mixed connective tissue
diseaseHematological disease, e.g. cryoglobulinemia,
cold agglutinins, paroxysmal hemoglobinuria,
Waldenström’s macroglobulinemia
Obstructive arterial disease, e.g.
atherosclerosis, thromboangiitis obliterans
(TAO) (Buerger’s disease)Neurological disease, e.g. thoracic outlet
syndrome (cervical rib), carpal tunnel syndrome
Trauma or vibration:  Reflex sympathetic
dystrophy, vibration exposure, arteriovenous
fistulaMiscellaneous, e.g. paraneoplastic syndrome,
chronic renal failure, primary pulmonary
hypertension
Drugs and toxins, e.g. Ergot, β-blockers,
methysergide
Causes of Raynaud’s Phenomenon (Table 7.100)
Clinical FeaturesCharacterized by sequential color changes: White (pallor due to
vasospasm), >blue (cyanosis due to deoxygenated blood) > and red (rubor
due to reactive hyperemia). Pallor is essential for diagnosis.
Age of onset and gender: Usually less than 40 years of age, but it may

occur over this age. F: M = 5:1. However, in secondary cases it depends
on the underlying disease, and is not restricted to female sex.
Raynaud’s phenomenon usually involves the hands and less common in
the feet. Rarely, involves nose, ear lobe, tongue, etc.
Typical attack  is characterized by sudden attack of pallor in one or more
digits, followed after a few minutes by cyanosis or/and sometimes by
erythema. Attacks are usually precipitated by cold (either local or of the
whole body), by pressure or by psychological stimuli. Episodes may occur
infrequently or many times each day.
–  Primary Raynaud’s: Usually bilateral, symmetrical and involves
several digits (fingers).
–  Secondary Raynaud’s: Involves only one or a few digits and
asymmetry is not unusual.Severe cases: Usually seen in secondary type and may be complicated by:
–  Telangiectasias of the nail fold
–  Thinning and ridging of the nail
–  Atrophy or sclerosis of the fingers (sclerodactyly).
–  Skin necrosis: Rare in primary Raynaud’s phenomenon but not
uncommon in secondary Raynaud’s phenomenon and may lead to
destruction of the digits.
InvestigationsBlood test
–  Complete blood count, ESR, urinalysis
–  Patient with ANA, specific antigen like Sm antigen or topoisomerase or
centomere or DsDNA to rule out SLE or scleroderma.
Chest X-ray: To look for cervical rib or evidence of ILD.
Specific test: Nail fold capillary microscopy procedure differentiates
primary from secondary Raynaud phenomenon. Patients with connective
tissue diseases may have enlarged deformed capillary loops surrounded by
avascular areas.
Treatment
General measuresLifestyle modifications to minimize exposure to cold.
Patient’s education to recognize and terminate attacks promptly by returning to a warmer

environment and applying local heat to hands (e.g. by placing their hands in warm water or by
using a hair dryer).
Cessation of smoking because nicotine induces cutaneous vasoconstriction.
Stress modification and social support to minimize vasoconstriction induced by hyperactivity of
sympathetic nervous system.
Treatment of underlying cause.
Drugs:  Calcium channel blockers (e.g. nifedipine, amlodipine), sildenafil, prostaglandin
analogues (e.g. ilaprost), bosentan, losartan, topical glyceryl trinitrate.
Sympathectomy:  Patients with refractory, disabling attacks or with an acutely ischemic digit that
is unresponsive to other measure.
CIRCULATORY FAILURE: SHOCK
Q. Write short note/essay on:
Septic shock, SIRS and sepsis (refer chapter 4).
Anaphylactic shock (refer pages 1129-31) and neurogenic shock
(refer page 534).
Management of septic shock (refer pages 212-4).
Definition
Q. Define acute circulatory failure/shock.
Shock (acute circulatory failure, low-output state) is defined as a state with
impaired cardiac pump, circulatory system, and/or volume that can lead to
compromised blood flow to tissues.Kumar and Parrillo (1995): Shock is a state in which profound and
widespread reduction of effective tissue perfusion leads first to reversible,
and then if prolonged, to irreversible cellular injury.
Classification and Causes (Table 7.101)
Q. Write short note/essay on classification and causes of shock.
Q. Causes of cardiogenic shock.
Table 7.101: Classification and causes of shock.
Type of shock and insult Causes Physiologic effect Compensation
Cardiogenic:  Heart fails to
pump  blood outMyocardial infarction (MI),
arrhythmia, aortic stenosis,Decreased cardiac
outputBaroreceptor
mechanism.

mitral regurgitation,
myocarditis, rupture of
papillary muscle, right
ventricular infarction with
excessive diuretic therapyIncreased
systemic vascular
resistance.
Increased heart
rate and
contractibility Obstructive:  Heart pumps
well, but the outflow is
obstructedExtracardiac obstructive
causes such as pericardial
effusion, tension
pneumothorax, tamponade,
acute massive pulmonary
embolism
Hypovolemic:  Heart pumps
well, but not enough blood
volume  to pumpHemorrhage, fluid loss
(vomiting, diarrhea, burns)
Distributive:  Heart pumps
well, but there is peripheral
vasodilationSeptic, anaphylactic, and
neurogenic shock
Pancreatitis, burns, multi-
trauma via activation of the
inflammatory responseReduced systemic
vascular
resistanceIncreased cardiac
output.
Increased heart
rate and
contractibility.
No change in
neurogenic shock
Stages of Shock (Table 7.102)
Table 7.102: Stages of shock.
Stage Pathophysiology Clinical findings
Insult (initial
stage)Example: Splenic rupture with blood
loss
Preshock
(compensatory
stage)Hemostatic compensation
Mean arterial blood pressure (MAP) =
Reduced. Decreased cardiac output is
compensated by increase in heart rate
and systemic vascular resistance.MAP is maintained
Heart rate will be increased
Extremities will be cool due to
vasoconstriction.
Shock
(progressive
stage)Compensatory mechanisms fail MAP is reduced. Tachycardia,
dyspnea, restlessness
End organ
dysfunction
(refractory stage)Cell death and organ failure Decreased renal function, liver failure,
disseminated intravascular
coagulopathy, death
Pathogenesis of Various Types of Shock (Flowchart 7.6)
Clinical Features (Table 7.103)

Q. Write short notes on hypovolemic shock.
Types of Shock
Neurogenic shock
–  Neurogenic is the rarest form of shock. Caused by the loss of
sympathetic control of resistance vessels resulting in massive dilatation
of arterioles and venules.
–  A type of distributive shock that results from the loss or suppression of
sympathetic tone.
–  Causes massive vasodilatation in the venous vasculature → venous
return to heart → cardiac output.
–  Most common cause is spinal cord injury above T6.
Flowchart 7.6:  Pathogenesis of various types of shock.
Table 7.103: Clinical features of various types of shock.
Hypovolemic
shockDistributive
shockCardiogenic
shockObstructive shock
Heart rate Increased Increased (normal
in neurogenic
shock)Increased or
decreasedIncreased

Jugular venous
pressure (JVP)Low Low High High
Blood pressure Low Low Low Low
Skin Cold Warm (cold in
severe shock)Cold Cold
Capillary refill Slow Slow Slow Slow
Sepsis (discussed in Chapter 4)
–  Sepsis syndrome: SIRS with confirmed infectious process associated
with organ failure or hypotension
–  Two phases:
♦  ‘Warm’ shock-early phase: Hyperdynamic response, vasodilation
♦  ‘Cold’ shock- late phase: Hypodynamic response
–  Decompensated state
Anaphylactic shock  (discussed in Chapter 20)
–  A type of distributive shock that results from widespread systemic
allergic reaction to an antigen.
–  Differences between anaphylactic shock and anaphylactoid shock
(Table 7.104).
–  This hypersensitive reaction is life-threatening.
Cardiogenic shock.
–  The impaired ability of the heart to pump blood. Pump failure of the
right or left ventricle.
–  Most common cause is left ventricular myocardial infarction (anterior).
Occurs when > 40% of ventricular mass damage.
–  Mortality rate is 80% or more.
Table 7.104: Differences between anaphylactic shock and anaphylactoid
shock.
Anaphylactic shock Anaphylactoid shock
Insect envenomations
Antibiotics (beta-lactams, vancomycin,
sulfonamides)
Heterologous serum (anti-toxin, anti-sera)
Blood transfusion
Immunoglobulins (esp. IgA deficient)Ionic contrast media
Protamine
Opiates
Polysaccharide volume expanders (dextran,
hydroxyethyl starch)
Muscle relaxants

Egg-based vaccines
LatexAnesthetics
Q. Write short note/essay on management of shock.
Management of Shock
Goal of management: (1) Treat reversible causes, (2) protect ischemic myocardium and (3) improve
tissue perfusion.
Patient Monitoring
Initial assessment (ABC)
Airway:
–  Does patient have mental status to protect airway?
–  Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) less than ‘eight’ means ‘intubate’
–  Airway is compromised in anaphylaxis.Breathing:  If patient is conversing with you, airway (A) and breathing (B) are fine, place patient
on oxygen.
Circulation:  Vitals (heart rate and blood pressure), 2 large bore IV, start fluids (careful if
cardiogenic shock), put on continuous monitor.
–  In a trauma, perform ABCDE, not just ABC.
Deficit or Disability:
–  Assess for obvious neurologic deficit.
–  Moving all four extremities—Yes/No Pupils-Reaction
–  Glasgow Coma Scale (M6, V5, E4).Exposure:  Remove all clothing on trauma patients.
General Measures
Optimize oxygen content
–  Hemoglobin: Check if appears pale or anemic, check coagulation status.
–  SaO 2: Just a pulse oximeter tells you the SpO 2. Check SaO 2 on ABG.
Optimize cardiac output
–  Cardiac output (CO) = Stroke volume (SV) x Heart rate (HR)
–  Stroke volume depends on preload, contractility and afterload
♦  Preload: Look at response to fluid bolus.
◊   If improves BP could be suggestive of decreased preload (volume) and a reasonable
contractility.
◊   If no improvement or worsening BP could be suggestive of a contractility problem or
excess preload (volume) situation.
◊   Look at CVP
♦  Contractility
◊   Check any history suggestive of ischemic disease or CCF.
◊   Check ECHO and ECG.
◊   A high systolic pressure could be suggestive of good contractility.
♦  Afterload
◊   Check ECHO if suggestive of any obstructive features.
◊   If peripheries cold could indicate increased vascular resistance.

◊   If peripheries warm could indicate vasodilation and decreased vascular resistance.
◊   A low diastolic blood pressure could indicate low vascular resistance.
◊   A high diastolic blood pressure could indicate increased vascular resistance.
Heart rate
–  If low, 2 possible interventions namely electric pacing or pharmacological intervention.
–  If high, 2 possible interventions namely electric cardioversion/defibrillation or pharmacological
intervention.
Optimize Blood Pressure
Q. Write short note/essay on sympathomimetic amines and vasopressor agents in shock.
Vasopressors and inotropes (sympathomimetic amines and vasopressin)(Table 7.105)
–  Dobutamine alone is useful to augment cardiac output if arterial pressure is near-normal.
Otherwise, a combination of dopamine and dobutamine is preferred initial sympathomimetic
agents.
–  Vasopressin
♦  Vasopressin constricts vascular smooth muscle directly via V1 receptors, and also increases
responsiveness of the vasculature to catecholamines.
♦  Vasopressin may also increase blood pressure by inhibition of vascular smooth muscle nitric
oxide production.
–  Milrinone  can be used to increase cardiac contractility.
–  Steroids can be used in specific types as septic shock.
Treatment of Underlying Cause
Hypovolemic Shock
–  Rapid replacement of blood, colloid, or crystalloid.
–  Identify source of blood or fluid loss and treat it. Endoscopy/colonoscopy or angiography.
Table 7.105: Common sympathomimetic amines used in shock.
Sympathomimetic amine
(receptor activated) and
doseActions
Dopamine:
(Dopaminergic+α + β 1)
0.2–1 mg/minuteVasodilation of renal, mesenteric, cerebral and coronary vessels
Increase myocardial contraction, heart rate and cardiac output. Rise in
systolic blood pressure
Dobutamine:  (β1)
2–8 µg/kg/minuteMarked increase in myocardial contraction, minimal increase in heart
rate and minimal peripheral vessels vasodilatation
Noradrenaline: ( α + β 1)
2–8 µg/minuteIncreased myocardial contraction, heart rate, cardiac output, and rise
in blood pressure
Vasoconstriction in skin, muscle and splanchnic beds. Coronary
vasodilation
Adrenaline:  (α+β 1+ β2)
1–8 µg/kg/minuteIncreased myocardial contraction, heart rate and cardiac output. Rise
in mean blood pressure
Vasoconstriction in most except skeletal muscles and coronary
arteries. Vasodilatation in skeletal muscles and coronary arteries

Isoproterenol:  (β1+ β2)
5–10 µg/minuteIncreased myocardial contraction, heart rate cardiac output and rise in
systolic blood pressure
Vasodilatation mainly in skeletal muscles
Phenylephrine:  (α1)
30–60 µg/minuteVasoconstriction
Box 7.60:  Management of cardiogenic shock.
Left ventricular infarction
Intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP)
Cardiac angiography
Revascularization: Angioplasty, coronary bypass
Right ventricular infarction
Fluid and inotropes with PA catheter monitoring
Mechanical abnormality
Echocardiography
Corrective surgery.
Q. Write short note on management of cardiogenic shock.
Cardiogenic Shock (Box 7.60)
Extra-cardiac obstructive shock
Pericardial tamponade: Pericardiocentesis and surgical drainage (if needed).
Pulmonary embolism
–  Heparin
–  Ventilation/perfusion lung scan
–  Pulmonary angiography
–  Consider: Thrombolytic therapy, embolectomy at surgery.
Septic shockIdentify site of infection and drain, if possible.
Antimicrobial agents (key rules).
ICU monitoring and support with fluids, vasopressors, and inotropic agents.
Management of neurogenic shock
Hypovolemia: Treat with careful fluid replacement for BP<90 mm Hg, UO <30 cc/hr.
Observe closely for fluid overload
Vasopressors may be needed.
Hypothermia: Warming. Avoid large swings in patient’s body temperature.
Treat hypoxia
Maintain ventilatory support.
Alpha agonist to augment tone if perfusion still inadequate
–  Dopamine (>10 μg/kg per min)
–  Ephedrine (12.5–25 mg IV every 3–4 hour)
Treat bradycardia with atropine 0.5–1 mg doses to maximum 3 mg, may need transcutaneous or
transvenous pacing temporarily.

PULMONARY EMBOLISM AND VENOUS
THROMBOSIS
Pulmonary Embolism (PE)
Q. Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations, diagnosis and
management of pulmonary thromboembolism and pulmonary
infarction.
Definition
Pulmonary embolism (pulmonary thromboembolism—PTE) is defined as
an embolism in which emboli occlude pulmonary arterial tree (pulmonary
artery or its branches). Pulmonary embolism is the second most common
cause of unexpected death in most age groups. It accounts for about 15%
of all postoperative deaths. Present in 60–80% of patients with DVT, more
than 50% of them are asymptomatic.Pulmonary infarction: It is ischemic necrosis of lung tissue following
embolic occlusion. It develops in less than 10% of cases of pulmonary
embolism. They are more common in patients with an underlying cardiac
or pulmonary disease.
Source of Emboli
Pulmonary embolism usually results from dislodgement of venous thrombi
and the source of these emboli are as follows:Thromboemboli
–  Deep leg veins: DVTs are the source in more than 95% of cases of
pulmonary emboli. Deep leg veins include popliteal, femoral or iliac
veins. Other source of thromboemboli is from pelvic veins, abdominal
veins and vena cava.
–  Other sites: Rarely, source of emboli may be right atrium or right
ventricle.Other nonthrombotic emboli: They are rare and include septic emboli
(from endocarditis involving the tricuspid or pulmonary valves), tumor
emboli (especially choriocarcinoma), fat (long bone fractures), air,

amniotic fluid emboli and foreign material during iv drug use.
Table 7.106: Risk factors (predisposing factors) for venous thrombosis and
embolism.
Primary (genetic)
Deficiency of antithrombotic (anticoagulant) factors (e.g. Antithrombin III deficiency, protein
C and S deficiency)
Increased prothrombotic factors (e.g. activated protein C (APC) resistance (factor V mutation/
factor Va/ factor V Leiden).
Secondary (acquired)
Surgery:  Major abdominal/pelvic, hip/knee surgery, postoperative intensive care
Obstetrics:  Pregnancy, postpartum
Cardiorespiratory disease:  COPD, congestive cardiac failure
Lower limb conditions: Fracture, varicose veins
Malignancy: Abdominal/pelvic, advanced/disseminated cancers, concurrent chemotherapy
Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome
Miscellaneous:  Increasing age, prolonged bed rest, prolonged immobilization, trauma
Causes and Risk Factors (Table 7.106)
Q. Write short essay/note on the predisposing causes of pulmonary
embolism.
Q. Write short note on Virchow’s triad.
Virchow’s triad: It consists of three factors that predispose to thrombus
formation and includes (1) endothelial injury, (2) altered blood flow and (3)
hypercoagulability. These factors favor the adhesion of platelets at the site of
endothelial damage. These platelets undergo aggregation and release factors
which generate thrombin generation. Venous thrombi form and flourish in the
presence of stasis and hypercoagulability.
Pathological Consequences
Embolization: The deep venous thrombi may detach from their site of
formation. These emboli pass to the vena cava, right atrium and right
ventricle, and finally lodge in the pulmonary arterial circulation. In the lung
they produce acute pulmonary embolism.Acute massive pulmonary embolism: When emboli lodges in the main
pulmonary artery (may result in death). Massive pulmonary embolism

shows 60% or more obstruction of the pulmonary circulation. Massive PE
accounts for 5–10% of cases.
Pulmonary infarction: It results from embolism to smaller pulmonary
arteries. Most (about 75%) small pulmonary emboli do not produce
infarcts. However, in the patients with congestive heart failure or chronic
lung disease an embolus can cause infarction.Pulmonary hemorrhage: Obstruction of medium-sized pulmonary
arteries by emboli and subsequent rupture of these vessels can result in
pulmonary hemorrhage.Pulmonary hypertension: Multiple recurrent pulmonary emboli → may
cause mechanical blockage of the arterial bed → result in chronic
pulmonary hypertension → right ventricular failure.
Clinical Features of Pulmonary Embolism and Pulmonary
Infarction
Dyspnea (75–85%), pleuritic chest pain (57–87%), cough (40–53%),
hemoptysis, syncope, similar to obstructive lung disease (chronic).
Massive pulmonary embolism: Rarer condition characterized by sudden
collapse because of an acute obstruction of the right ventricular outflow
tract. Symptoms include collapse/hypotension, unexplained hypoxia,
engorged neck veins. Acute right heart failure (acute cor pulmonale).Physical findings
Patient may be normal.
There may be tachypnea (respiratory rate >16/min) in 96% of cases, rales
(58%), accentuated second heart sound (53%), tachycardia (heart rate
>100/min), fever (temperature >37.8 °C), diaphoresis, S3 or S4 gallop.Other clinical signs and symptoms suggesting thrombophlebitis, lower
extremity edema, cardiac murmur, cyanosis and clinical evidence of DVT
may be present.
Wells Scoring System (Box 7.61)
Box 7.61: Wells scoring system for the diagnosis of pulmonary embolism
(PE).
Clinically suspected DVT: 3.0 points

Alternative diagnosis is less likely than PE: 3.0 points
Tachycardia (heart rate > 100): 1.5 points
Immobilization (≥ 3d)/surgery in previous four weeks: 1.5 points
History of DVT or PE: 1.5 points
Hemoptysis: 1.0 point
Malignancy (with treatment within six months) or palliative: 1.0 point
Score > 4-PE likely. Consider diagnostic imaging and score 4 or less-PE unlikely.
Diagnosis
Q. Write short essay/note on diagnosis of pulmonary embolism.
Pulmonary embolism is the Great Masquerader. Its symptoms and signs are
nonspecific and the diagnosis is difficult. Not all leg pain is due to deep vein
thrombosis and not all dyspnea is due to pulmonary embolism. Pulmonary
embolism should be considered if a patient has pleuritic chest pain,
hemoptysis or dyspnea that is out of proportion to the size of pleural effusion.Nonimaging Diagnostic Modalities
Blood tests
–  Pulmonary infarction: It results in polymorphonuclear leukocytosis,
raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and raised lactate
dehydrogenase levels in the serum.
–  D-dimer assay: D-dimer is a specific degradation product produced
during the breakdown of endogenous fibrin (fibrinolysis) by plasmin. It
is best screening test for PE or DVT. Its significance are:
♦   Raised D-dimer: The quantitative raise in plasma D-dimer
[measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)]
indicates the presence of DVT or PE or clinically ineffective
thrombolysis. The sensitivity of the D-dimer is >80% for DVT (less
sensitive than for PE because the size of DVT thrombus is smaller)
and >95% for PE. However, raised D-dimer is not specific, because
it may be also raised in other conditions (e.g. myocardial infarction,
pneumonia, sepsis, cancer, postoperative state and during second or
third trimester of pregnancy). It has no role in hospitalized patients
because levels are usually raised due to systemic illness. A positive
test or normal test in high-risk patients requires further specific
diagnostic tests such as Doppler of legs for deep vein thrombosis,
spiral CT pulmonary angiography (CT-PA), perfusion scanning of

the lungs and pulmonary angiography.
♦   Normal D-dimer: If D-dimer is normal, it rules out the diagnosis of
embolism (unless patient has a high-risk of PTE clinically).
–  Electrocardiogram (ECG) is often normal but helps in excluding other
differential diagnoses (e.g. acute myocardial infarction and
pericarditis). It may show sinus tachycardia, changes of acute
pulmonary hypertension and right ventricular strain. Other
abnormalities include atrial fibrillation; ECG changes include the S l
Q3T3 sign: an S wave in lead 1, a Q wave in lead III, and an inverted
T wave in lead III.
–  Arterial blood gases: Show a hypoxemia (reduced PaO2) and a normal
or hypocapnia (low PaCO2) i.e. type I respiratory failure pattern and an
increased alveolar–arterial oxygen gradient.Noninvasive Imaging Modalities
–  Ultrasound scanning: For the detection of clots in deep veins, pelvic
or iliofemoral veins.
–  Venous ultrasonography: Color Doppler ultrasound of the leg veins
examines the venous flow dynamics and is the investigation of choice
in suspected DVT. Normally, manual compression of calf increases the
Doppler flow pattern. Loss of normal respiratory variation is seen
when there is occluding DVT or any obstruction within the pelvis.
–  Chest X-ray
♦  Pulmonary embolism
◊   Normal or nearly normal
◊   Increased radiolucency in lung zones (due to decreased or absent blood flow).
◊   Small infiltrative shadows (due to linear atelectasis)
◊   Elevated hemidiaphragm
◊   Difference in the diameter of pulmonary arteries and their main branches on either
side.
◊   Abrupt “cut-off” of a blood vessel
◊   Enlarged right descending pulmonary artery (Palla’s sign).
♦  Pulmonary infarction
◊   May be normal during early stages
◊   Parenchymal, peripheral, wedge-shaped (pulmonary infarct) density above the
diaphragm (Hampton’s hump). Previous infarcts may appear as opaque linear scars.
◊   Translucent under perfused distal zone, infiltrative shadow abutting against the
pleura (usually appears 12–36 hours later) (Westmark’s sign).
◊   Abrupt cutoff of a pulmonary artery

◊   Blunting of a costophrenic angle (due to a small pleural effusion).
–  Chest CT: CT of the chest with intravenous contrast is the main
imaging test for the diagnosis of PE.
–  Lung scanning: It is the second line diagnostic test for PE and
performed in patients who cannot tolerate intravenous contrast. The
perfusion scan defect favors absent or decreased blood flow possibly
due to PE whereas a normal perfusion scan excludes significant
pulmonary embolism. However, an abnormal perfusion scan may be
due to lung pathology (e.g. asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease). In such patients, a ventilation-perfusion scan is needed
though it may still give ambiguous results.
–  Magnetic resonance (MR) (contrast-enhanced) imaging: It is useful
mainly in detecting large proximal PE but is not reliable for smaller
segmental and subsegmental PE.
–  Echocardiography is not useful for diagnosis of acute PE, but is very
useful for detecting conditions that mimic PE (e.g. acute myocardial
infarction, pericardial tamponade, and aortic dissection).
–  Radionuclide ventilation/perfusion scanning (V/Q scan): It uses less
radiation and contrast and is a good diagnostic tool. Pulmonary Tc
scintigraphy shows under perfused regions indicative of pulmonary
infarcts. However, this test should be interpreted in consideration of
history, examination and other investigations.Invasive diagnostic modalities
–  Pulmonary angiography: Chest CT with contrast has replaced
invasive pulmonary angiography as a diagnostic test. It is performed in
patients planned for interventional procedure (e.g. catheter-directed
thrombolysis). Features of PE includes visualization of a filling defect
in the lumen, abrupt blockage (“cutoff’) of vessels, segmental oligemia
or avascularity, a prolonged arterial phase with slow filling, and
tortuous, tapering peripheral vessels. Q. Write short essay/note on management of pulmonary embolism.
Management
Supportive measures
Prompt recognition and treatment.
Bed rest in acute stage.

Oxygen should be given to hypoxemic patients to maintain arterial oxygen saturation above 90%.
Intravenous saline and/or noradrenaline may be necessary to maintain venous pressure in massive
embolism.
Avoid diuretics and vasodilators because they will reduce cardiac output.
Analgesics: Opiates may be needed to relieve pain and distress.
External cardiac massage in the moribund patient may dislodge and breaking up a large central
embolus.
Anticoagulation
Unfractionated heparin:  Initial dose is 5000–10,000 units IV, followed by maintenance.
Maintenance: By any one of the three regimens namely (1) continuous intravenous, (2)
intermittent intravenous and (3) intermittent subcutaneous.
Dosage and monitoring of anticoagulant therapy.
–  After initiating heparin therapy, repeat APTT every 6 hour for first 24 hours and then every 24
hours when therapeutic APTT is achieved.
–  Warfarin 5 mg/d can be started on day 1 of therapy; there is no benefit from higher starting
doses.
–  Platelet count should be monitored at least every 3 day during initial heparin therapy.
–  Therapeutic APTT should correspond to plasma heparin level of 0.2–0.4 IU/mL.
–  Heparin is usually continued for 5–7 days. Heparin can be stopped after 4–5 d of warfarin
therapy when INR is in 2.0–3.0 range.
Novel oral anticoagulants.
–  Rivaroxaban  is an oral factor Xa inhibitor approved by the FDA in November 2012 for the
treatment of DVT or PE. Apixaban was approved for treatment of PE in August 2014.
–  Direct thrombin inhibitors: Argatroban, ximelagatran.
Anticoagulation is maintained for at least 6 months.
Thrombolytic therapy
Indications: Hemodynamic instability, hypoxia on 100% oxygen, and right ventricular dysfunction
by echocardiography.
Approved thrombolytics for pulmonary embolism
–  Streptokinase: 250,000 IU as loading dose over 30 minutes, followed by 100,000 U/h for 24
hours.
–  Urokinase: 4400 IU/kg as a loading dose over 10 minutes, followed by 4400 IU/kg/h for 12–24
hours.
– Recombinant tissue-plasminogen activator:100 mg as a continuous peripheral intravenous
infusion administered over 2 hour
Contraindications
–  Absolute: Active internal bleeding
–  Relative:  Recent surgery, bleeding disorder (thrombocytopenia, renal failure, liver failure),
hypertension >200 mm Hg systolic or 110 mm Hg diastolic, hypertensive retinopathy with
hemorrhages or exudates.
Surgical therapy:  Include surgical pulmonary embolectomy, inferior vena caval filters (to prevent
recurrent emboli) and venous interruption.
Prophylaxis:  To prevent pulmonary embolism (refer prophylaxis for venous thrombosis in page
542).

Venous Thrombosis
Q. Discuss the risk factors, clinical features, investigations, diagnosis,
and treatment of venous thrombosis (deep venous thrombosis–DVT).
Venous thrombosis is the formation of thrombus in the venous circulation
namely veins or right side of the heart.
Sites of Venous Thrombosis
Most commonly deep or superficial veins of the leg are involved.
Deep venous thrombosis (DVT):
–  Usually develops in the lower extremity, starting at the larger calf vein
level and progressing proximally to involve popliteal, femoral, or iliac
veins. In about 80–90% pulmonary embolism, the source is deep vein
thrombus. Lower extremity DVTs are found in associated with venous
stasis and hypercoagulable states. More prone to embolization into the
lungs and produce pulmonary infarction. About 50% of DVTs are
asymptomatic and are detected after embolization.
–  Other systemic veins, e.g. pelvic veins
–  Right side of the heart: Atrium (e.g. in patients with atrial fibrillation
and cardiac failure) and right ventricle.Superficial venous thrombi: They develop in the varicosities involving
saphenous veins. It can cause local congestion, swelling (edema), pain,
and tenderness. Embolization is very rare.
Risk Factors of Venous Thrombosis (refer Table 7.106)
Clinical Features of Deep Venous Thrombosis (DVT)
Often DVT is asymptomatic with minimal symptoms and signs in about
50% of patients. It may present with clinical features of pulmonary
embolism.
Usually unilateral (only one leg) but may be bilateral (both legs), and
thrombus may extend proximally into the inferior vena cava. Bilateral
DVT develops more commonly associated with underlying malignancy.Major presenting features are: Pain in the calf or tenderness, or both,
swelling (ankle edema), redness, an increase in temperature (affected calf
is warmer) and dilatation or engorgement of the superficial veins.

Homan’s sign: Pain in the posterior calf on forced dorsiflexion of the foot
while the knee is fully extended. It can be usually demonstrated, but is not
diagnostic and may be observed with all lesions of the calf. This test
should not be done, because it has the possibility to dislodge the deep vein
thrombosis (DVT) and development of pulmonary embolism.Moses test is tenderness over calf muscles on squeezing the muscles from
side to side. It is also not done because of possibility of pulmonary
embolism.Thrombosis in the iliofemoral region: Severe pain, swelling of the thigh
and/or ankle edema.
Complete occlusion of a large vein: Cyanosis of the limb, severe edema,
and very rarely lead to venous gangrene.
Table 7.107: Wells probability score.
Clinical parameter Score
Active cancer (ongoing treatment or within 6 months of palliative) +1
Paralysis or recent plaster immobilization of the lower extremities +1
Recently bedridden for >3 days or major surgery <4 weeks +1
Localized tenderness along the distribution of the deep veins +1
Swelling of entire leg +1
Calf swelling >3 cm compared to the asymptomatic leg +1
Pitting edema (greater in the symptomatic leg) +1
Previously documented DVT +1
Collateral superficial veins (non-varicose) +1
Alternative diagnosis (at least as likely as DVT) -2
Diagnosis of DVT
Q. Write short essay/note on Wells probability score.
Wells clinical prediction guide for diagnosis of DVT is presented in Table
7.107. It incorporates risk factors, clinical signs, and the presence or absence
of alternative diagnoses. It helps in quantifying the pretest probability of DVT
namely high score is 3 or more, a moderate score 1−2 and a low score 0. It
groups the patients into high, moderate, or low-risk categories.
Complications

Pulmonary embolism
Post-thrombotic syndrome: Consists of edema, skin pigmentation,
venous eczema/dermatitis, ulceration around the medial malleolus, venous
claudication, nocturnal cramping, and lifelong pain in the involved limb.
Venous gangrene: Due to complete obstruction of large veins.
Investigations
D-Dimer: Raised (>500 ng/mL) but is not specific. May be raised in
trauma, recent surgery, hemorrhage, cancer, etc. In DVT, it remains raised
for 7 days.
–  Negative D-dimer assay: Rules out DVT in patients with low-to-
moderate risk and a Wells score ≤1. No further investigations needed.
–  Positive D-dimer assay: With a moderate-to-high risk of DVT (Wells
score ≥2) need diagnostic investigation, e.g. Doppler ultrasonography.B mode venous compression, ultrasonography or Doppler (duplex)
ultrasonography: Compression ultrasound is the imaging investigation of
choice and has sensitivity for proximal DVT (of the popliteal vein or
above) of 99.5%. Venous thrombosis is associated with failure to
compress the vascular lumen.Contrast venography (phlebography) can reliably detect below knee
thromboses, but is now rarely by venography with noninvasive.
Impedance plethysmography (IPG) also detects above knee thrombi.
Radiofibrinogen scanning is very accurate in calf vein and lower thigh
thrombi.
Box 7.62:  High risk factors for deep vein thrombosis and pulmonary thromboembolism.
Patients undergoing major surgery, e.g. abdominal, thoracic or gynecological
Fractures: Involving pelvis or extremities
Significant medical comorbidities, e.g. heart disease, metabolic, endocrine or respiratory
diseases pathologies, acute infectious diseases, inflammatory conditions
Patients admitted with major medical diseases:
–  Acute coronary syndrome, Acute congestive failure (NYHA classes III, IV)
–  Acute respiratory diseases (respiratory failure with or without mechanical ventilation), chronic
respiratory disease (e.g. chronic obstructive pulmonary disease)
–  Active cancer or cancer treatment
–  Inflammatory bowel disease
–  Acute arthritis of lower extremities

–  Sepsis, stroke, paraplegia, obesity
–  Varicose veins with phlebitis
Treatment of Deep Venous Thrombosis (DVT)
Bed rest till the patient is fully anticoagulated.
Legs:  Elevation by 15° and physiotherapy.
Prophylaxis
Q. Write short essay/note on prophylaxis of venous thrombosis (deep venous thrombosis-
DVT).
Prophylaxis for DVT and pulmonary embolism is indicated in at high-risk patients (Box 7.62).
Prophylaxis of DVT
Nonpharmacological measures:
–  Mechanical VTE (antiembolism stockings) thigh or knee length.
–  Foot impulse devices.
–  Physiotherapy
–  Intermittent pneumatic compression devices (thigh or knee length): Compress the calf
intermittently (usually once a minute).Pharmacological prophylaxis
–  Fondaparinux or low-molecular weight heparin or unfractionated heparin are given before
operation or on admission to hospital, continued until the patient is ambulatory.
–  When risk factors are present treatment with warfarin to be given for a prolonged time.
DISORDERS OF BLOOD LIPIDS AND
LIPOPROTEINS
Q. Write short essay/note on structure of lipoproteins and their
transport in body.
Classes of lipid: Most important are:
–  Cholesterol: It is composed of hydrocarbon rings.
–  Triglycerides (TG): These are esters composed of glycerol linked to
three long-chain fatty acids.
–  Phospholipids: Composed of a hydrophobic ‘tail’ consisting of two
long-chain fatty acids connected to a hydrophilic head containing a
phosphate group by glycerol. Phospholipids are present in cell
membranes and constitute important signaling molecules.
Both plasma cholesterol and TG are clinically important because they are
major treatable risk factors for atherosclerosis.

Lipoproteins
Lipids are poorly water soluble, but are absorbed from the gastrointestinal
tract and transported throughout the body. This is achieved by lipids by
forming complexes known as lipoproteins. Lipoproteins are spherical or disc-
shaped and composed of:Hydrophobic core: Consisting of TG and cholesterol ester which is
enveloped by a less hydrophobic surface coat (mentioned below).
Less hydrophobic surface coat: Consisting of phospholipids, unesterified
cholesterol and special proteins called apolipoproteins. Some
apolipoproteins make these lipoproteins to act as enzyme co-factors or cell
receptor ligands.
Types of LipoproteinChylomicrons
Very low density lipoprotein (VLDL)
Intermediate density lipoprotein (IDL)
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL): Lipoprotein [Lp(a)] is a type of
lipoprotein similar to LDL with the addition of apolipoprotein (a)/ Lp(a)
links lipid metabolism with blood coagulation.High-density lipoprotein (HDL).
VLDL particles containing more cholesterol ester are more atherogenic than
LDL particles.
Transport and Storage of Lipids (Fig. 7.56)
Three main pathways involved in metabolism of lipid are:
1. Exogenous (dietary) Lipid Pathway
Dietary lipids are digested and absorbed in the small intestine and form
chylomicrons in the epithelial cells of the intestines. Chylomicrons are
the largest lipoprotein particle containing TG and cholesterol ester.
Chylomicrons enter the blood circulation and are hydrolyzed by
lipoprotein lipase (LPL) located on the endothelium of tissue capillary
beds and release fatty acids. These fatty acids are utilized locally for
energy production or stored as TG in muscle or fat.

Fig. 7.56: Absorption, transport and storage of lipids in body.
2. Endogenous Pathway
During fasting, the liver is the main source of plasma lipids and
constitute endogenous pathway.
TGs and cholesterol ester are produced by the liver and these lipids are
secreted by the liver into the circulation as very low-density
lipoproteins (VLDL). VLDL is also rich in TG but differ from
chylomicrons in that they contain full-length Apo B100.VLDL secreted into the circulation undergoes metabolic processing
similar to that of chylomicrons. Hydrolysis of VLDL TG by capillary
LPL releases fatty acids to tissues (utilized by fat and muscle) and
remaining lipid portion of VLDL is converted into ‘remnant’ particles
termed as intermediate-density lipoproteins (IDL).Major part of IDL is taken up and quickly cleared by LDL receptors in

the liver. Some of IDL is processed by hepatic lipase, which converts
the IDL to LDL by removing TG.
LDL is an atherogenic lipoprotein. LDL particles carry the majority of
the cholesterol in the blood and are a source of cholesterol for cells and
tissues.Regulation of plasma LDL concentration: LDL cholesterol is taken
up by receptor-mediated endocytosis through the LDL receptor in the
peripheral cells or liver.
–  Controls the rate of cholesterol synthesis: The supply of
cholesterol through this pathway down-regulates further expression
of the LDL receptor gene. This in turn decreases the synthesis and
activity of the rate-limiting enzyme for cholesterol synthesis,
HMGCoA reductase. This negative feedback loop, along with the
modulation of cholesterol esterification, controls the intracellular
free cholesterol level.3. Reverse Cholesterol Transport
It is the process in which cholesterol is removed from the peripheral
tissues and is returned to the liver. This protects against excessive
cholesterol accumulation in peripheral tissues.High-density lipoproteins (HDL) are the main lipoprotein along with
lipid-poor Apo A1 (derived from the liver, intestine and the outer layer
of chylomicrons and VLDL) involved in his reverse cholesterol
transport process. HDL is produced and catabolized in the liver and
intestines.HDL is able to accept more free cholesterol from atherogenic
lipoproteins and peripheral tissues to the liver. A circulating enzyme
called lecithin cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT) esterifies these HDL.
Hyperlipidemia
Q. Write short essay/note on hyperlipidemias, their causes and
management.
Hyperlipidemia is characterized by an abnormality in the lipid profile,
consisting of a variety of disorders with raised total cholesterol, LDL or TG,
or conversely, lower levels of HDL.
Classification and Causes

Primary hyperlipidemia: It is a genetic disorder of lipid metabolism (e.g.
familial hypercholesterolemia). It is characterized by a genetic mutation,
which causes impaired clearance of LDL from the circulation due to
absence of LDL receptors.Secondary hyperlipidemia: These are characterized by hyperlipidemia
secondary to a disease/disorder other than the genetic defect (Table 7.108).
Management Strategies
Lipid profile of an individual should be interpreted along with the risk
factors for coronary artery disease (CAD).
Coronary heart disease risk based on risk factors other than the LDL level
is listed in Box 7.63.
Major modifiable risk factors: (1) hypercholesterolemia (2) smoking,
(3) diabetes mellitus and (4) hypertension as per Framingham Risk Score
(FRS). It provides the risk of an individual and developing a cardiac event
in the next 10 years.Emerging risk factors: That may contribute to the risk of CAD include:
–  Apoliopoprotein B
–  Lipoprotein (a)
–  C-reactive protein
–  Hyperhomocysteinemia
–  Small, dense LDL particlesCoronary artery diseases (CAD) equivalents: These include:
–  Diabetes mellitus
–  Patients with Framingham Risk Score (FRS) ≥20%
–  In these patients, the goals of treatment are same as those for patients
with established CAD.LDL cholesterol goals in different categories (Table 7.109).
Table 7.108: Causes of secondary hyperlipidemia.
Increased LDL cholesterol level Increased triglyceride level Decreased HDL cholesterol level
Diabetes mellitus
Hypothyroidism
Nephrotic syndrome
Obstructive liver diseaseAlcoholism
Diabetes mellitus
Hypothyroidism
ObesityCigarette smoking Diabetes
mellitus Hypertriglyceridemia
Menopause Obesity Uremia
Anabolic steroids Beta-adrenergic

Drugs
Anabolic steroids
Progestins
Beta-adrenergic blockers
(without intrinsic
sympathomimetic action)
ThiazidesRenal insufficiency
Drugs
Beta-adrenergic blockers
(without intrinsic
sympathomimetic action)
Bile acid binding resins
Estrogens
Ticlopidineblockers (without intrinsic
sympathomimetic action)
Progestins
(LDL: low-density lipoprotein; HDL: high-density lipoprotein)
Box 7.63: Coronary heart disease risk based on risk factors other than the
LDL level.
Positive risk factors
Sex: Male > = 45 years and female > = 55 years or postmenopausal without estrogen replacement
therapy
Family history of premature coronary heart disease:  Myocardial infarction or sudden death
before age 55 in father or other male first-degree relative or before age 65 in mother or other
female first-degree relative)
Current cigarette smoking
Hypertension:  Blood pressure > = 140/90 mm Hg or patient is receiving antihypertensive drug
therapy
HDL cholesterol level  <35 mg per dL (<0.90 mmol per L)
Diabetes mellitus
Negative risk factor#: High HDL cholesterol level (> = 60 mg per dL [>=1.60 mmol per L])
#Subtract one positive risk factor if negative risk factor is present. (LDL: low-density lipoprotein;
HDL: High-density lipoprotein).
Management
Therapeutic lifestyle changes.
Patients with normal-weight, dyslipidemia (BMI 18.5–24.9 kg/m2):  Focus on healthy eating
and regular exercise.
Overweight and obese patients (BMI ≥25 kg/m2):  Reduce caloric intake from fats, simple
carbohydrate and ≥30 mins physical activity most days.
Intake of soluble fiber to be increased (10–25 g/day).
Diet (rich fruits, veg, nuts, whole grains, monounsaturated oils; low red meat, animal fat) reduces
LDL 5–15% (ATP III TLC diet).
Aerobic exercise:  Running, walking, cycling, swimming enhance weight reduction facilitates
achieving optimum lipid levels.
Therapeutic drug classes, their effect on lipid profile and side effects are
presented in Table 7.110.

Table 7.111 shows drugs to be considered depending on cholesterol level.
Ezetimibe inhibits the absorption of cholesterol from the diet.
Omega-3 fatty acid: Useful to reduce TG levels. Dose is 1–2 g/day.
Newer agents: Torcetrapib is a cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP)
inhibitors.
Table 7.109: LDL cholesterol goals in different categories.
Risk group LDL cholesterol goals
Very high-risk:  Cardiovascular disease plus multiple risk
factors (especially diabetes), or severe/poorly controlled
risk factors, or metabolic syndrome, or acute coronary
syndrome<100 mg/dL or optional goal <70
mg/dL
High-risk:  Coronary heart disease (CHD) or CHD risk
equivalents (10-year risk >20% )<100 mg/dL
Moderately high-risk:  2 or more risk factors (10 year risk
10–20%)<130 mg/dL or optional goal <100
mg/dL
Moderate-risk: 2 or more risk factors (10-year risk 5–10%) <130 mg/dL
Low-risk: 0-1 risk factors <160 mg/dL
(LDL: low density lipoprotein)
Table 7.110: Drug classes, their effect on lipid profile and side effects.
Drug class Total
cholesterol
levelsLDL
levelsHDL
levelsTriglycerides Side effects
Bile acid binding
resins20% 10–
20%3–5% Neutral Unpalatability, bloating,
constipation, heartburn
Nicotinic acid 25% 10–
25%15–
35%20–50% Flushing, nausea, glucose
intolerance, abnormal liver
function test
Fibric acid
analogs15% 5–15% 14–
20%20–50% Nausea, skin rash
HMG-CoA
reductase
inhibitors15–30% 20–
60%5–15% 10–40% Myositis, myalgia, elevated
hepatic transaminases
(LDL: low-density lipoprotein; HDL: high-density lipoprotein)
Table 7.111: Drugs to be considered depending on cholesterol level.

LDL cholesterol level Drugs to be considered
High LDL-C level only Statins first, resins or intestinal absorption
blocker second, niacin third
High LDL-C and low HDL-C levels Statins first, niacin second
High LDL-C, low HDL-C, and high triglyceride
levelsNiacin and statins first, fibrates second
High triglyceride levels, with or without low
HDL-C levelsFibrates first, niacin second
Low HDL-C levels only Niacin first, fibrates second
(LDL-C: low density lipoprotein cholesterol; HDL-C: high-density-
lipoprotein cholesterol)
LIPODYSTROPHY
Q. Write a short note on lipodystrophy.
Lipodystrophy is changes in the distribution body fat. Lipoatrophy implies
partial or complete decrease of fat. However, the terms lipoatrophy and
lipodystrophy are used interchangeably in clinical practice.
Classification of Lipodystrophies
Total lipodystrophy: Two types namely congenital and acquired.
–  Beradinelli-Seip (congenital): Autosomal recessive, hypermetabolic
state.
–  Seip-Lawrence (acquired): Begins <15 years old, often <5 years
Partial lipodystrophy
–  Kobberling-Dunnigan syndrome: Inherited form, autosomal
dominant
–  Progressive partial lipodystrophy: Acquired forms
Centrifugal: One type is seen primarily in infants from Japan. 90% are
under 5 years. Centrifugally spreading loss of abdominal fat over 3–8
years with regional lymphadenopathy. Resolves completely after
progression stops.Semicircular: Adult women affected with single or multiple,
asymptomatic, symmetric depressions of anterolateral thigh. Often after
trauma, resolves in several years.

Annular atrophic panniculitis: 10 cm band of atrophy, bilaterally,
around the ankles of children and young adults. Rare.
Lipoatrophia annularis: Bracelet-like constrictions of upper extremities
1–2 cm wide on women following a period of swelling and erythema of
extremity. Arthralgias and pain of affected extremity. Persist up to 20
years.Localized lipodystrophy: Secondary to injection of medications
especially insulin.
HIV associated lipodystrophy:
–  Occurs in effectively treated AIDS patients with reverse transcriptase
inhibitors and protease inhibitors.
–  Fat redistribution from face, buccal, buttocks and limbs is lost to neck,
upper back and inter abdominal areas.
–  Peripheral lipodystrophy, central fat accumulation and lipomatosis.
Box 7.64: Indications for low dose aspirin.
Secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease: CAD (coronary artery disease, stroke, post CABG
(coronary artery bypass grafting)
Primary prevention of ischemic heart disease
TIA(transient ischemic attacks)
APLA(anti-phospholipid antibody) syndrome
Preeclampsia
Essential thrombocytosis, polycythemia vera
Venous thromboembolism- prophylaxis
Q. Write short note on indications for low dose aspirin.
Indications for low dose aspirin (Box 7.64).
STRAIGHT BACK SYNDROME
Q. Write short essay/note on straight back syndrome (SBS).
In straight back syndrome, there is loss of normal curvature upper thoracic
spinal which reduces the anteroposterior diameter of the chest. This
deformity compresses or ‘pancakes’ the heart (cardiomegaly) and great
vessels so as to appear enlarged. There is displacement of the heart
towards left, resulting in cardiac murmurs.

Clinical features: Chest pain, tracheal compression and mitral valve
prolapse (MVP).
Chest X-ray: Lateral chest X-ray reveals significant reduction of distance
from the middle of the anterior border T8 to a vertical line connecting T4
and T12. A value less 1.2 cm is diagnostic.ECG often shows right bundle branch block.
CARDIAC TUMORS
Myxoma
Most common type of primary cardiac tumor in adults seen in third to
sixth decade of life.
Most common in females.
Most are sporadic, but some are familial (autosomal dominant)–10%.
Most are solitary and located in left atrium arising from inter atrial septum
near fossa ovalis.
Its presentation most commonly mimics that of mitral valve disease.
‘Tumor plop’ is a characteristic low-pitched sound which may be audible
during early or mid-diastole and is thought to result from the tumor
abruptly stopping as it strikes the ventricular wall.Symptoms and signs: Fever, weight loss, cachexia, malaise arthralgia,
rash, clubbing, Raynaud’s phenomenon. Peripheral or pulmonary
embolization can develop.Investigations:
–  Anemia, polycythemia, elevated ESR, thrombocytopenia or
thrombocytosis.
–  2-D echocardiography: Useful screening tool
–  CT and MRI are investigations of choice
Treatment is surgical excision using cardiopulmonary bypass.
Rhabdomyomas are the commonest cardiac tumor in children.
DIGOXIN
Q. Write short essay/note on digoxin, manifestations of digoxin/digitalis

toxicity and its management.
Digoxin is a purified glycoside derived from Digitalis lanata having cardiac
inotropic property.
Pharmacological Actions
Force of myocardial contraction is increased by a direct action of digitalis.
Heart rate: Decreased and bradycardia is more marked in CHF.
Electrophysiological properties:
–  Prolongs the refractory period of V node → slows the ventricular rate.
–  Reflex vasodilation in CHF.
Pharmacokinetics
Has a good oral absorption.
Digoxin concentration in the heart is 30 times more than in the plasma.
The elimination half-life for digoxin is 36 to 48 hours in patients with
normal or near-normal renal function. This permits once-a-day dosing;
near steady-state blood levels are achieved one week after initiation of
maintenance therapy.
About 85% of digoxin is excreted through the kidneys and the remaining
15% through the stool.
Indications
Cardiac arrhythmias: Supraventricular tachycardia, tachyarrhythmias
and atrial fibrillation with a fast ventricular rate.
Heart failure with reduced ejection fraction (HFrEF)
Heart failure accompanied by atrial fibrillation or flutter with a rapid
ventricular rate.
Dosage and Route of Administration
The dosage and route is determined based on the desired action.
Rapid digitalizing (loading dose) regimen
–  Intravenously: Initial loading dose of 0.25–0.5 mg followed by 0.25
mg every 6 hour. Careful monitoring of clinical response and toxicity
should be performed before each dose.
–  Orally: Initial loading dose is 0.5–1 mg followed by 0.25 mg 6 hourly.
Careful monitoring of clinical response and toxicity before each dose.

Slow digitalization: Maintenance dose (0.125–0.25 mg/day) given from
the beginning. Dose may be increased every 2 weeks depending on
clinical response, serum levels of the drug, and toxicity.
As per ACCF/AHA guidelines, a loading dose to initiate digoxin therapy
in patients with heart failure is not required.
Digoxin Toxicity and its Management
Digitalis has high toxicity low margin of safety. Definite toxicity defined
as nausea/vomiting, with cardiac effects and resolution of side effects on
discontinuation. Serum digoxin concentration (SDC) is not a necessary
criterion but SDC > 2.0 ng/mL helpful.
Manifestations of Digoxin Toxicity
Extracardiac manifestations
–  Nonspecific but more common
–  Gastrointestinal (60–80%): Nausea/vomiting, anorexia, abdominal
pain, diarrhea
–  Malaise (30–40%), lethargy, fatigue
–  Neurological (20–30%): Dizziness, confusion, headache, visual
changes (flashing lights, halos, color disturbances in green-yellow
spectrum, blurred vision)
Cardiac side effects
–  More specific but less common
–  Almost any permutations and combinations of heart block (partial to
complete), brady and tachydysrhythmias can be produced.
–  Classical: Paroxysmal atrial tachycardia, ventricular bigeminy,
bidirectional ventricular tachycardia, nodal and ventricular extra
systoles.
ECG changes of digoxin toxicity: Inverse check mark with proximal ST
segment depressed, in leads other than those with tall R waves, with T
wave not rising above baseline (Inverted T), with shortened QTc.
Management of digoxin toxicityStop digoxin.
Blood test:  Urea, electrolytes and plasma digoxin concentration.
Correction of hypokalemia:  Intravenous supplementation of no more than 20 mmol/h of
potassium. More rapid infusion may cause asystole.

Heart blocks:  Atropine and temporary cardiac pacing.
Malignant ventricular arrhythmias
–  Phenytoin (100 mg intravenously, repeated after 5 minutes if required) opposes digitalis binding
and may improve atrioventricular conduction by its anticholinergic properties.
–  Ultrashort acting beta blockers, e.g. esmolol.
–  Avoid cardioversion wherever possible, due to the risk of precipitating asystole.
–  Digoxin-specific antibody fragments: Digoxin-specific fab antibody fragments (Digibind) are
the most effective but expensive. Hence, reserved for treatment of serious toxicity, especially
in the presence of malignant cardiac dysrhythmias.
VALSALVA MANEUVER
Q. What is the Valsalva maneuver?
The Valsalva maneuver is a forceful attempted exhalation against a closed
glottis.
Method (Fig. 7.57)
Instruction: Take a deep breath, close your mouth and pinch your nose
with the thumb and index finger and attempt to breathe out gently, keeping
your cheek muscles tight, not allowing the air to escape by keeping the
lips pursed.“Standard” or “quantitative:” Blowing out with an open glottis into a
tube of a sphygmomanometer against the pressure of 40 mm Hg.

Fig. 7.57:  The Valsalva maneuver.
Phases of Valsalva Maneuver
Physiological effects on blood pressure heart rate and phases of Valsalva
maneuver are presented in Figure 7.58 and Table 7.112.
Phase 1: The onset of blowing. The pressure within the chest and abdomen
increases and presses upon the arteries in the chest, which results in an
increase in mean arterial blood pressure. This activates the baroreceptor
reflex, which results in an increase in parasympathetic (vagal) activity and
hence in a drop in heart rate. The increased intrathoracic pressure also
reduces the amount of blood that comes into the right atrium (decreased
venous return or preload).
Table 7.112: Various phases of Valsalva maneuver and its associated
changes.
Phase 1 2a 2b 3 4
Intrathoracic
pressureIncreased Increased Increased Normal Normal
Mean arterial
blood pressureIncreased Decreased Increased Decreased Increased

Heart rate Decreased Increased Decreased Increased Decreased
Sympathetic
activityDecreased Decreased Increased Increased Increased
Parasympathetic
(vagal) activityIncreased Increased Decreased Decreased Increase
Phase 2: A decrease of venous return results in a lower amount of blood that
is ejected from the heart, which results in a decrease of central venous
pressure and consequently in a decrease of mean arterial blood pressure. This
activates the baroreflex, which results in a decrease of the parasympathetic
(vagal) activity and consequent increase of the heart rate, and in an increase
in sympathetic activity, which constrict the arteries (an increase of peripheral
resistance), which results in a slight rise of the blood pressure at the end of
phase 2 (2b).
Phase 3: Relaxation – the end of the maneuver. The intrathoracic pressure
decreases, so the intrathoracic arteries widen, which results in a brief drop in
blood pressure. At the same time, the venous blood fills the heart.
Phase 4: The heart ejects the blood into the arterial system against increased
peripheral resistance (which has developed in phase 2), so the blood pressure
rises again (blood pressure overshoot). This activates the baroreflex, which
results in a drop in heart rate (bradycardia). Eventually, both the blood
pressure and heart rate normalize.
Fig. 7.58: Mean arterial blood pressure and heart rate changes during the Valsalva maneuver.
Uses

Eustachian tube dysfunction
Heart murmurs: Valsalva increases murmurs in hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy and mitral valve prolapse and decreases them in atrial
septal defects and aortic stenosis.
Congestive heart failure: Valsalva responses lost
Function of the autonomous nervous system: An abnormal blood pressure
response (for example, an absence of the blood pressure rise in phase 4)
suggests an abnormality of the sympathetic system.An abnormal heart rate response suggests an abnormality of the
parasympathetic Valsalva maneuver can be used as a provocative test to
check for:
–  Neurogenic orthostatic hypotension
–  Chiari malformation, the Valsalva maneuver (coughing) triggers a
headache at the back of the head.Diagnosis of inguinal hernia, prolapse of the uterus, bladder or vagina,
varicocele and intrinsic sphincter deficiency in stress urinary incontinence
system.
Valsalva maneuver can help: Equalize the pressure between the middle ear
and the ambient pressure during scuba diving, driving from a steep hill,
elevator descending, parachuting or plane landing or in individuals with
Eustachian tube dysfunction.
Modified valsalva maneuver: Modified Valsalva maneuver is used to
terminate an attack of supraventricular tachycardia (SVT); it includes
blowing against a closed glottis followed by lying down face up and raising
legs with the help of an assistant, may be effective in 19–54% of cases.
Reversed valsalva—Müller’s maneuver: Müller’s maneuver is the opposite
of the Valsalva maneuver and includes forced exhalation followed by an
attempted forceful inhalation with a closed mouth and nose or just with a
closed glottis. The test can be used to evaluate weakness of the soft palate
and throat walls in individuals with obstructive sleep apnea.

Hematology

CHAPTER
8
DISORDERS OF RED BLOOD CELL
INTRODUCTION
Q. Write short note on the structure of normal hemoglobin.
Hemoglobin Structure
A hemoglobin molecule is a conjugated protein composed of iron containing
pigment called heme and protein globin . About 65–70% of hemoglobin is
synthesized in normoblasts and 30–35% is synthesized at the reticulocyte
stage.
Each molecule of heme consists of protoporphyrin with an iron in ferrous
state (Fe++). Heme synthesis occurs mainly in the mitochondria of
normoblasts.
Each globin  chain is made up of two pairs of distinct polypeptide chains
(composed of a number of amino acids) bound to a heme molecule.
–   Hemoglobin A (HbA), is composed of two α and two β globin chains
(α2 β2) and normally represents more than 95% of the hemoglobin in
adult red blood cell (RBCs). Fetal hemoglobin is replaced by adult
hemoglobin during the first year of life (hemoglobin switching).
–   Fetal hemoglobin (HbF) contains two α and two γ-globin chains (α2
γ2). It is the major hemoglobin (70–90%) during fetal development and
is normally found in low levels in adults.
–   Hemoglobin A2 (α2 δ2) is normally found at low levels in adults (2%).
–   Normal hemoglobin in the adult are Hb-A (α2 β2) and Hb-A2 (α2δ2)
–   Normal hemoglobin in the fetus are Hb-F (α2 γ2) and Hb-Bart’s (γ4).

Red Cell Indices
Q. Describe various blood indices used in patients with anemia.
1. Mean corpuscular volume (MCV): It is used for classification and
differential diagnosis of anemias.
Normal range: 82–98 fL; (fL stands for femtoliters)
Microcytic anemia have MCV <80 fL and macrocytic anemia have MCV
>100 fL.
2. Mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH):
Normal range: 27–32 pg
MCH <26 pg is seen in microcytic anemia and MCH >33 pg is seen in
macrocytic anemia.
3. Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC): It is a better
indicator of hypochromasia than MCH.
Normal range: 31–35 g/dL.
MCHC <31 g/dL is seen in hypochromic RBC such as IDA and
thalassemia. MCHC is increased in heriditary spherocytosis.
4. Red Cell Distribution Width (RDW)
RDW is a quantitative measure of anisocytosis.
Normal RDW is 11.5 to 14.5%.
RDW = (Standard deviation + mean cell volume) × 100
Significance: RDW is used for differentiating anemia due to iron
deficiency and thalassemia. Increased in iron deficiency anemia (along
with low MCV) and megaloblastic anemia (with high MCV) while in
thalassemia trait, RDW is normal with low MCV.
RBC count: Normal range in males 4.5–5.5 millions/cumm; females 4–4.5
millions/cumm
ReticulocyteQ. Write short essay/note on laboratory technique of reticulocyte count
and causes of reticulocytosis.
Reticulocytes are immature, non-nucleated RBCs released from bone
marrow. They are demonstrated by using visual method brilliant cresyl
blue/new methylene blue stain or by automated method.

Reticulocyte count is expressed as percentage of RBC count (normal
<2.5%). Reticulocyte count reflects the erythropoietic activity of the bone
marrow and provides an estimate of red cell production. Increased
erythropoiesis results in increased reticulocyte release. The reference range of
the corrected reticulocyte percentage in adults is 0.5–1.5%. Causes of
increased and reduced reticulocyte count are listed in Table 8.1.
Table 8.1: Causes of increased and reduced reticulocyte count.
Causes of increased reticulocyte count
(reticulocytosis)Causes of reduced reticulocyte countHemolytic anemias
Hemolytic crisis
Hemorrhage
Following treatment in iron/folic acid/vitamin
B12 deficiency anemias. Highest counts are
found on 6th/7th day of treatment and indicate
marrow response to iron and 3rd day in
response to vitamin B 12Due to decreased erythropoietic activity
Aplastic anemia
Aplastic crisis due to parvovirus (in hereditary
spherocytosis and sickle cell disease)
Pure red cell aplasia
Fanconi anemia
Myelofibrosis
Reticulocyte production index (RPI) is expressed as % and it accounts
for premature release of reticulocytes from bone marrow in anemia. It is
important in determining if a patient’s bone marrow is responding
appropriately to the level of anemia.
–   Significance: Normal RPI is 1.0 to 2.0. However, RPI <2 with anemia
indicates decreased RBC production (hypoproliferative anemia) and
RPI >2 with anemia indicates hemolysis or loss of RBCs leading to
compensatory production of reticulocytes and is observed in
hyperproliferative anemia.
RBC Abnormalities
Various RBC abnormalities are presented in Figures 8.1 to 8.4.Q. Discuss the RBC abnormalities seen on a peripheral blood smear
examination.
Q. Write short note on value of peripheral smear in the diagnosis of

anemia.
Fig. 8.1:  Variation in size of red blood cells and associated conditions.

Fig. 8.2A:  Variation in shape of red blood cells and associated conditions.


Fig. 8.2B:  Variation in shape of red blood cells and associated conditions.
Fig. 8.3:  Variation in color of red blood cells.
Fig. 8.4:  Inclusions in red blood cells and associated conditions.
ANEMIA
Q. Define and classify anemia.
Definition
Anemia is defined as decrease in circulating red blood cell mass. It is
characterized by decrease of hemoglobin concentration (Hb)/RBC
count/hematocrit (PCV) below normal for the patient’s age, sex and altitude

of residence.
Normal adult hemoglobin level is in the range of 13 to 17 g/dL in males
and 12 to 15 g/dL in females.
Classification of Anemia
Anemia may be classified (1) based on the morphology of red cells
(morphological classification) and (2) based on the etiology/cause of anemia.
Morphological Classification
Normocytic normochromic (with a normal MCV)
Microcytic hypochromic (with a low MCV)
Macrocytic (with a high MCV).
Etiological Classification (Table 8.2)
Q. Write short essay/answer on etiology of anemia.
Table 8.2: Etiological classification of anemia.
1. BLOOD LOSS
Acute:  Loss of large volume over short period: Trauma, postpartum bleeding
Chronic:  Small volume over long period lesions of gastrointestinal tract (e.g. peptic ulcer,
hemorrhoids, carcinoma colon, hook worms), gynecological disturbances (excessive menstrual
loss), urinary blood loss
2. IMPAIRED RED CELL PRODUCTION (HYPOPROLIFERATIVE ANEMIAS)
Disturbed Proliferation and Maturation of Erythroblasts
–   Defective DNA synthesis
♦   Megaloblastic anemias due to deficiency or impaired utilization of vitamin B 12 and folic
acid
♦   Anemia of renal failure due to deficiency of erythropoietin
♦   Anemia of chronic disease due to iron sequestration and relative erythropoietin deficiency
♦   Anemias of endocrine disorders
–   Defective hemoglobin synthesis
♦   Defective heme synthesis: Iron deficiency, sideroblastic anemia
♦   Defective globin synthesis: Thalassemias
Marrow Replacement
–   Primary hematopoietic neoplasms:  Acute leukemia, myelodysplastic syndromes
Marrow Infiltration (myelophthisic anemia)
–   Metastatic neoplasms
Disturbed Proliferation and Differentiation of Stem Cells

–   Aplastic anemia, pure red cell aplasia
3. INCREASED RED CELL DESTRUCTION (HEMOLYTIC ANEMIAS)
Intrinsic (Intracorpuscular) Abnormalities
–   Hereditary
♦   Membrane abnormalities: Spherocytosis, elliptocytosis
♦   Enzyme deficiencies: Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, pyruvate kinase
♦   Disorders of hemoglobin synthesis
◊  Deficient globin synthesis: Thalassemia syndromes
◊  Structurally abnormal globin synthesis (hemoglobinopathies): Sickle cell anemia
–   Acquired
♦   Membrane defects: Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuriaExtrinsic (Extracorpuscular) Abnormalities
–   Antibody-mediated
♦   Isohemagglutinins: Transfusion reactions, Rh disease of the newborn
♦   Autoantibodies: Idiopathic (primary), drug-associated, systemic lupus erythematosus
–   Mechanical trauma to RBCs
♦   Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia: Disseminated intravascular coagulation, prosthetic
valves
–   Infections:  Malaria, infective endocarditis, mycoplasma
Clinical Features
Q. Discuss the clinical features of anemia. How to approach a case of
anemia?
Symptoms
They depend on (1) speed of onset of anemia, (٢ ) severity of anemia, (3) age
of the patient and (4) underlying illness. General clinical features are either
due to tissue hypoxia or compensatory mechanisms.
Due to tissue hypoxia:
–   Nonspecific symptoms: Weakness, malaise, lassitude, and easy fatiga-
bility
–   Dyspnea on mild exertion, angina, intermittent claudication, transient
cerebral ischemia
–   Central nervous system (CNS): Headache, vertigo, tinnitus, dizziness,
syncope, irritability, sleep disturbances and lack of concentration.
–   Gastrointestinal tract (GIT): Anorexia, indigestion, nausea, bowel
disturbances
–   Female genital tract: Amenorrhea, polymenorrhea

Due to compensatory mechanisms:
–   Cardiac features: Dyspnea on mild exertion, palpitation, tachycardia
and congestive cardiac failure.
Figs. 8.5A and B:  (A) Pallor of palpebral conjunctiva; (B) Pale palms with pale creases.
Signs
Pallor (Figs. 8.5A and B) is observed on skin, palms, mucous membranes
(oral, vaginal, rectal) nail beds and palpebral conjunctiva.
Pulse: Tachycardia, wide pulse pressure.
Cardiovascular system (CVS): Cervical venous hum, hyperdynamic
precordium, ejection systolic murmur (best heard over the pulmonary
area), cardiac dilatation and later, signs of cardiac failure.Ankle edema.
Signs suggesting etiology of anemia (Table 8.3)
Table 8.3: Various signs of anemia suggesting the probable etiology.

Sign Probable etiology
Angular cheilitis, blue sclera,
koilonychiaIron deficiency anemia
Glossitis Iron, vitamin B 12 and folate deficiency anemia
Neurological changes (neuropathy,
dementia, ataxia), Knuckle
pigmentationVitamin B 12 deficiency
Jaundice Hemolytic anemia, megaloblastic anemia
Splenomegaly Malaria, chronic hemolytic anemia, acute infection,
leukemia, lymphoma, portal hypertension, megaloblastic
anemia, iron deficiency anemia (rare)
Frontal bossing, dental malocclusion,
skin ulcersChronic hemolytic anemia (e.g. beta-thalassemia, sickle cell
anemia)
Leg ulcers Sickle cell disease History in diagnosis of anemias (Table 8.4)
Table 8.4: History suggesting the possible etiology of anemia.
History: Signs and symptoms Possible etiology of anemia
Known normal complete blood cell count in the
pastProbably not a hereditary/congenital disorder
Anemia known since childhood Inherited/congenital hemolytic anemia
Splenectomy, gallstones and/or jaundice Chronic hemolytic anemia, liver disease
Family history of splenectomy, gallstones and/or
jaundiceHereditary hemolytic anemia (RBC enzyme or
membrane disorder, thalassemia, or
hemoglobinopathy)
Poor or unconventional diet, malnutrition or
severe alcoholismBone marrow hypoplasia, folate deficiency
Paresthesias, foot numbness, loss of balance,
altered mental statusCobalamin (vitamin B 12) deficiency
Gastrectomy, surgical removal of the ileum,
chronic malabsorption disorderCobalamin (vitamin B 12) deficiency
Chronic gastritis, peptic ulcer disease, chronic
use of ASA or NSAIDs, recurrent epistaxis or
rectal bleeding, melena, menorrhagia,
metrorrhagia, multiple pregnancies, duodenal
surgery, gastrectomyIron deficiency
Chronic rheumatologic, immunologic, infectious
or neoplastic diseaseAnemia of inflammation, autoimmune hemolytic
anemia
Decreased urine output Anemia secondary to renal insufficiency
Dark urine Hemolytic anemia (intravascular hemolysis)
Recent onset of infections, mucosal and skin
bleeding, easy bruising, oral ulcerationsBone marrow aplasia/hypoplasia, acute leukemia,
myelodysplasia, myelophthisis
Occupational/environmental toxin exposure Bone marrow aplasia/hypoplasia, acute leukemia,

(benzene, ionizing radiation, lead) myelodysplasia, lead poisoning
Drug/medication exposure:
Penicillin, cephalosporin, procainamide,
quinidine, quinine, sulfonamideDrug-induced immune hemolytic anemia
Fava beans, dapsone, naphthaleneOxidant-induced hemolysis (G6PD deficient)
Cancer chemotherapeutic drugs (recent use)Bone marrow aplasia/hypoplasia, oxidant
damage, fluid retention/dilutional anemia,
megaloblastic anemia
Cancer chemotherapeutic drugs (past use)Bone marrow hypoplasia, myelodysplasia, acute
myeloid leukemia
Chloramphenicol, gold salts, sulfonamides,
anti-inflammatory drugsBone marrow aplasia/hypoplasia
Ethanol, chloramphenicolAcute reversible bone marrow toxicity
Methotrexate, azathioprine, pyrimethamine,
trimethoprim, zidovudine, sulfa drugs,
hydroxyurea, antimetabolitesBone marrow aplasia/hypoplasia, megaloblastic
anemia
IRON METABOLISM (FIG. 8.6)
Iron is required for synthesis of normal heme of hemoglobin. Its deficiency
leads to decreased erythropoiesis and anemia.
Distribution of Iron
Iron is an essential metal present in the human body. The total body iron
content (3–4 g) is divided into functional and storage compartments (Table
8.5). Iron in the body is extensively recycled between the functional and
storage pools.1. Functional: Approximately 80% (2.5 g) of the functional iron is present in
hemoglobin. The remaining functional iron is found in myoglobin and
iron-containing enzymes (catalase, cytochromes and peroxidases).2. Storage: The storage pool contains 15–20% (0.5–1.5 g) of total body iron.
Free iron is highly toxic because it can result in tissue damage due to its
capacity to form free radicals. Therefore, iron is bound to protein and
stored in the body in two forms namely; ‘ferritin ’ and ‘hemosiderin ’. The
storage iron can be readily mobilized whenever there is increase in the
requirements of iron, as may occur after blood loss. Two-third of the iron
is stored as ferritin and one-third as hemosiderin.
–  Ferritin  (Fe3+) is a protein-iron complex (apoferritin + iron) found in

all tissues but particularly in liver, spleen, bone marrow and skeletal
muscles. Very small amounts of ferritin circulate in the serum, the
value normally being 15–300 μg/L. Serum ferritin levels reflect the
iron stores and is a sensitive indicator of the amount of iron in the
body. Serum ferritin level is usually below 12 μg/L in iron deficiency
and it is very high (as high as 5000 μg/L may be observed) in
conditions associated with iron overload. Ferritin is water-soluble and
not visible by light microscopy.
–  Hemosiderin  is an aggregate of iron and protein which is found in the
reticuloendothelial cells of bone marrow, spleen and liver. It is formed
when iron is in excess (amorphous iron deposition).
Fig. 8.6:  Iron metabolism.
Table 8.5: Iron distribution in healthy young adults.
Pool Grams %

Functional
Hemoglobin 2.5 68
Myoglobin 0.15 4
Transferrin (iron-binding blood plasma
glycoprotein)0.003 0.1
Iron-containing enzymes 0.02 0.6
Storage
Ferritin and hemosiderin in tissue 1.0 27
Ferritin, serum 0.0001 0.004
Daily requirements: Recommended dietary allowance 10–15 mg. The daily
requirement in adult males is 5–10 mg/day and in females 20 mg/day.
Dietary sources: The diet contains iron either in the form of heme contained
in animal products and/or non heme iron in vegetables. Of 10–50 mg in the
diet, only 10–15% is normally absorbed.
Iron Absorption
Site of absorption: Iron is absorbed from the duodenum and proximal
jejunum. Iron balance is maintained mainly by regulating the dietary
absorption of iron (by the synthesis of apoferritin within mucosal cells).
Transport of Iron
Transferrin: Iron is transported in plasma by the iron transport protein
transferrin , which is synthesized in the liver. The major function of
plasma transferrin is to deliver iron to erythroid precursors for the
synthesis of hemoglobin. In normal individuals, transferrin is about 33%
saturated with iron, with an average serum iron levels of 120 μg/dL in men
and 100 μg/dL in women. Thus, the total iron-binding capacity of serum is
in the range of 310 to 340 μg/dL. Unsaturated transferrin protects againsts
infections (iron overload and infection).Lactoferrin: It binds iron in milk. It has antimicrobial effect (protects
newborns from gastrointestinal infections).
Haptoglobin: It binds hemoglobin in the plasma.
Iron Excretion/Loss
Iron metabolism is unique as it is very efficiently utilized and reutilized by
the body. There is no physiological regulated mechanism for iron excretion
and 1 to 2 mg per day is lost by shedding of epithelial cells of GI tract, skin

epithelial cells (by sweat) and renal tubules; and by menstruation, pregnancy,
multiple births, lactation and bleeding.
Regulation of Iron Balance
Iron is essential for cellular metabolism; at the same time, excess of it is
highly toxic. Therefore, the total body iron stores must be properly regulated.
Iron balance is mainly achieved by regulating the absorption of iron in the
diet. As body stores decreases, the absorption of iron rises and vice versa.
Hepcidin
Q. Write short note on role of hepcidin.
It is synthesized in the liver and is the central  (key) regulator of iron
homeostasis and it controls intestinal iron absorption  plasma iron
concentrations, tissue iron distribution and storage.
Ferroportin is the cellular iron exporter which exports iron into plasma
1. from absorptive enterocytes,
2. from macrophages that recycle the iron of senescent erythrocytes, and
3. from hepatocytes that store iron.
The major mechanism of hepcidin is the regulation of transmembrane iron
transport. Hepcidin binds to ferroportin and forms hepicidin-ferroportin
complex. This complex is degraded in the lysosomes and thus degrades its
receptor ferroportin. By this mechanism hepicidn reduces resorption of
iron in the intestinev and inhibits iron transfer from the enterocyte to
plasma (thereby reduces concentration of iron in plasma).When hepcidin levels rise, it lowers iron absorption in the intestine, iron
gets stored (locked) within enterocytes forming mucosal ferritin and is
shed with the cells. It also lowers iron release from hepatocytes and
macrophages (through degradation of ferroportin) leading to decreased
serum iron. Actions of hepcidin are presented in Figure 8.7.
Significance of hepcidinIncreased hepcidin concentration is seen in inflammation (chronic disease
anemia).
Reduced hepcidin production → hereditary hemochromatosis.
Functions of Iron

1. Heme iron: Hemoglobin, myoglobin, cytochromme c oxidase, catalase
2. Non-heme iron: Fe-S complexes (xanthine oxidase), DNA synthesis
(ribonucleotide reductase)
IRON DEFICIENCY ANEMIA (IDA)
Q. Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations, and
management of iron deficiency anemia.
Q. Write short note on causes of iron deficiency anemia. What is the
commonest cause in tropical countries?
Fig. 8.7:  Actions of hepcidin.
Etiology (Table 8.6)
Table 8.6: Causes of iron deficiency anemia.
1. Decreased iron intake
Milk fed infants
Elderly with improper diet and poor dentition
Low socioeconomical sections

Vegetarians (contains poorly absorbable inorganic iron)
2. Decreased absorption of iron
Total/partial gastrectomy
Intestinal absorption is impaired in sprue, other causes of intestinal steatorrhea and chronic
diarrhea
Specific items in the diet, like phytates of cereals, tannates, carbonates, oxalates, phosphates
and drugs can impair iron absorption
3. Increased demand/requirement for iron
Rapid growth in infancy or adolescents
Pregnancy and lactation
4. Increased iron loss:  Chronic blood loss due to bleeding from the:
Gastrointestinal tract (e.g. peptic ulcers, gastric carcinoma, colonic carcinoma, hemorrhoids,
hookworm infestation or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs)
Urinary tract (e.g. renal or bladder tumors, schistosomiasis)
Genital tract (e.g. menorrhagia, uterine cancer)
IDA is due to deficiency of iron causing defective heme synthesis. Iron
deficiency anemia is the most common cause of anemia.
Daily requirement of iron is 10–15 mg. Children consuming large amounts
of cow milk develop iron deficiency anemia because iron from cow milk
poorly absorbed and calcium in the milk inhibits iron absorption.
Q. Discuss the clinical manifestations and complications of iron
deficiency anemia.
Q. Write short note on Plummer-Vinson syndrome.
Clinical Features
Clinical features of iron deficiency anemia include the usual symptoms
and signs of anemia (refer pages 554-5).
Characteristic signs of advanced iron deficiency include:
–   Cheilosis (fissures at the corners of the mouth)/angular stomatitis
–   Atrophic glossitis (Fig. 8.8)
–   Brittle finger nails, platonychia and koilonychia (spooning of the
fingernails)(Figs. 8.9A and B), brittle hair
–   Blue-tinged sclerae, alopecia
–   Pica is the unusual craving for substances which has a ‘crunching’
sound with no nutritional value like clay or chalk. Craving for ice

(pagophagia) specific to iron deficiency or less commonly for clay
(geophagia) or starch (amylophagia); pagophagia is believed to be the
most specific to iron deficiency.
♦   Restless leg syndrome is seen in around 25% of patients with IDA.
Plummer-Vinson syndrome or Patterson-Brown-Kelly or sideropenic dysphagia develops in
long-standing iron deficiency.
–   Iron deficiency (microcytic hypochromic) anemia
–   Atrophic glossitis
–   Esophageal/post-cricoid webs resulting in dysphagia for solids than liquids. The web can be
demonstrated either by endoscopy or by barium swallow
–   These patients have increased risk of squamous cell carcinoma of pharynx and esophagus.
Treatment of Plummer-Vinson syndrome:  Administration of iron. Severe obstruction by the web
may require dilatation. Regular upper GI endoscopy may be required for the early detection of
cancers.
Beeturia is a phenomenon in which the urine turns red following ingestion of
beets. Beeturia is increased in individuals with iron deficiency (49–80% of
individuals with iron deficiency).
Diagnosis of Iron Deficiency Anemia
Q. Discuss the investigations/diagnosis of iron deficiency anemia.
Laboratory Investigations
These investigations may be divided into two major categories namely:
1. To confirm iron deficiency
Hemoglobin and hematocrit (PCV): Decreased
Red cell indices: MCV: <80 fL MCH: <25 pg and MCHC: <27 g/dL.
RDW: Increased  and >15%. It is earliest sign of iron deficiency.
Peripheral smear (Fig. 8.10): RBCs are microcytic (small) and
hypochromic (pale). Severe anemia shows ring/pessary, pencil/cigar-
shaped cells with moderate anisocytosis and poikilocytosis.
Reticulocyte count is low for the degree of anemia.
Bone marrow
–   Moderate erythroid hyperplasia and micronormoblastic
maturation
–   Absence of bone marrow iron: ‘Gold standard’ test,

demonstrated by negative Prussian blue reaction
Serum iron profile (Table 8.7)
Hepcidin: Decreased. Hepcidin regulates iron concentrations and tissue
iron distribution.
2. To determine the cause of iron deficiency: These depend on the age, sex
of the patient, and also history and clinical findings. In the absence of any
significant features, the following investigations are performed to identify
the chronic blood loss, especially from the GI tract.Stool: Examine for occult blood and hook worm infestation.
Endoscopy: Includes upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, sigmoidoscopy
and colonoscopy.
Radiological investigations: Barium meal and barium enema.
Urine: Examine for parasites such as schistosomiasis.
Investigations for malabsorption: If there are features of
malabsorption such as steatorrhea relevant investigations has to done to
find out the cause.
Table 8.7: Serum iron profile in IDA.
Normal range Value in IDA Observation
Serum ferritin 15–300 µg/L <15 µg/L ↓
Serum iron 50–150 µg/dL 10–15 µg/dL ↓
Serum transferrin
saturation30–40% <15% ↓
Total plasma iron-binding
capacity (TIBC)310–340 µg/dL 350-450 µg/dL ↑
Serum transferrin receptor
(TFR)0.57–2.8 µg/L 3.5–7.1 µg/L ↑
Red cell protoporphyrin 30–50 µg/dL >200 µg/dL ↑

Fig. 8.8:  Atrophic glossitis producing bald tongue in iron deficiency anemia. There is also mild
cheilosis.

Figs. 8.9A and B:  Koilonychia (spooning of the fingernails) in iron deficiency anemia.

Fig. 8.10:  Peripheral blood smear showing microcytic hypochromic red blood cells.
Box 8.1: Differential diagnosis of microcytic hypochromic blood picture.
Iron deficiency
Thalassemia: It is an inherited defect in globin chain synthesis. It can be differentiated from iron
deficiency by serum iron values; normal or increased serum iron levels and transferrin saturation.
The red blood cell distribution width (RDW) index is generally normal or reduced in thalassemia
and elevated in iron deficiency.Anemia of chronic disease
Sideroblastic anemia
Lead poisoning
Box 8.2: Complications of severe iron deficiency anemia.
During pregnancy: Poor pregnancy outcomes such as premature births and low birth weight babies
Heart failure
Delayed growth and development in infants and children
Increased susceptibility to infections
Exacerbates cardiorespiratory problems especially in the elderly
Differential diagnosis

Q. Mention the causes/differential diagnosis of microcytic hypochromic
blood picture/anemia.
The microcytic hypochromic anemia does not necessarily mean only iron
deficiency. The various causes of microcytic hypochromic anemia are listed
in Box 8.1.
Complications of severe iron deficiency anemia are listed in Box 8.2.
Q. Discuss the management/treatment of iron deficiency anemia.
Q. Write short note on (1) iron therapy and (2) parenteral iron therapy.
Management
Treatment can be divided into:
Treatment of underlying cause for iron deficiency. The correct management of iron deficiency is
to identify and treat the underlying cause for deficiency.
Treatment of iron deficiency: Next step is to give iron to correct the anemia and replace iron
stores. There are three major therapeutic approaches: (1) oral iron therapy (2) parenteral iron
therapy and (3) red cell transfusion.
1. Oral iron therapy
Most patients can be treated with oral iron preparations.Iron preparations and dose:  Oral iron dose is 6 mg/kg/day. Commonly used and best are ferrous
sulfate (200 mg three times daily, a total of 180 mg ferrous iron), ferrous gluconate (300 mg twice
daily, only 70 mg ferrous iron), ferrous fumarate (325 mg two or three times daily), and others.
Side effects:  Few patients may develop metallic taste, nausea, dyspepsia, constipation, black tarry
stools or diarrhea. These can be reduced by taking iron tablets with food or reducing the dose or
by using preparation with less iron (e.g. ferrous gluconate) or a controlled-release preparation or a
liquid preparation.Response to oral iron therapy:  The response appears within 7–10 days of treatment with iron in
the form of an increased reticulocyte count (usually not exceeding 10%, normal <2.5%).
Duration of oral iron therapy:
–   Iron should be given to correct the Hb level to normal range and usually occurs within 4–6
weeks. If it does not occur, it may be due to failure of response to therapy.
–   Once the hemoglobin returns to normal, oral iron therapy should be continued to replace the
iron stores. This may take 6 months to 1 year.
–   Patients having iron deficiency due to malabsorption, deficient intake, continuing blood loss,
etc. may require long-term iron supplements at a minimum dose.
Causes of failure to respond to oral iron therapy: It may be due to one or more of the
following reasons:
–   Failure to take the iron tables: Patients taking iron preparations have gray or black colored
stools.
–   Continuing hemorrhage/blood loss.
–   Incorrect/wrong diagnosis:  For example, thalassemia trait.
–   Ingestion of drugs which reduces iron absorption: Certain drugs if taken along with oral iron

(e.g. H 2-receptor blockers, proton-pump inhibitors, antacids, tetracyclines) may interfere
with iron absorption.
–   Severe malabsorption.
2. Parenteral iron therapy
Parenteral iron therapy should be given only after the definite diagnosis of iron deficiency; otherwise
it may lead to iron overload and its consequences. Iron stores are replaced much faster with parenteral
iron than with oral iron, but the hematological response is not quick.
Indications of parenteral iron therapy:  The indications are:
Intolerant to oral iron preparation.
Severe malabsorption.
Primary blood loss is uncontrollable: When rate of iron (blood) loss exceeds the rate of its
absorption.
Chronic GI tract disease (e.g. inflammatory bowel disease) which may worsen with oral iron.
Calculation of total iron dose required.
Iron dose in mg = Body weight (kg) × 2.3 × (normal Hb-patient’s hemoglobin, g/dL) + 500 or 1000
mg (to provide body iron stores).
Route of administration:  Parenteral iron can be given by slow intravenous infusion or by
intramuscular injection.
Types of parenteral iron preparations: These include iron-sorbitol, iron-dextran (imferon) and
preparations with much lower rates of adverse effects such as iron sucrose or sodium ferric gluconate,
ferric carboxymaltose, iron isomaltoside.
Iron-sorbitol
Administered only intramuscularly and never by intravenous route.
Dose is 1.5 mg of iron/kg body weight daily, to a dose not exceeding 2.5 g.
Iron-dextran (Imferon)
Low-molecular-weight iron dextran is most commonly used. It may be given either intramuscularly
or intravenously (more ideal). Test dose is required before administration to prevent anaphylaxis.
Intramuscular:  Dose is 100 mg daily till the total required dose is administered or to a maximum
of 2 kg. It should be given deep intramuscularly into the buttocks using a ‘Z-tract technique’.
Slow Intravenous infusion:  Total dose intravenous infusion is rarely required. If a large dose is to
be given (>100 mg), it should be diluted in 5% dextrose in water or 0.9% NaCl solution and
infused slowly.
Iron sucrose
It has lesser adverse effects and is considered to be the safe intravenous iron preparation.
Single dose of 100–200 mg as an intravenous injection or up to 500 mg infused over a period of 3
hours.
Sodium ferric gluconate
It is the preferred form of parenteral iron owing to the low incidence of adverse reactions.
Administered intravenously at a dose of 125 mg over 10 minute.
Ferric carboxymaltose:  A novel iron complex that consists of a ferric hydroxide core stabilized by a
carbohydrate shell, allows for controlled delivery of iron to target tissues. Administered
intravenously, it is effective in the treatment of iron-deficiency anemia, delivering a replenishment

dose of up to 1000 mg of iron during a minimum administration time of </=15 minutes with least
reactions.
Ferumoxytol:  Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles coated with a LMW semisynthetic
carbohydrate. It can be given in doses of 17 mL (equivalent to 510 mg of elemental iron).
Iron isomaltoside can be administered in a single infusion, at a dose of 20 mg/kg, over 15 minutes.
Side effects/toxicity of parenteral iron preparations
Pain and swelling at the site of injection/infusion.
Anaphylactic reactions: Fever, generalized urticarial rash, lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, and
arthralgias.
Hemochromatosis.
c. Red cell transfusion
Indication:  It is reserved for patients who have symptoms of anemia, cardiovascular instability,
continued and excessive loss of blood loss from any site, and require immediate intervention.
Transfusions correct the anemia acutely as well as transfused red cells provide a source of iron for
reutilization.
MACROCYTIC ANEMIA
Q. Write a short note on vitamin B12.
Vitamin B12 and folic acid are closely related and both are essential for
normal DNA synthesis and nuclear maturation.
Vitamin B 12 Metabolism
Vitamin B12 is present only in animal proteins and dairy products and not
present in vegetables. Therefore, strict vegetarians do not get an adequate
quantity of vitamin B12.
A balanced diet (not rigid vegetarian!) contains significantly large
amounts of vitamin B12 which accumulates in the body (liver) and is
enough for several (about 3) years. Hence, if there is any dietary
deficiency or malabsorption of vitamin B12, its clinical manifestations
appear only after about 2 to 4 years.Normal daily requirement is about 2 to 3 μg.
Absorption, Transport and Storage (Fig. 8.11)
Vitamin B12 in food is usually in coenzyme form (as
deoxyadenosylcobalamin and methylcobalamin) and bound to binding
proteins in the diet.

In the stomach, peptic digestion at low pH is required for release of
vitamin B12 from binding protein in the food. The released vitamin B12
binds with salivary protein called haptocorrin, which is secreted in
salivary juice.
These haptocorrin-B12 complexes leave stomach along with unbound
special protein called intrinsic factor (IF), which is produced by gastric
(fundus and cardia) parietal (oxyntic) cells.
As haptocorrin-B12 complexes pass into the second part of the duodenum,
pancreatic proteases release vitamin B12 from haptocorrin. Vitamin B12
then associates with the intrinsic factor and forms IF-B12 complex.
This stable IF-vitamin B12 complex is transported to the ileum, where it is
endocytosed by ileal enterocytes. These ileal enterocytes express a
receptor on their surfaces for the intrinsic factor. These receptors are
called cubilin .In the ileal epithelium, vitamin B12 combines with a major carrier protein,
transcobalamin II, and is actively transported into the mucosal cells and
then into the blood.
Transcobalamin II-vitamin B12 complex delivers vitamin B12 to the liver
and other cells of the body, particularly rapidly proliferating cells in the
bone marrow and mucosal lining of the gastrointestinal tract.

Fig. 8.11:  Mechanism of vitamin B 12 absorption.
Role of Vitamin B 12

Vitamin B12 is essential for:
Normal hemopoiesis
Maintenance of normal integrity of the nervous system.
Vitamin B12 is indirectly required for DNA synthesis in various metabolic
steps and its deficiency impairs DNA synthesis. There are two biologically
active forms of cobalamin in the body, both act as coenzymes namely: (1)
methylcobalamin and (2) adenosylcobalamin.
1. Methylcobalamin is the main form of vitamin B12 in plasma, and is an
essential coenzyme for conversion of homocysteine to methionine and
formation of tetrahydrofolate (THF) from methyl THF (Fig. 8.12). During
the former reaction, vitamin B12 loses its methyl group and this is replaced
from methyl THF, the principal form of folic acid in plasma.
Tetrahydrofolate is essential for the generation of a precursor of DNA
known as deoxythymidine monophosphate (d TMP).
In vitamin B12 deficiency, main cause of impaired DNA synthesis is that
methyl THF is not converted into THF. Methyl THF accumulates in the
cell and is known as ‘Methyl THF trap’. Lack of folic acid is the next
cause of anemia in vitamin B12 deficiency, as the anemia invariably
improves with folic acid administration.2. Deoxyadenosylcobalamin form of vitamin B12 is a coenzyme required for
conversion of methylmalonyl CoA to succinyl malonyl CoA (Fig. 8.13).
Deficiency of vitamin B12 causes increased levels of methylmalonic acid
in plasma and urine. This results in the formation of abnormal fatty acids
which get incorporated into neuronal lipids. Consequently, this predisposes
to myelin breakdown and is probably responsible for neurologic
complications of vitamin B12 deficiency.

Fig. 8.12:  Inter-relation and role of vitamin B 12 and folate in DNA synthesis.
Fig. 8.13:  Role of vitamin B 12 in methylmalonyl CoA metabolism.
Folic Acid Metabolism
Q. Write short essay/note on folic acid.
Daily requirement: 50–200 mg.

Source: Green vegetables, yeast, legumes, fruits and animal proteins are
the richest sources. The folic acid in these foods is largely in the form of
polyglutamates. Polyglutamates are sensitive to heat (thermolabile);
boiling, steaming or frying, and which destroys most of the folic acid
(destroyed by cooking). Intestinal conjugates split the polyglutamates into
monoglutamates.Site of absorption: Proximal jejunum. During intestinal absorption, they
are modified to 5-methyltetrahydrofolate, the normal transport form of
folic acid (FA).Storage: Folate is mainly stored in the liver and is enough for about 3
months and hence the manifestations of folate deficiency appear after
about 3 months.
Role of Folic Acid
Active form of folic acid is tetrahydrofolate (THF) which is the biologic
‘middleman’ involved in metabolic processes which synthesize DNA. The
various reactions in which folic acid plays a main role are:Purine (required for DNA and RNA) synthesis.
Conversion of homocysteine to methionine, a reaction also requiring
vitamin B12.
Deoxythymidylate monophosphate synthesis: 5,10-methylene THF
polyglutamate is required for conversion of dUMP to dTMP and DNA, a
rate limiting step in pyrimidine synthesis.
Folic acid is associated with metabolism of histidine: Histidine is
metabolized to form iminoglutamic acid (FIGLU) which combines with THF
to form glutamic acid (Fig. 8.14). In FA deficiency, this reaction cannot take
place and therefore FIGLU accumulates and is excreted as such in urine. This
is used as a test to measure folic acid deficiency.
Manifestations of Megaloblastic AnemiaQ. Write short essay/note on the etiology/causes of
megaloblastic/macrocytic anemias.
Q. Discuss the causes, clinical features/manifestations and management
of vitamin B12 deficiency/megaloblastic anemia.

Q. Discuss the causes, clinical features/manifestations and management
of folate deficiency.
Megaloblastic anemias are a group of disorders characterized by
defective/impaired DNA synthesis and distinct megaloblasts in the bone
marrow and macrocytes in the peripheral blood. Megaloblastic anemias
are common among anemias due to impaired red cell production. They are
usually caused due to deficiency of either cobalamin (vitamin B12) or
folate (folic acid), but may occur because of genetic or acquired
abnormalities that affect the metabolism of these vitamins.
Fig. 8.14: Role of folic acid in metabolism of histidine
Etiology of Megaloblastic Anemia (Table 8.8)
Q. Write short note on causes of macrocytic anemia.
Table 8.8: Causes of megaloblastic anemia.
Vitamin B 12 deficiency
1. Decreased intake:  Inadequate diet, ‘pure vegetarians’
2. Impaired absorption
Gastric: Deficiency of gastric acid or pepsin or intrinsic factor
–   Pernicious anemia
–   Postgastrectomy
–   Drugs: Prolonged use of H 2-receptor blockers and proton-pump inhibitors
Intestinal:
–   Loss of absorptive surface
♦   Malabsorption syndromes
♦   Diffuse intestinal disease, e.g. lymphoma, systemic sclerosis
♦   Ileal resection and Crohn's disease
–   Bacterial or parasitic competition for vitamin B 12
♦   Bacterial overgrowth in blind loops and diverticula of bowel
♦   Fish tapeworm ( Diphyllobothrium latum) infestation
3. Increased demand: Pregnancy, hyperthyroidism, disseminated cancer

4. Abnormal cobalamin transport:  Transcobalamin II deficiency
Folic acid (vitamin B9) deficiency
1. Decreased intake:  Inadequate diet—alcoholism, malnutrition
2. Impaired absorption
Malabsorption states: Nontropical and tropical sprue, celiac disease
Diffuse infiltrative diseases of the small intestine (e.g. lymphoma)
Drugs: Anticonvulsant phenytoin, oral contraceptives, metformin, cholestyramine
3. Increased loss:  Hemodialysis
4. Increased demand: Pregnancy, lactation, infancy, disseminated cancer, markedly increased
hematopoiesis (hemolytic anemias), chronic exfoliative skin disease, chronic inflammatory and
infective diseases
5. Impaired utilization:  Folic acid antagonists (antifolate drugs) such as methotrexate, trimethoprim,
pyrimethamine, pentamidine, 5-fluorouracil, hydroxyurea
Others
1. Therapy with antifolate drugs: For example, methotrexate
2. Independent of either cobalamin or folate deficiency
Pathogenesis (Mechanism) of Megaloblastic Anemia
Megaloblastic anemias are commonly due to deficiency of vitamin B12
(cobalamin) or folic acid, which are coenzymes required for the synthesis
of one of the four bases found in DNA namely thymidine.
Deficiency of cobalamin or folate results in failure of DNA synthesis and
delayed/arrested nuclear maturation. Synthesis of RNA and protein is
normal resulting in normal cytoplasmic maturation. Thus, the nuclear
maturation lags behind the cytoplasmic maturation  producing
nucleocytoplasmic asynchrony. This results in abnormal cell proliferation
that affects rapidly dividing cells in the bone marrow (erythroid, myeloid
and megakaryocyte series).Impaired DNA synthesis causes delay in cell division, increased time
between divisions, more cell growth and size of the cells become large and
are called as ‘megaloblasts’. The megaloblasts have an open, stippled and
lacy chromatin. The megaloblastic changes are most prominent in the
early nucleated red cell precursors.Erythroid precursor cells show reduced number of mitoses and synthesis
of hemoglobin is unimpaired. The mature RBCs derived from these
megaloblasts are large (macrocytes) and oval  but well hemoglobinized.In the bone marrow, large number of megaloblastic precursors does not
mature enough to be released into the blood and are destroyed in the bone

marrow (ineffective erythropoiesis). There is also mild hemolysis of red
cells in the peripheral blood. This releases large amounts of lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH) resulting in raised levels in the blood.
In the bone marrow, abnormal proliferation affects myeloid series
producing giant metamyelocytes and the megakaryocyte series resulting in
dysplastic megakaryocytes.All rapidly dividing cells of the body (including skin, GI tract, bone
marrow) exhibit megaloblastic changes and anemia is only a manifestation
of a more generalized defect in DNA synthesis.
Pathogenesis of Neurological Changes in Vitamin B 12 Deficiency
Two mechanisms are responsible for neurologic changes seen of vitamin B12
deficiency. Deficiency of vitamin B12 causesImpairment in the conversion of homocysteine to methionine:
Methionine is required for the production of choline and choline
containing phospholipids. These are needed by the neuronal cells.Lack of adenosylcobalamin: It is a vitamin B12–containing cofactor
required for the conversion of methylmalonyl CoA to succinyl CoA. Lack
of this cofactor results in increased levels of methylmalonyl CoA and its
precursor, propionyl CoA. This causes production of non-physiologic fatty
acids and incorporated into neuronal lipids.
PERNICIOUS ANEMIA
Q. Discuss the etiology of Addisonian pernicious anemia.
Pernicious anemia (PA) is a chronic autoimmune disorder characterized by
atrophic gastritis with loss of parietal cells in the gastric mucosa which causes
failure of production of intrinsic factor. Absence of intrinsic factor results in
failure of absorption of dietary vitamin B12 and deficiency which eventually
produces megaloblastic macrocytic anemia.Age and gender: PA is a disease of older age and generally presents in
the fifth to eighth decades of life. Females are more involved than males
(F : M is 1.5 : 1).
Etiology

Pernicious anemia is an autoimmune disease causing destruction and
permanent atrophy of gastric mucous membrane. The evidences for
autoimmune etiology are:
It is associated with other autoimmune diseases like Graves’ disease,
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, vitiligo and Addison’s disease.
Microscopically, stomach shows chronic atrophic gastritis with damage
to gastric parietal cells.
Response to steroids.
Presence of autoantibodies in most of the patients. Two major types of
autoantibodies are found.
1. Anti-intrinsic factor (IF) antibody:
♦   Type I (blocking) antibody: This blocks the binding of vitamin B12
to IF and are present in 50–75% of the cases and can be detected in
both plasma and gastric juice.
♦   Type II (binding) antibody: It attaches to the IF–vitamin B12
complex and prevent their binding to receptors in the ileal mucosa.
They are present in about 40% of patients.
2. Parietal cell (type III) antibody: It is directed against α and β subunits
of the gastric proton pump (H+, K+-ATPase) in parietal cells but is
neither specific for PA nor other autoimmune disorders. They are found
in 90% of patients with PA as well as in older patients with chronic
nonspecific gastritis.
Role of Helicobacter pylori: H. pylori  gastritis may play role in PA.
There is a higher incidence of gastric carcinoma in patients with PA.
Incidence is higher in patients with blood group A.
Clinical Features of Macrocytic Anemias (Fig. 8.15)
Q. Discuss clinical manifestations of vitamin B12 deficiency/folate
deficiency/pernicious anemia.
Onset
Insidious and progress slowly unless halted by therapy.
Clinical features related to vitamin B12 deficiency:
Classic triad: Weakness, sore throat and paresthesias.

Tongue: Painful red ‘beefy’ tongue due to glossitis and atrophy of
papillae (Fig. 8.15). The patient complains of loss of taste and appetite.
Patients may have a lemon-yellow color due to combination of pallor and
mild jaundice caused by excess breakdown of hemoglobin.
Pigmentation: Pigmentation of knuckles and creases are common (Figs.
8.16A and B). The generally accepted mechanism of pigmentation is an
increase in the melanin synthesis. The other hypothesis proposed are (1)
Deficiency of vitamin B12 decreases the level of reduced glutathione, which
activate tyrosinase and thus leads to transfer to melanosomes. (2) Defect in
the melanin transfer between melanocytes and keratinocytes, resulting in
pigmentary incontinence.Neurological Features
Q. Write short essay/note on neurological complications of pernicious
anemia/megaloblastic anemia.
Peripheral nerves-peripheral neuropathy: Glove and stocking
distribution of numbness or paresthesia. This tingling begins in tips of toes
and progresses proximally and is bilateral and symmetric. Loss of ankle
reflexes.

Fig. 8.15:  Clinical features and laboratory findings in pernicious anemia.


Figs. 8.16A and B:  (A) Pigmentation of knuckles; (B) Pigmentation of creases.
Spinal cord: Subacute combined degeneration of the cord.
–   Posterior columns: Impaired/diminished vibration and position
sensation.
–   Corticospinal tracts: Upper motor neuron signs—ataxic, uncoordinated
gait. Bilateral extensor plantar with absent ankle jerks.
Cerebrum: Depression and loss of memory (dementia), optic atrophy.
A positive Romberg sign and Lhermitte sign may be elicited.
Folate deficiency in adults does not give rise to significant neurologic
findings.
Prematurely gray-haired.
Atherosclerosis: Serum homocysteine level is raised and is a risk factor for
atherosclerosis and thrombosis (myocardial infarction, stroke).
Pernicious anemia: Symptoms are same as those of vitamin B12 deficiency.
In addition:
Hypochlorhydria: Atrophic gastritis causes decreased secretion of
hydrochloric acid and IF. The symptoms include dyspepsia, postprandial
fullness and early satiety.
Clinical Features Related to Folate Deficiency
They are similar to those of vitamin B12 deficiency except for neurological
features.
Diagnosis/Laboratory Findings of Megaloblastic Anemia
Q . Discuss the diagnosis of megaloblastic anemias.
Q. Discuss the diagnosis of anemias due to vitamin B12 deficiency.
Q. Discuss the causes, clinical features/manifestations, diagnosis and
management of anemias due to folic acid/folate deficiency.
Q. Write short essay on the diagnosis of Addisonian pernicious anemia.
Blood findings in vitamin B12 (including pernicious anemia) and/or folic acid
deficiency are similar.

Common Findings
Peripheral blood
Q. Describe the peripheral blood and bone marrow picture in
megaloblastic anemia.
Hemoglobin and hematocrit (PCV): Reduced
Red cell indices: MCV raised  above 100 fL (normal 82–98 fL)
RBC, WBC and platelet count: All are reduced.
Peripheral smear (Fig. 8.17): Pancytopenia (decreased RBCs, WBCs
and platelets)
–   RBCs:
♦   Macrocytic and oval (egg-shaped macro-ovalocytes) and are
diagnostic.
♦   Marked variation in the size and shape of red cells
(anisopoikilocytosis).
♦   Evidence of dyserythropoiesis: Basophilic stippling, Cabot ring and
Howell-Jolly bodies.
–   WBCs:
♦   Decreased WBC count (leukopenia)
♦   Hypersegmented neutrophils  (more than five nuclear lobes): First
and specific morphological sign of megaloblastic anemia. These
neutrophils are also larger than normal.
–   Platelets: Decreased
Reticulocyte count: Normal or low. Reticulocytosis occurs in response to
very small doses of parenteral vitamin B12.
Bone marrow
Markedly hypercellular.
Megaloblastic type of erythropoiesis.
Granulocytic precursors display nuclear-cytoplasmic asynchrony in the
form of giant metamyelocytes and band forms.
Megakaryopoiesis: Normal or increased in number.
Bone marrow iron: Moderately increased.

Biochemical tests (Common for both vitamin B12 and folic acid deficiency)
Deoxyuridine suppression test: It is a sensitive measure of deficiency of
5, 10-methylene THF, which occurs in both folic acid and vitamin B12
deficiency.
Serum homocysteine levels are raised.
Serum bilirubin: Indirect bilirubin is mildly increased due to increased
breakdown of red cells in bone marrow and produces mild jaundice.
Serum iron and ferritin raised and iron binding capacity is reduced.
Plasma lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) is markedly increased.
Serum vitamin B12/folate decreased.
Fig. 8.17:  Peripheral blood smear showing macro-ovalocytes (short arrows) and hypersegmented
neutrophil (inset).
Diagnostic/Specific Tests for Vitamin B 12 Deficiency
Serum vitamin B12 levels: Reduced and levels are very low (<200 pg/
µL).
Serum methylmalonic acid (MMA) and homocysteine levels (Table 8.9):
Raised
Urinary excretion of methylmalonic acid: Raised.
Table 8.9: Test results on metabolites: Serum methylmalonic acid and total

homocysteine in megaloblastic anemia.
Methylmalonic acid
(Normal: 70–270 nM)Total homocysteine
(Normal: 5–14 μM)Diagnosis
Increased Increased Vitamin B 12 deficiency confirmed; folate
deficiency still possible (i.e. combined Vitamin
B12 plus folate deficiency possible)
Normal Increased Folate deficiency is likely; <5% may have
vitamin B 12 deficiency
Normal Normal Vitamin B 12 and folate deficiencies are excluded
Schilling test (refer below) for vitamin B12 absorption which was
discontinued in 2003, once provided invaluable information on the locus
and mechanism of cobalamin malabsorption.
Diagnostic/Specific Tests for Folic Acid Deficiency
RBC folic acid levels: Reduced
FIGLU in urine: Excessively excreted
Determining the Cause of the Vitamin (Folate/Vitamin B 12)
Deficiency
The cause of folate deficiency is usually determined from the history,
physical examination, and clinical features.
In adults, the cause of vitamin B12 deficiency is either due to vitamin B12
malabsorption or dietary deficiency of vitamin B12. To determine the basis
for malabsorption needs additional diagnostic tests (e.g. intestinal biopsy,
examination of stool for malabsorption or D. latum infestation) and
requires specific therapy (e.g. gluten-free diet, folate, antibiotics,
antihelminthics). A detailed dietary history or past medical history (e.g.
gastroduodenal disease, pancreatic insufficiency, impaired bowel motility,
or other autoimmune diseases) and physical examination can provide
additional clues for other causes.
Schilling test  for vitamin B12 absorption (Fig. 8.18)Q. Write short essay on Schilling test/vitamin B12 absorption test.
Use: Schilling test helps in distinguishing megaloblastic anemia due to IF

deficiency (pernicious anemia) from other causes of vitamin B12 deficiency.
It is diagnostic of PA but now very infrequently performed.

Fig. 8.18:  Stages of Schilling test.
Method and interpretation
Radioactive vitamin B12 (1 µg) is given orally to a fasting patient. This is

followed by non-radioactive 1000 µg of vitamin B12 intramuscularly. The
injected vitamin B12 saturates vitamin B12 binding proteins and flush out the
ingested radioactive vitamin B12 which will be excreted in urine. The urine is
collected for 24 hours.
Stage 1:
–   Normal persons excrete more than 10% of oral radioactive dose in 24
hour urine.
–   Patients with pernicious anemia excrete less than 5% of the oral dose.
Stage 2: If the test is abnormal
–   The test is repeated with addition of oral intrinsic factor to radioactive
vitamin B12.
–   If the urinary excretion is now normal, the diagnosis is intrinsic factor
deficiency either due to pernicious anemia or gastrectomy.
Stage 3: Giving pancreatic enzyme extracts with the oral vitamin B12
should guide towards pancreatic insufficiency if it corrects the
abnormality.
Stage 4:
–   If the excretion is still abnormal, the lesion must be in the terminal
ileum or there may be bacterial overgrowth. The bacterial overgrowth
may be corrected by a 7 day course of oral tetracycline/antibiotics. The
test is repeated after a course of oral tetracycline.
–   If the excretion returns to normal, it confirms that malabsorption of
vitamin B12 due to bacterial overgrowth in the intestine.
Specific diagnostic tests for pernicious anemiaSerological tests
–   Anti-intrinsic factor antibodies in serum (in 70% of patients; highly
specific for pernicious anemia)
–   Antiparietal cell antibodies (in 85–90%; less specific compared to anti-
intrinsic antibodies).
Achlorhydria with histamine stimulation.
Severe deficiency of intrinsic factor.
Other Nonspecific Tests

Serum gastrin raised
Pepsinogen I decreased
Gastric biopsy shows mucosal atrophy and inflammatory infiltrate of
lymphocytes and plasma cells.
Q. Discuss the management of megaloblastic macrocytic anemias.
Q. Discuss the management of Addisonian pernicious anemia.
Management of Megaloblastic Macrocytic Anemia
Treatment consists of treating the underlying cause, whenever possible.
Specific therapy
Treatment of underlying cause of vitamin B 12 or folate deficiency.
Vitamin B 12/Cobalamin deficiency
Vitamin B 12 therapy (cyanocobalamin, hydroxocobalamin or methylcobalamin may be used).
Dosage:
–   Initial dose: It is treated with six intramuscular injections of hydroxycobalamin 1000 μg given
at 3- to 7-day intervals.
–   Maintenance dose: Maintenance dose of 1000 μg to be given intramuscularly every 3 months
for rest of the patient’s life. Methylcobalamin, metabolically active form of vitamin B 12 can
also be used.
An aggressive scheme to replace vitamin B 12 rapidly is 1 mg of intramuscular cyanocobalamin
per day (week 1), 1 mg twice weekly (week 2), 1 mg/week for 4 weeks, and then 1 mg/month for
life.
Response:  Clinical improvement may occur within 48 hours (LDH and bilirubin will normalize)
and a reticulocytosis peak by the 3–4th day after therapy and may be as high as 50%. Anemia will
correct by 4–6 weeks. Improvement of the sensory polyneuropathy may take 6–12 months to
correct but longstanding spinal cord damage is irreversible. Hypokalemia during the initial week
of treatment as there is marked potassium uptake during production of new blood cells.Dimorphic anemia:  If there is associated iron deficiency, ferrous sulfate 200 mg thrice daily
orally should be started soon after the commencement of vitamin B 12 therapy.
Folate deficiency
Dosage: Oral dose of 5 mg folate (folic acid) daily for 3 weeks will treat acute deficiency and 5
mg once weekly is adequate maintenance therapy.
Folinic acid is of value to bypass the block of dihydrofolate reductase by methotrexate and
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
Congenital folate malabsorption arising from inadequate folate transport across the gastrointestinal
tract and blood-brain barrier responds to parenteral leucovorin in high doses.
Response is same as seen after treatment of vitamin B 12 deficiency.
Precaution: Large doses of folic acid alone should not be given to treat megaloblastic anemia
(such as pernicious anemia or other vitamin B 12 deficiency anemias) unless the serum vitamin
B12 level is known to be normal. If vitamin B 12 deficiency is present, it should be corrected first;

otherwise cobalamin neuropathy may be aggravated or precipitated despite a response of the
anemia of cobalamin deficiency to folate therapy.
Prophylactic folic acid in pregnancy:  Prophylactic folic acid in the dose of 400 μg daily is
recommended for all women planning a pregnancy to reduce the risk of fetal neural tube defects.
Supportive therapy
Blood transfusions: Transfusion is usually not necessary and not advisable. It should be given in
significantly symptomatic and severely anemic patients with angina or heart failure.
Other measures: Treatment of infection and physiotherapy in nervous system involvement.
Follow-up
Clinical and hematological examination should be carried out every 6 months.
Pernicious anemia: Carcinoma stomach, gastric carcinoids are more common in patients with
pernicious anemia and early detection is important.
Causes of Macrocytosis
Q. Enumerate the causes of macrocytosis/macrocytic anemia. Write
short note on macrocytic.
Macrocytes are large red blood cells with a diameter of more than 9 µ and
mean corpuscular volume of more than 95 fl. The macrocytic anemias can be
divided into megaloblastic and non-megaloblastic types, depending on the
appearance of developing red cell precursors in the bone marrow.
Megaloblastic Macrocytic Anemia
It is characterized by raised MCV with macrocytosis on the peripheral blood
and the presence of abnormal red precursors the bone marrow known as
megaloblasts. Causes of megaloblastic anemia include deficiency of vitamin
B12, folate or copper and drugs that interfere with purine or pyrimidine
metabolism (Box 8.3). The peripheral blood smear shows macro-ovalocytes
and hypersegmented neutrophils.Non-megaloblastic Macrocytic Anemia
It is characterized by a raised MCV with macrocytosis on the peripheral
blood film with a normoblastic rather than a megaloblastic bone marrow.
Common causes are listed in Table 8.9. These conditions are associated with
normal levels of vitamin B12 and folate.
HEMOLYTIC ANEMIAS

Q. Define and classify hemolytic anemia. Discuss the clinical features,
diagnosis and management of hemolytic anemias.
Definition
Hemolytic anemias are defined as anemias that result due to increase in the
rate of red cell destruction. The life span of red cells (normal life span is 90 –
120 days) is shortened.
Compensated Hemolytic Disease
Shortening of red cell survival may not always cause anemia as bone marrow
can compensate by increased production of red cells by six to eight times.
Classification of Hemolytic Anemias (Table 8.10)
Q. Write short essay/note on classification/causes of hemolytic anemia.
The hemolytic anemias are classified in a variety of ways.
1. Location of hemolysis: Depending upon the site of red cell destruction it
can be classified as intravascular and extravascular  hemolytic disorders.
2. Source of defect causing hemolysis: Those due to a defect intrinsic to the
red cell itself (intracorpuscular defect) or those due to an abnormality
outside the red cell (extracorpuscular mechanism).3. Mode of onset: Hereditary and acquired  disorders.
4. Clinical point of view: Acute or chronic.
Box 8.3: Causes of non-megaloblastic macrocytic anemia.
Physiological causes:
Pregnancy
Newborn
Pathological causes:
Alcohol excess
Chronic liver disease
Reticulocytosis
Hypothyroidism
Postsplenectomy
Myeloproliferative disorders
Hematological disorders
–   Aplastic anemia
–   Sideroblastic anemia
–   Pure red cell aplasia

Drugs
–   Azathioprine
–   Hydroxycarbamide, metformin, zidovudine, leflunomide
Table 8.10: Classification and causes of hemolytic anemia.
Hereditary hemolytic anemias Acquired hemolytic anemias
A. Defects in red cell membrane:
Hereditary spherocytosis
Hereditary elliptocytosis
Stomatocytosis
Abetalipoproteinemia (acanthocytosis)
B. Red cell enzyme deficiencies:
Pyruvate kinase deficiency
Hexokinase deficiency
Glucose-6-Phosphate dehydrogenase
deficiency (G-6-PD)
C. Defects in globin synthesis:
Hemoglobinopathies (abnormal hemoglobins)
Thalassemia—quantitative
hemoglobinopathies
Sickle cell syndromes—qualitative
hemoglobinopathies
Alpha thalassemia
Unstable hemoglobin diseaseA. Immunohemolytic anemias
Autoimmune hemolytic anemias
–   Due to warm antibodies: Idiopathic or
secondary
–   Due to cold antibodies: Cold agglutinin
disease, paroxysmal cold
hemoglobinuria
Hemolytic disease of the newborn
B. Fragmentation syndromes
Hemolytic uremic syndrome
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Prosthetic cardiac valves
C. Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
D. Drugs and chemicals
Drugs: For example, oxidant drugs,
primaquine and dapsone
Chemicals: For example, naphthalene,
nitrites and nitrates, oxidizing chemicals
E. Thermal injury: Burns
Clinical Features of Hemolytic Anemia
Symptoms/history
Mild jaundice
Symptoms due to anemia
Urine color
–   Urine passed appears normal in color (acholuric), but turns dark on
standing due to oxidation of urobilinogen to urobilin.
–   Black urine with hemoglobinuria seen in intravascular hemolysis (e.g.
malaria, mismatched blood transfusion, G6PD deficiency).
Infections

Splenic pain due to enlargement or infarction of spleen
Acute crisis due to sudden fall in hemoglobin and sometimes, fever, joint
pains and abdominal pain.
Symptoms due to pigment gallstones which develops as a complication of
chronic hemolysis.
Leg ulcers manifest in adult males especially in patients with hereditary
spherocytosis and sickle cell anemia.
Family history in congenital hemolytic anemias.
Physical Findings/Signs
Anemia
Mild jaundice
Splenomegaly in some cases of hemolytic anemia (e.g. thalassemia,
hereditary spherocytosis).
Chronic leg ulcers in some cases (e.g. sickle cell anemia).
Skeletal abnormalities: Expansion of bone marrow may develop in some
congenital hemolytic anemias (sickle cell anemia) due to increased
erythropoiesis. These manifests are enlargement of maxillary bones and
frontal bossing and malocclusion of the teeth due to overgrowth of upper
jaw (thalassemic facies).Signs of systemic diseases: Predisposing to hemolysis.
Signs of cholelithiasis: Cholecystitis.
Diagnosis of Hemolytic Anemias
Q. Write short essay on laboratory investigations/features of
hemolysis/hemolytic anemia.
Recognition of Hemolysis (Table 8.11 and Fig. 8.19)
Table 8.11: Summary of laboratory features of hemolytic anemia.
1. Features/consequences of increased RBC destruction/ breakdown
Anemia
Unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia (jaundice)
Increased urobilinogen in urine (resulting from bilirubin breakdown in the intestine) leading to
high-colored urine

Shortened red cell life span (demonstrated by 51 Cr-labeled red blood cells)
Other features
–   In extravascular hemolysis: Splenomegaly usual
–   In intravascular hemolysis
♦   Decreased plasma haptoglobin and hemopexin
♦   Increased plasma lactic dehydrogenase (LDH)
♦   Hemoglobinemia, hemoglobinuria, hemosiderinuria and methemoglobinemia (in some)
2. Consequences of increased RBC productionPeripheral smear:  Reticulocytosis
Bone marrow:  Erythroid hyperplasia
3. Morphological features of damaged red cells
Peripheral smear:  For example, microspherocytes, elliptocytes, red cell fragments
Features of increased RBC production: As a compensatory mechanism to
hemolysis, there is increased production of red cells.
Bone marrow shows compensatory erythroid hyperplasia
Peripheral smear  shows increased reticulocytes (reticulocytosis)
nucleated red cells and polychromasia. Other findings vary depending on
the cause are mentioned below.
Radiological changes: Hair on end appearance in skull radiograph
(thalassemia, sickle cell anemia).
Recognition of Cause of Hemolysis
Common tests:
–   Peripheral smear examination: Red cell morphology provides a clue
to the underlying hemolytic disorder like (1) spherocyte (hereditary
spherocytosis, autoimmune hemolytic anemia), (2) sickle cell (sickle
cell anemia), (3) target cell (thalassemia), (4) acanthocyte, (5)
schistocyte (Intravascular hemolysis-fragmented red cells, helmet cells,
triangular cells), (6) malarial parasite.
–   Coomb’s test
–   Osmotic fragility, sucrose lysis and Ham’s test
–   Heinz body preparation
–   Hemoglobin electrophoresis
–   High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)
–   Measurement of enzyme activity.

Specific tests: Identification of specific cause of hemolysis is dealt under
individual diseases.
DEFECTS IN HEMOGLOBIN PRODUCTION
Q. Write short note on classification of disorders of hemoglobin
(hemoglobinopathies/hereditary disorders of hemoglobin).
Hemoglobin defects may be in the form of production of abnormal
(qualitative) or reduced production (quantitative) of normal hemoglobin
(Table 8.12). The term hemoglobinopathy unless specified usually indicates a
qualitative hereditary disorder.
SICKLE CELL DISEASE
Q. Discuss the etiopathogenesis, clinical features, investigations and
management of sickle cell anemia.
Sickle cell disease (SCD) is an important group of autosomal recessive
hereditary disorder of hemoglobin characterized by production of defective
hemoglobin synthesis called sickle hemoglobin (HbS). HbS imparts sickle
shape to red cells on low oxygen tension or deoxygenation. The term sickle
cell disease includes all entities associated with sickling of hemoglobin
within the red blood cells. The major entities included are:Sickle cell anemia (SS) is a homozygous state in which both the β globin
chains are abnormal.
Sickle cell trait (AS) is a heterozygous state in which one gene is
defective for HbS (abnormal) while the other gene is for HbA (normal).
Compound heterozygous is characterized by both the β-globin chains
having different abnormalities, (e.g. Hb SC, HbS-β-thalassemia).

Fig. 8.19:  Mechanism and consequences of extravascular and intravascular hemolysis.
In India, it is seen in certain tribes of South India, Assam, Bihar and
Odisha.
Table 8.12: Classification of hemoglobin defects.
1. Qualitative defect in (structurally abnormal) hemoglobins
Hemoglobin S
Hemoglobin C
Hemoglobin D Punjab
2. Quantitative defect in hemoglobins
Thalassemias (α, β-thalassemia)
3. Combined qualitative and quantitative defects in hemoglobins

Hemoglobin E
Sickle-cell β-thalassemia
4. Acquired hemoglobinopathies
Methemoglobinemia due to toxic exposures
Carboxyhemoglobinemia
Etiology and Pathogenesis
Sickle cell anemia is caused by production of abnormal hemoglobin called
sickle hemoglobin (HbS). In HbS, there is an adenine (A) to thymidine (T)
substitution (GAG → GTG) in codon 6 of the β-globin gene. This point
mutation results in replacement of the normal glutamic acid residue by a
valine and alters the solubility or stability of the hemoglobin.
Pathogenesis
The change in the shape due to dehydration, partly caused by potassium
leaving the red cells via calcium activated potassium channels called the
Gárdos channel.
Deoxygenated HbS molecules are insoluble and polymerize to form
pseudocrystalline structures known as ‘tactoids’. RBCs become rigid,
deformed and assume a characteristic sickle/crescent shape (sickle-shaped
cells). Initially, on reoxygenation this process is reversible. But with repeated
episodes of sickling, the RBCs eventually lose their membrane flexibility and
become irreversibly sickled cells (ISC). Factors that favor and hinder
sickling are listed in Table 8.13.
Table 8.13: Factors affecting sickling.
Factors Favors sickling Hinders sickling
Other hemoglobins - HbA
- HbF
HbC -
Transit time in microvasculature Slowing of blood stream -
MCHC Increased MCHC Decreased MCHC
Intracellular pH Decreased pH -
Other factorsTemperature above 37 ºC-
Infections -
Oxygen tension Low High

Consequences of Sickling
Irreversibly sickled cells are dehydrated and dense and will not return to
normal when oxygenated. Sickling can produce:
Microvascular occlusions: Impaired passage of ISCs through the
microcirculation, produces obstruction of small vessels and leads to tissue
ischemia and infarction.Hemolytic anemia: Due to shortened survival of the sickle cells which
are destroyed by the reticuloendothelial system.
Clinical Features
Q. Write short essay/note on the complications of sickle cell anemia.
The clinical features change as life advances.
In Children
Infant till 3 months may be asymptomatic, because of the protective role
of HbF. Since, HbF disappears after 3rd month majority of cases present
after 3 months and before 1st year of life.Prone to infections: Children are susceptible to acute infections with
encapsulated organisms. Common infections are pneumococcal
pneumonia, meningitis due to S. pneumonia and osteomyelitis due to
Salmonella. Increased susceptibility to infections is because of
hypofunction of spleen and defects in the alternative complement pathway
which impair opsonization of encapsulated bacteria such as pneumococci
and Haemophilus influenzae . Septicemia and meningitis are the most
common causes of death in children. Increased frequency of osteomyelitis
is because of repeated bone infarcts which act as nidus for infection.In children, bone involvement  may resemble acute osteomyelitis. They
manifest as the hand-foot syndrome, dactylitis of the bones of the hands
or feet or both. It is due to microinfarcts in the carpal and tarsal bones.
Sequestration crisis: Usually occurs in children with chronically enlarged
but normal functioning spleen. Sudden trapping of blood in spleen or liver
causes rapid enlargement of the organ with resultant drop in hematocrit
and hypovolemic shock. This may require blood transfusions.Changes in spleen: Splenomegaly is observed during early childhood.
Repeated episodes of splenic infarct results in atrophy of the spleen

(autosplenectomy).
Acute chest syndrome can develop in both children and adults. It is due
to infection or infarction in the lung and presents with pain in the chest,
fever, respiratory distress and hypoxemia.
Others include acute coronary syndrome and stroke. Chronic hypoxia in
children is responsible for generalized impairment of growth and
development.
In Adults (Fig. 8.20)
Anemia: Patients develop severe hemolytic anemia which is exacerbated
by secondary folate deficiency. Chronic anemia presents with fatigue,
frequent infections, cardiomegaly and systolic murmurs. Chronic
hemolytic anemia causes increased levels of unconjugated (indirect)
bilirubin, which predisposes to development of pigmented bilirubin
gallstones. Cholelithiasis may lead to cholecystitis.Q. Write short essay/note on sickle cell crises.
Crises: Irreversibly sickled cells have a shortened survival and plug
vessels in the microcirculation. Any new syndrome or episode that
develops rapidly in sickle cell anemia is termed crises. The protracted
course of sickle cell anemia is frequently exacerbated by a variety of
crises. Four types of crises are encountered. These are:
–   Infarction (sickling) crisis (vaso-occlusive crisis): Due to blockage of
microcirculation by sickled red cells causes hypoxic injury and
infarction.
♦   Most common and the hallmark of sickle cell disease.
♦   Clinically presents with acute, severe pain in the affected region. It
commonly involves bones, lungs, liver and spleen.
♦   Bone: Sudden attacks of bone pain are due to ischemia and
infarction. Avascular necrosis of the head of femur is also common.
♦   Lung: involvement presents with fever, cough, chest pain and
pulmonary infarcts and known as acute chest syndrome
(dangerous). These are sometimes initiated by a simple lung
infection.
♦   Spleen: Acute abdominal pain caused by infarcts of spleen and leads
to autosplenectomy.

♦   Other sites of infarction: Mesenteric infarction results in acute
abdominal pain, cerebral infarctions result in hemiplegia, infarction
of renal papillae results in hematuria. And retinal microinfarcts
result in loss of vision.
–   Aplastic crisis: Temporary suppression of bone marrow erythropoiesis
may develop due to an acute infection of erythroid progenitor cells by
parvovirus B19.
–   Hemolytic crisis is characterized by episodes of increased
sequestration and destruction of red cells. It presents with marked
increase in hemolysis with a sudden lowering of hemoglobin, rapid
enlargement of liver and spleen and reticulocytosis.
–   Sequestration crisis (described above).

Fig. 8.20: Various effects of vascular occlusion and hemolysis in sickle cell anemia.
Other crisis encountered rarely is hypoplastic crisis and megaloblastic
crisis (due to inadequate folate).

Q. Write short essay/note on long-term complications of sickle cell
anemia.
Described in Table 8.14.
Investigations
Evidences of hemolysis (refer page 572)
Blood count: Hb is in the range 6–8 g/dL with a high reticulocyte count
(10–20%).
Peripheral smear: The characteristic red cell which appears in smear is
the sickle cell (Fig. 8.21).  These appear as long, curved cells with pointed
ends. Features of hyposplenism include: Howell-Jolly bodies (small
nuclear remnants), target cells (due to red cell dehydration) and
ovalocytes.ESR is low because sickle cells do not form rouleaux.
Sickling test is induced by adding a reducing (oxygen-consuming) agent
like 2% sodium metabisulfite or sodium dithionite to blood sample.
Sickle solubility test: A mixture of HbS in a reducing solution (e.g.
sodium dithionite) gives a turbid appearance because of precipitation of
HbS, whereas normal Hb gives a clear solution.Hemoglobin electrophoresis: There is no Hb-A, 80–95% Hb-SS and 2–
20% HbF. HbS is slow moving hemoglobin compared to HbA and HbF. In
sickle cell trait (heterozygous state) Hb-S is 20–40% and the rest is Hb-A.Tests for iron overload: Serum ferritin levels, transferrin saturation, liver
iron concentration using liver biopsy specimen, measurement of liver iron
using MRI.Prenatal diagnosis can be done by analysis of fetal DNA obtained by
amniocentesis or chorionic villous biopsy.

Fig. 8.21: Peripheral blood smear with sickle cells (arrows).
Table 8.14: Long-term complications of sickle cell anemia.
Impaired growth and development  with low weight and delayed sexual maturation
Chronic infarcts of bones
Infections of bones (Salmonella osteomyelitis), lungs, kidneys (pyelonephritis, chronic
tubulointerstitial nephritis)
Leg ulcers
Cardiac: Cardiomegaly, arrhythmias, myocardial infarctions and iron overload cardiomyopathy
Neurological:  Transient ischemic attacks, seizures, cerebral infarction, cerebral hemorrhage and
coma
Cholelithiasis
Liver:  Chronic hepatomegaly, liver dysfunction.
Priapism
Iron overload  due to repeated transfusions
Eye:  Background retinopathy, proliferative retinopathy, vitreous hemorrhages and retinal
detachments
Pregnancy: Spontaneous abortion, intrauterine growth retardation, preeclampsia and fetal death
Management
General Measures
Sickle cell disease is a chronic disorder which requires following general measures:
Good nutrition and folic acid supplementation (5 mg daily) to be given to all patients with
hemolysis.
Timely immunizations  against Streptococcus pneumoniae, seasonal influenza, Neisseria

meningitidis , Haemophilus influenzae type B, and hepatitis B virus.
Antibiotic prophylaxis with phenoxymethyl penicillin 500 mg daily starting at the age of 2
months. Older children do not routinely need continued antibiotic prophylaxis.
Precipitating factors should be avoided or treated quickly. These include avoidance of cold,
dehydration and hypoxia.
Prevention, prompt identification and treatment of infections with antibiotics.
Anemia
Transfusions should only be given for clear indications. Transfusion should not be given to patient
with chronic stable anemia, those having minor surgery or having painful episodes without
complications.Indications for blood transfusion:  Transfusion is required to increase the oxygen carrying
capacity, replace the rigid, sickle-shaped RBCs with normal cells and to restore blood flow. Acute
transfusions with packed RBCs can be life-saving and chronic transfusions reduce the incidence
and severity of most complications.
–   Heart failure, TIAs, strokes, acute chest syndrome and severe anemia due to aplastic crises and
acute splenic sequestration.
–   Repeated transfusions may be used to reduce the proportion of circulating HbS to less than
20% to prevent sickling, before elective operations and during pregnancy. Chronic RBC
transfusion reduces the chance of recurrent ischemic stroke.
–   Exchange transfusions may be necessary in patients with severe or recurrent crises or before
emergency surgery. Whether exchange transfusion is preferable to simple transfusion in the
acute chest syndrome, stroke or other acute complications has not been established by clinical
trials.
–   Infarction crises are managed with hydration, oxygen, analgesics and transfusion with RBC
concentrate in selected cases.Iron overload:  With repeated transfusion, iron overload inevitably develops and can result in
heart and liver failure and other complications. Iron overload is treated by using iron chelators
(deferoxamine or deferasirox).
Hydroxycarbamide (hydroxyurea) : May be used as therapy for patients with severe symptoms.
Hydroxyurea (10–30 mg/kg per day) increases fetal hemoglobin and suppress the neutrophil and
reticulocyte counts (which may play a major role in the pathogenesis of sickle cell crisis).
Hydroxycarbamide reduces the episodes of pain, the acute chest syndrome, and the need for blood
transfusions.
Senicapoc, a Gardos channel inhibitor, prevented erythrocyte dehydration in clinical trials of patients
with sickle cell disease. This drug has antiplasmodium activity.
Acute Painful Crisis
Require supportive therapy with intravenous fluids, oxygen, antimicrobial agents and adequate
analgesia. Acute severe pain is treated with narcotic, analgesia (morphine) and milder pain can be
relieved by codeine, paracetamol and NSAIDs. Inhaled nitric oxide inhibits platelet function, reduces
vascular adhesion of red cells and is also a vasodilator. It can provide short-term pain relief and
shown to reduce opiate requirements in acute painful episodes. But, should be restricted to experts to
avoid hypoxia and respiratory depression. Nasal oxygen should be employed as appropriate to protect
arterial saturation.
Acute chest syndrome is treated with antibiotics, maintenance of arterial oxygenation, pain relief,
bronchodilators, and if required, exchange transfusion.
Chronic leg ulcers:  Elevation of limb, daily dressings with zinc sulfate and exchange transfusion in

extreme cases.
Curative
Bone marrow/stem cell transplantation:  in children and adolescents younger than 16 years of age
who have severe complications (strokes, recurrent chest syndrome, or refractory pain) can provide
definitive cure.
Gene therapy  is intensively pursued, but no safe measures are currently available.
HEREDITARY SPHEROCYTOSIS
Q. Write short note on hereditary spherocytosis (HS).
Most common inherited hemolytic anemia in adults.
Autosomal dominant inheritance in more than 75% cases.
Defect in the RBC membrane is due to cytoskeleton protein (e.g. ankyrin,
band 3, spectrin or band protein 4.2) deficiency.
This results in red cells losing part of the cell membrane as they pass
through the spleen and assume spheroidal shape (spherocytes) that are less
deformable (rigid) and more susceptible to osmotic lysis.
Red cells have decreased life span of as low as 10 to 20 days.
Clinical Features
Disease may present during anytime from the neonatal period to
adulthood.
Family history: Most (75%) HS are inherited as autosomal dominant trait
and there is strong family history of anemia, jaundice, splenomegaly and
cholelithiasis.Anemia is usually mild to moderate
Jaundice: Intermittent attacks of jaundice
Splenomegaly:  Moderate splenic enlargement is characteristic and
constant feature.
Children: Growth retardation due to hemolysis and bone changes due to
marrow hyperplasia.
Adults: Anemia, intermittent jaundice and moderate splenomegaly.
Complications of hereditary spherocytosis are listed in Box 8.4.
Box 8.4:  Complications of hereditary spherocytosis.
Cholelithiasis (pigment gallstones)

Chronic leg ulcers
Aplastic crises due to parvovirus B19 infection
Hemolytic crises (rare)
Investigations
Anemia: Usually mild, but occasionally can be severe.
Peripheral blood film shows spherocytes (Fig. 8.22) and reticulocytes.
MCHC is increased .
Demonstration of a hemolytic state: Raised serum bilirubin and urinary
urobilinogen.
Specific diagnostic tests are listed in Box 8.5. Increased osmotic fragility
may be absent in mild cases and may be positive in autoimmune hemolytic
anemia.Negative Coombs test.
Strong family history will be present.
Box 8.5:  Specific diagnostic tests for hereditary spherocytosis.
Osmotic fragility testing
Ektacytometry
Acidified glycerol lysis test
Cryohemolysis test
Eosin-5-maleimide binding test
Fig. 8.22:  Peripheral blood smear with numerous spherocytes (arrow) in hereditary spherocytosis.

Treatment
Splenectomy is the treatment of choice and should not be done before the age of 6 years.
Splenectomy corrects the anemia and its complications, but increases the risk of infections. Hence,
it should be preceded by pneumococcal  and Haemophilus influenzae immunization, and followed
by lifelong penicillin prophylaxis).
Folic acid supplementation in patients without splenectomy.
Regular blood transfusions are required in few patients with severe disease.
Cholecystectomy is indicated only for symptomatic gallstones.
THALASSEMIA SYNDROME
Q. Write short essay/note on definition, common forms and genetics of
thalassemias.
Thalassemia syndrome is a heterogeneous group of inherited disorders which
result from reduced or absence of synthesis of one of the globin chains (either
α or β globin chain).
Classification
Thalassemic syndromes are mainly classified into two main types depending
on the defective globin chain α or β thalassemia (Box 8.6). Mode of
inheritance is autosomal recessive. Rarely, HBB gene mutation is inherited as
autosomal dominant.
Genetics
β-thalassemia syndromes are classified into 3 types depending on the
genetic defect (β+ or β0): 1. β-Thalassemia major also called Cooley’s anemia, Mediterranean
anemia, transfusion-dependent thalassemia is the homozygous disorder
and is the most severe form of β-Thalassemia. There is either no
production of β-chains (β0) or β-chain production is markedly reduced (β
+). The anemia is of severe degree and is transfusion dependent. There is
high level of HbF in the blood.
2. β-Thalassemia intermedia is the double heterozygous state and anemia is
moderately severe and not transfusion dependent.
3. β-Thalassemia minor or β-thalassemia trait is the heterozygous state
and is asymptomatic with mild anemia.
Box 8.6:  Classification of thalassemic syndromes.

α-thalassemia (synthesis of  α chains is affected)
Silent carrier state
α-Thalassemia trait
Hemoglobin H disease
Hydrops fetalis (Hb Barts)
β-thalassemia (synthesis of  β chains is affected)
β-thalassemia minor (heterozygous state)
β-thalassemia intermedia
β-thalassemia major (Cooley’s anemia homozygous state)
α-Thalassemia Syndromes
Each cell has four genes coding for α-globin, two on each chromosome. Each
of the four α-globin genes normally contributes 25% of the total α-globin
chains. Severity of α-thalassemia depends on the number of α-globin genes
deleted or affected. Deleted genes may vary from 1 to 4.
Silent carrier state develops with deletion of one α-chain gene
α-thalassemia trait: Due to deletion of two α-genes
HbH disease: With deletion of three α-genes
Hb Barts (hydrops fetalis): Develops if all four genes are absent. It is incompatible with life and
the infants are either stillborn or die shortly after birth. They are pale, edematous, and have large
liver and spleen.
Classical thalassemia syndromes (genotypes and laboratory findings) are
presented in Table 8.15.
Table 8.15: Classical thalassemia syndromes (genotypes and laboratory
findings).
Syndrome Genotype Typical findings on CBC Hemoglobin analysis
(HPLC or electrophoresis)
Alpha thalassemias (reduction in alpha globin chains)
Hydrops fetalis
with Hb Barts(−€−€/ −€−€) Severe microcytic anemia
with hydrops fetalis; usually
fatal in uteroHb Barts (γ globin
tetramers); Hb Portland
(embryonic hemoglobin); no
HbF, HbA or HbA 2
HbH disease (α€− / − −)
  or
(αt −€/ −€−)*Moderate microcytic anemia HbH (up to 30%); HbA 2 (up
to 4%)
Minor (α€−€/α€−€)
  orMild microcytic anemia Hb Barts (3 to 8%)

(α α /−€−)
Silent carrier (α α /α −) Normal hemoglobin, normal
MCVNormal
Beta thalassemias (reduction in beta globin chains)
Major
(transfusion-
dependent)β0 / β0
  or
β0 / β+ Severe microcytic anemia
with target cells (typical Hb
3 to 4 g/dL)HbA 2 (5% or more); HbF
(up to 95%); no HbA
Intermedia (non-
transfusion-
dependent)β+ / β+ Moderate microcytic anemia HbA 2 (4% or more); HbF
(up to 50%)
Minor (also called
trait or carrier)β / β0
  or
β / β+Mild microcytic anemia HbA 2 (4% or more); HbF
(up to 50%)
β-THALASSEMIA MAJORQ. Discuss the clinical features, salient investigations, diagnosis and
management of β-thalassemia major (Cooley’s anemia).
β-thalassemia major (Mediterranean or Cooley’s anemia) is the
homozygous form of β-thalassemia characterized by absent or reduced
synthesis of β-chain.
It is most common in Mediterranean countries, parts of Africa and
Southeast Asia. In India, it is common among certain communities (e.g.
Sindhi, Punjabi, Gujarati, Parsee) in North India and less common in
South India.Anemia is produced due to diminished synthesis of HbA, ineffective
erythropoiesis and extravascular hemolysis.
Consequences of ineffective erythropoiesis
–   Marked erythroid hyperplasia: Severe hemolytic anemia stimulates
erythropoietin (EPO) production by kidney leading to marrow
erythroid hyperplasia.
–   Changes in the bone: Thalassemic facies and hair on end appearance of
skull X-ray.
–   Extramedullary hematopoiesis.
Clinical Features

Severe anemia: Infants with thalassemia major are well at birth but
develop moderate to severe anemia 6 to 9 months after birth, when
hemoglobin synthesis switches from HbF to HbA.
Retardation of growth and development: Untreated/untransfused
children fail to thrive (growth retardation) and die early within 4–5 years
of age from the effects of anemia. They are susceptible to recurrent
bacterial infections.Changes in bone: Those who survive longer, bone marrow hyperplasia
cause expansion and widening of marrow and give the classical X-ray
changes.
–   Thalassemic (Chipmunk) facies (Fig. 8.23): Due to enlargement and
distortion of craniofacial bones (frontal bossing of the skull, prominent
malar eminence, depression of bridge of nose, and hypertrophy of the
maxillae, which tends to expose the upper teeth).
–   Hair on end (‘crew-cut’) appearance (Fig. 8.24): In the skull X-ray
due to new bone formation.Splenomegaly may be massive and enlarges up to 1,500 g due to
hyperplasia and extramedullary hematopoiesis.
Liver (hepatomegaly) and lymph nodes also may show extramedullary
hematopoiesis.
Hemosiderosis: Although blood transfusions improve the anemia but iron
overload will lead to hemosiderosis and secondary hemochromatosis. This
may be due to increased gastrointestinal absorption of iron. It damages
organs like heart, liver and pancreas.
–   Cardiac hemosiderosis results in arrhythmias, heart blocks and
congestive heart failure.
–   Hepatic hemosiderosis results in cirrhosis
–   Pancreatic hemosiderosis results in diabetes.
–   Pituitary: Leads to hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.Treated patients can survive beyond 40 years of age.

Fig. 8.23:  Chipmunk facies in thalassemia.
Investigations
Peripheral smear (Fig. 8.25):  Marked microcytic hypochromic anemia
with moderate to marked anisocytosis and poikilocytosis. Many target
cells (hemoglobin collects in the center of RBCs) and nucleated red cells.
HbF level is increased  (30–92%) on hemoglobin electrophoresis.
Markedly reduced or absent hemoglobin A (HbA).
Osmotic fragility test shows increased resistance to hemolysis.
Skull radiograph shows a ‘hair on end’/crew cut appearance.
Evidence of thalassemia minor in both parents.
Red cell distribution width (RDW) within normal limits (in contrast to
iron deficiency anemia).
Management
Aims of treatment:  To suppress ineffective erythropoiesis, prevent deformities of bone and allow
normal activity and development. Blood transfusions may be required every 4–6 weeks. Hyper
transfusion  to maintain Hb level between 10–12 g/dL is probably adequate. It decreases the effect
of chronic anemia and prevents abnormal growth and development. Super-transfusion  wherein
Hb level is maintained at 12 g/dL is designed to completely suppress hematopoiesis.
Maintenance of Hb level:  Long-term folic acid supplement and regular blood transfusions to

keep the Hb >10 g/dL.
Treatment of iron overload: The iron-chelating agent, desferrioxamine (administered
parenterally) is indicated if serum ferritin >1500 µg/L. Ascorbic acid 200 mg daily along with
desferrioxamine increases the urinary excretion of iron in response to desferrioxamine.
Deferiprone and deferasirox are oral iron chelators.
Splenectomy is indicated in children with massive symptomatic splenomegaly and those with
progressively increasing requirement of blood transfusion or hypersplenism.
Bone marrow transplantation  in young patients.
Management of associated complications:  For example, congestive heart failure and
endocrinopathies.
β-Thalassemia Minor (Trait)
Q. Write short essay/note on thalassemia minor (trait) and thalassemia
intermedia.
β-thalassemia minor is more common than β-thalassemia major.
It is a common carrier (heterozygous) state and is usually asymptomatic.
Anemia is mild or absent.
Peripheral blood smear shows severe microcytic and hypochromic red
cells with target cells. It may be confused with iron deficiency.
Serum ferritin and the iron stores are normal.
Hb electrophoresis usually shows a raised HbA2 (3.5–7.5%) and often a
raised HbF.
Iron should not be given to these patients unless there is associated iron
deficiency.
Genetic counseling to prevent transmission of carrier state from both
parents.
Prenatal diagnosis by chorionic villi biopsy at 11 weeks.
It may be associated with other hemoglobin abnormalities. Examples,
HbS/β-thalassemia, HbC/β-thalassemia, HbE/β-thalassemia.

Fig. 8.24: Skull X-ray showing crew-cut appearance due to new bone formation.
Fig. 8.25: Peripheral blood smear in β-thalassemia showing target cell (arrows).
β-Thalassemia Intermedia
Clinical entity in which patients have a clinical spectrum intermediate
between thalassemia trait and thalassemia major.

Patients are anemic and generally have mild to moderate anemia (Hb 7–9
g/dL).
Not transfusion dependent.
Mild splenomegaly, bone deformities, gallstones and chronic leg ulcers
may be seen.
Folic acid supplementation should be given.
Fig. 8.26: Role of G6PD against injury by oxidants.
GLUCOSE-6-PHOSPHATE DEHYDROGENASE
(G6PD) DEFICIENCY
Q. Discuss the etiology, precipitating causes, clinical features,
investigations and management of glucose-6-phosphate
dehydrogenase (G6PD) deficiency.
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD) is the initial and rate-
limiting step in the hexose monophosphate (HMP) shunt of the Embden-
Meyerhof pathway.G6PD is the only source of NADPH and NADPH is required for the

generation of glutathione (GSH), which protect red cells from oxidative
stress (Fig. 8.26).
G6PD-deficient patients may develop acute hemolytic anemia after
exposure to any oxidative stress.
G6PD deficiency is an X-linked disorder and is the most common enzyme
deficiency.
RBCs deficient in G6PD are unable to keep glutathione in reduced state.
These RBCs are susceptible to injury by oxidants of both exogenous and
endogenous origin.More than four hundred G6PD genetic variants are known, but most are
harmless. The three common variants are:
–   G6PD A: The minus sign indicates absence of enzyme activity.
Hemolysis develops when exposed to oxidant drugs (primaquine) or
infections. The hemolysis is mild to moderate and is limited to the
older RBCs.
–   G6PD (B-)  or G6PD Mediterranean/Wild type: It is prevalent in the
Middle East and is the severe form of deficiency. This is the most
common variant seen in India. Other variants in India include G6PD
Kerala-Kalyan, and G6PD Odisha.
–   G6PD Canton  seen in Chinese.
Clinical FeaturesMost patients with G6PD deficiency remain clinically asymptomatic;
however, all of them have an increased risk of developing clinically
significant syndromes: (1) acute hemolytic anemia (AHA), (2) neonatal
jaundice (NNJ), and rarely, (3) Chronic non-spherocytic hemolytic anemia
(CNSHA).Acute hemolytic anemia: Due to intravascular hemolysis is the most
dramatic clinical presentation of G6PD deficiency. It develops after
exposure to an oxidative stress and the triggers include:
1. Drugs: Antimalarials (primaquine, quinine, chloroquine), sulfonamides
(sulfamethoxazole), antibacterial/antibiotics (cotrimoxazole,
nitrofurantoins), antipyretics/analgesics (acetanilide phenazopyridine)
dapsone, quinidine, methylene blue, nitrofurantoins, etc.
2. Fava beans.
3. Infections: Viral and bacterial.

The exposure to triggering agents produces hemolytic attack with rapid
development of anemia and hemoglobinuria (cola colored urine). Rarely
acute renal failure may develop. The onset can be extremely abrupt,
especially following ingestion of the broad beans (favism) in children.
Neonatal jaundice is a feature of Mediterranean type. Hemolytic anemia
is very rarely severe. Jaundice may be due to decreased hepatic
elimination of bilirubin. Severe neonatal jaundice if not adequately treated
with phototherapy may result in kernicterus or even death.Chronic nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia (CNSHA): Develops in very
small minority of patients. Such patient is always a male and usually has a
history of severe neonatal jaundice, chronic anemia. The degree of chronic
anemia is variable and some patients have may require intermittent
transfusions. They have reticulocytosis, gallstones and splenomegaly.
Hemolysis is mainly extravascular.
G6PD deficiency (African variety) has a protective effect againstPlasmodium falciparum.
Laboratory Findings (Investigations)
Evidence of intravascular hemolysis: Raised unconjugated bilirubin,
hemoglobinemia, hemoglobinuria, high LDH, and low or absent plasma
haptoglobin.Anemia: Usually range from moderate to extremely severe. It is due to
both intravascular and extravascular hemolysis.
Peripheral blood film:
–   Normocytic and normochromic with anisocytosis, polychromasia
(reticulocytosis), poikilocytes and spherocytes.
–   Bite (blister) cells are red cells in which parts of them appear bitten
away.
–   Heinz bodies consist of membrane-bound precipitates of denatured
hemoglobin (methemoglobin) and represents oxidative damage. They
are seen as dark inclusions within red cells and can be demonstrated by
supravital staining with methyl violet.Confirmation of diagnosis: By estimating G6PD activity of the red cell.
This should be estimated several days after the acute hemolytic episode.
This is because if done during or immediately after acute hemolysis may
give a falsely normal value as the young red cells and reticulocytes have

near normal G6PD levels.
Treatment (management) of G6PD deficiency
Removal of the triggering agent  and avoiding its further exposure to triggering factors in
previously screened patients. Once cause is recognized, in most cases no specific treatment is
required. Management of neonatal jaundice is similar to any other cause of neonatal
hyperbilirubinemia.
Supportive therapy for anemia:
–   Blood transfusion
–   Regular folic acid supplements in CNSHA
Treatment of infection and genetic counseling.
MISCELLANEOUS ANEMIAS
Q. Write short essay/note on the causes and management of normocytic
anemia.
Normocytic Normochromic Anemia
Normocytic, normochromic anemia is characterized by normal size of the
RBCs and normal MCV (Table 8.16).
Table 8.16: Various causes of normocytic, normochromic anemia.
Decreased red cell production Increased red cell loss or destruction
Anemia of chronic disease
Chronic renal failure
Chronic liver disease
Endocrine disorders
–   Hypopituitarism
–   Hypothyroidism
–   Hypoadrenalism
Hematological disorders
–   Marrow hypoplasia or aplasia
–   Myeloproliferative neoplasms
–   Myelofibrosis
–   Sideroblastic anemiaAcute blood loss
Hypersplenism
Hematological disorders
–   Hemoglobinopathies (sickle cell disease)
–   Hereditary spherocytosis
–   Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase
(G6PD) deficiency
–   Microangiopathic anemias [disseminated
intravascular coagulation (DIC),
thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura,
hemolytic uremic syndromes]
–   Autoimmune hemolytic anemia
–   Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
Expansion of plasma volume: Pregnancy
Management:  Treatment of the underlying disease.

Differential Diagnosis of Hypochromic Microcytic Anemias
(Table 8.17)
Q. Write short note on causes of microcytic hypochromic anemia. How
will you differentiate various causes of hypoch-romic microcytic
anemias?
Table 8.17: Various differentiating features of hypochromic microcytic
anemias.
Iron deficiency
anemiaThalassemia trait Anemia of
chronic diseaseSideroblastic
anemia
MCV Reduced Very low for
degree of anemiaLow normal or
normalLow in inherited
type but often
raised in acquired
type
Serum iron
(normal 60–170
µg/dL)Reduced (<30
µg/dL)Normal to high Reduced (<50
µg/dL)Raised
Serum TIBC (total
iron binding
capacity) (normal
300–350 µg/dL)Raised (>350
µg/dL)Normal Reduced (<300
µg/dL)Normal
Serum ferritin
(normal 15–300
µg/dL)Reduced (<15
µg/dL)Normal (50–30
µg/dL)Normal or raised
(30–200 µg/L)Raised
Serum soluble
transferrin
receptorsIncreased Normal or raised Normal Normal or raised
Iron in marrow Absent Present Present Present
Iron in
erythroblastsAbsent Present Absent or reduced Ring forms
Hemoglobin A 2
(normal <3%)Reduced Increased Normal Reduced
Red cell
distribution width
(RDW)High Normal Normal High
Sideroblastic AnemiasQ. Write short essay/note on sideroblastic anemias.

Definition
Sideroblastic anemias are rare inherited or acquired disorders of refractory
anemia, characterized by:
A dimorphic peripheral blood picture. Microcytic hypochromic red cells in
hereditary form and macrocytic in the acquired forms of the disease mixed
with normochromic cells.Presence of ring sideroblasts, excess storage iron in the bone marrow and
increased serum iron concentration. The diagnostic feature is the presence
of ring sideroblasts in the bone marrow. The iron-laden mitochondria
surround the nucleus of erythroblasts and appear as the pathognomonic
‘rings’ of iron granules with Prussian blue staining (Perls’ reaction).Tiny iron-containing inclusions called as Pappenheimer bodies in the red
blood cells (stain positively by Prussian blue staining).
Ineffective erythroid hyperplasia due to non-viable sideroblasts.
Classification of Sideroblastic Anemia (Box 8.7)
Treatment
Withdrawal of causative agent: Some patients respond when the drugs, toxins or alcohol are
withdrawn.
Occasional cases may responds to pyridoxine or folic acid.
Supportive treatment with transfusions.
Erythropoietin.
Microcytosis is often seen in hereditary forms, but normochromic,
normocytic or even macrocytic RBCs may be seen, especially in the setting
of myelodysplasia or in a rare X-linked hereditary form known as Pearson’s
syndrome.
Box 8.7: Classification of sideroblastic anemia.
Inherited sideroblastic anemiaX-linked disease—transmitted by females
Acquired sideroblastic anemia
Primary: Myelodysplasia
Secondary
–   Drugs, e.g. isoniazid, cycloserine, chloramphenicol, busulfan, D-penicillamine
–   Alcohol abuse
–   Lead toxicity
–   Myeloproliferative neoplasms

–   Myeloid leukemia
–   Primary pyridoxine deficiency
–   Others (e.g. rheumatoid arthritis, carcinoma)

Hereditary Sideroblastic Anemias
Hereditary sideroblastic anemias comprise a clinically, genetically and
hematologically heterogeneous group of rare disorders. It may be inherited as
X-linked or an autosomal (dominant or recessive) disorder. These patients
generally have low levels of δ-aminolevulinic acid synthase (ALAS) enzyme
in the normoblasts leading to defective synthesis of hemoglobin.
Paroxysmal Nocturnal Hemoglobinuria
Q. Write short essay/note on paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
(PNH).
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH) is a rare acquired non-
malignant, genetic defect due to mutation in the hematopoietic stem cell.
These clone of red cells are particularly sensitive to destruction by
activated complement. Platelets and granulocytes are also affected and there
may be thrombocytopenia and neutropenia.
Etiology and Pathogenesis
The stem cells and their progeny have deficient synthesis of
glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) linked proteins namely (1) decay –
accelerating factor or CD55, (2) membrane inhibitor of reactive lysis or
CD59. This is most important and a potent inhibitor of C3 and prevents
activation of the alternative complement pathway on their membrane. In
PNH, the red cells are abnormally sensitive to complement-mediated
intravascular hemolysis. Severity of hemolysis is proportional to the number
of these abnormal red cells. The molecular basis of PNH is the mutations in
the pig-A  (phosphatidylinositol glycan protein A) gene responsible for
synthesis of the GPI anchor.
Clinical FeaturesMainly seen in adults, usually in middle age.
Both sexes equally affected.
Intravascular hemolysis: Characteristically, only the urine voided at
night (nocturnal) and in the morning on waking is dark in color. The
hemolysis is due to reduced pH of blood during sleep which enhances the
activity of complement. Hemoglobin in acidic urine is converted into acid

hematin which colors the urine dark brown. Urinary iron loss may be
sufficient to cause iron deficiency. Other features include: abdominal
pain/dysphagia, erectile dysfunction, pulmonary hypertension and renal
insufficiency.Mild jaundice and mild hepatosplenomegaly often present.
Thrombosis: Very common involving the hepatic (Budd-Chiari
syndrome), portal or cerebral veins is often the leading cause of death.
May begin or progress to aplastic anemia.
Diagnosis
Peripheral smear: Anemia, reticulocytosis, varying degrees of
thrombocytopenia and leukopenia (pancytopenia).
Features of intravascular hemolysis like raised bilirubin,
hemoglobinemia, hemoglobinuria and hemosiderinuria are present.
Bone marrow is sometimes hypoplastic (or even aplastic) despite
hemolysis.
Diagnosis is confirmed by Ham’s test and sucrose lysis test. These tests
cannot reliably detect small populations of affected red cells.
–   Ham’s acidified serum test: Checks whether red blood cells become
more fragile when they are placed in mild acid. Ham test can also be
positive in congenital dyserythropoietic anemia.
–   Sucrose hemolysis test: PNH patient’s red cell undergoes lysis when
incubated low-tonic-strength solution of sugar sucrose. It can be
positive in megaloblastic anemia and autoimmune hemolytic anemia.Flow cytometry: Detects red cells that are deficient in GPI-linked
proteins (CD55 and CD59). It is a rapid and sensitive test for diagnosis.
NAP score: Neutrophil alkaline phosphatase (NAP) score is reduced
(normal 40 to 100), because NAP is a GPI linked protein.
Treatment
Supportive measures: Blood transfusions (for patients with severe anemia) and control of
infections.
Iron therapy often necessary due to loss in urine.
Anti-complement therapy: Eculizumab  is a humanized monoclonal antibody that prevents the
cleavage of C5 (thereby the formation of the membrane attack complex) and reduces intravascular
hemolysis, hemoglobinuria and the need for transfusion.
Long-term anticoagulants may be necessary for patients with recurrent thrombotic episodes.

Steroids may be useful in some cases.
Bone marrow (stem cell) transplantation is curative.
Progress: PNH patients are also at increased risk for developing aplastic
anemia or acute myelogenous leukemia or a myelodysplastic syndrome.
Methemoglobinemia
Q. Write short essay/note on methemoglobinemia.
Normal oxygen transport depends on the maintenance of iron in
hemoglobin in ferrous (reduced) form (Fe++).
Methemoglobin (Hi) is a hemoglobin in which the iron is in oxidized
ferric form and unable to combine with oxygen. Normal RBCs contain
less than 1% methemoglobin. Increased amount of methemoglobin in the
RBCs is called methemoglobinemia.Clinically, when methemoglobin level is more than 1.5 g/dL, the patient
develops cyanosis. At higher levels, it produces headache, weakness and
breathlessness. At higher methemoglobin levels, respiratory depression,
altered sensorium, coma, shock, seizures, and death may occur.
Causes of MethemoglobinemiaHereditary: Deficiency of methemoglobin reductase, cytochrome B5
reductase deficiency.
Acquired: Exposure to certain drugs and toxins (e.g. nitrites and nitrates,
nitofurantoin, chloroquine, napthalene, local aneshthetics (procaine,
lidocaine), primaquine, dapsone, sulfa drugs phenacetin, phenazopyridine,
metoclopramide, nitroglycerine), copper sulfate.
TreatmentMethemoglobin reductase deficiency: Oral methylene blue or ascorbic acid.
Severe methemoglobinemia: Intravenous methylene blue. Ensure adequate tissue oxygenation.
Autoimmune Hemolytic Anemia (AIHA)
Autoimmune hemolytic anemias are a group of acquired disorders resulting
from increased red cell destruction due to red cell autoantibodies.
Q. Write short essay/note on autoimmune hemolytic anemias.

Classification of Autoimmune Hemolytic Anemia
It may be classified based on:
1. Type of antibody: Interaction of the autoantibody with the red cell antigen
is dependent on the temperature, i.e. warm or cold type (Box 8.8).
2. Etiology (Box 8.9).
Box 8.8: Classification of autoimmune hemolytic anemia according to type
of antibody.
Based on antibody type
Warm antibody type (IgG antibodies active at 37 °C)
–   Primary (Idiopathic)
–   Secondary
♦   Autoimmune disorders (systemic lupus erythematosus others)
♦   Drugs (e.g. methyldopa, penicillins, quinidine)
♦   Lymphomas, Hodgkin’s lymphoma, Chronic lymphatic leukemiaCold agglutinin type (IgM antibodies active at 4–18 °C)
–   Acute
♦   Mycoplasmal infection
♦   Infectious mononucleosis
–   Chronic
♦   Idiopathic
♦   LymphomasCold hemolysin type (Donath-Landsteiner antibodies) Rare; seen mainly in children; usually
postviral
Box 8.9: Classification of autoimmune hemolytic anemia based on etiology.
Idiopathic acquired hemolytic anemia (50%)
Secondary acquired hemolytic anemia (50%)
–   Drugs: For example, methyldopa, penicillins, quinidine
–   Mycoplasmal infection
–   Infectious mononucleosis
–   Autoimmune disorders (systemic lupus erythematosus others)
–   Lymphomas
Warm Antibody Immunohemolytic AnemiaWarm antibody type is the most common type (50–70%).
The antibodies are mainly of IgG type. The antibodies combine with red
cell antigen at 37oC and hence known as warm antibody.

Clinical features
They may occur at all ages and in both sexes, although most frequent in
middle-aged females.
They may present with anemia, jaundice, hepatosplenomegaly and
manifestations and underlying disease.
Exclude underlying systemic lupus erythematosus, lymphoma and
leukemia.
Investigations
Evidence of hemolytic anemia
Spherocytosis (due to red cell damage) and macrocytes in peripheral
blood.
Direct antiglobulin (Coombs) test is positive.
Autoantibodies may have specificity for the Rh blood group system (e.g.
for the e antigen).
In some cases, autoimmune thrombocytopenia and/or neutropenia may
also be present (Evans’ syndrome).
Antiglobulin (Coombs) test (Fig. 8.27)
Q. Write short essay/note on significance of Coombs test.
There are two types namely direct and indirect.
Q. Write short note on Coombs test.
1. Direct  (Coombs) antiglobulin test (DAT)  detects the immunoglobulin (IgG) antibody and/or C3
complement (usually C3d) on patient’s RBCs. Patient’s red cells are washed and suspended in
saline. Antiglobulin serum is added. Agglutination of red cells indicates the presence of antibody
on the surface of RBCs and interpreted as positive DAT.
2. Indirect  (Coombs) antiglobulin test (IAT)  detects the immunoglobulin (IgG) antibody or C3
complement (usually C3d) in the patient’s serum. 0 Rh +ve normal red cells and antiglobulin
serum is added to the patient’s serum. Agglutination of RBCs indicates the presence of
antibodies in the patient’s serum and test is reported as positive for indirect antiglobulin test.
Treatment
Corticosteroids (e.g. prednisolone in doses of 1 mg/kg daily) are effective in about 80% of
patients. Initially for first 2–4 weeks, prednisolone 60 mg daily, followed by gradual tapering of
the dose. When a dose of 20 to 30 mg daily achieves a persistent remission (indicated by the stable
Hb level and decreasing reticulocyte count), it is recommended to give prednisone on alternate
day. Patients with rapid hemolysis may require intravenous methylprednisolone at a dose of 250–
1000 mg/day for 1 to 3 days.Avoid blood transfusion  as far as possible, because autoantibodies may cause difficulty in cross-
matching the blood.

Danazol can be used in along with prednisone as first line therapy allowing for a shorter duration
of prednisone therapy.
Splenectomy may be necessary.
–   If there is no response to corticosteroids
–   If the remission is not maintained when the dose of prednisolone is reduced
–   Require the equivalent of more than 10–15 mg prednisone per day to maintain an acceptable
hemoglobin level.
Intravenous immunoglobulin  may also be used as a temporary measure before performing
splenectomy for patients refractory to conventional therapy with corticosteroids.
Rituximab  is a monoclonal antibody directed against the CD20 antigen expressed on B
lymphocytes.
–   Use:  Useful in refractory cases and also in secondary type of warm AIHA.
–   Adverse effects:  Hypotension, fever, chills, rigors, hypertension, bronchospasm, pulmonary
infiltrates, acute respiratory distress syndrome, myocardial infarction, cardiogenic shock.
–   Contraindication:  Untreated hepatitis B infection.
Other immunosuppressive drugs (e.g. azathioprine, cyclophosphamide and cyclosporine) may
be effective when there is no response to steroids, rituximab and splenectomy.
Cold Agglutinin Autoimmune Hemolytic Anemia
Q. Discuss cold hemagglutinin disease (CHAD) in brief.
It is less common than the warm antibody type is caused by so-called cold
agglutinins.
These antibodies bind to red cell antigens at low temperatures (4–18 °C),
i.e. avidity of red cell to antibody increases as the temperature falls.
The antibodies are of IgM type.
Clinically, it presents acrocyanosis (i.e. blue color of the fingertips, toes,
nose and ear lobes) after exposure to cold. Patients are advised to avoid
exposure to cold.
Investigations
Red cells agglutinate in the cold or at room temperature.
Direct antiglobulin test is positive with complement alone.
Monoclonal IgM antibodies.

Fig. 8.27:  Method of direct and indirect methods of antiglobulin test (Coombs test).
Treatment:  Rituximab (anti-CD20) is successful in some cases. It does not respond to steroids
alkylating agents and splenectomy.
Paroxysmal Cold Hemoglobinuria
Q. Write short essay/note on paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria (PCH).
Paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria (PCH) is a rare condition often follows
common childhood viral infections (e.g. measles, mumps and
chickenpox).
The autoantibodies are IgG type and bind to red cells at low temperatures
and fix the complement. These are autoantibodies directed against the P
antigen system on red cells.Since complement cascade functions more efficiently at 37°C, upon
warming, complement gets activated resulting in intravascular hemolysis
and hemoglobinuria.Donath-Landsteiner test: Hemolysis is demonstrated in vitro by

incubating the patient’s red cells and serum at 4°C and then warming it to
37°C.
Hemolysis is usually transient and found mostly in children. Supportive
transfusions of warmed blood may be required.
DAT is usually negative.
Anemias Due to Blood Loss
Q. Write short essay/note on anemias due to blood loss.
Anemias due to blood loss can be acute or chronic. Blood loss causes anemia
by two main mechanisms:
1. By the direct loss of RBCs.
2. Continuous blood loss gradually depletes the iron stores resulting in iron
deficiency.
Anemias Due to Acute Blood Loss
A healthy adult can lose about 500 mL of whole blood without any untoward
effect (e.g. blood donation). Acute blood loss (hemorrhage) causes loss of
intravascular volume over a short period and if massive can lead to
hypovolemic shock and death. The clinical features of acute blood loss
anemia depend on:Rate of hemorrhage
Nature of the bleeding (external or internal).
Clinical features
After the sudden loss of a large volume of blood over short period—three
clinical/pathophysiologic stages can be identified.
Stage 1: The dominant feature is hypovolemia during which the patient
appears pale, cold and sweating. The pulse rate is raised and blood
pressure is maintained. Earliest signs especially with internal bleeding are
postural hypotension and tachycardia. An ordinary blood count will not
show anemia because the hemoglobin concentration is not affected.
Stage 2: During this stage, the body will shift fluid from the extravascular
to the intravascular compartment, producing hemodilution. Thus, the
hypovolemia gradually converts to anemia. Anemia appears in 24–36
hours.

Stage 3:
–  If bleeding stops, anemia gets corrected in a few weeks, provided body
iron supply is normal.
–  If bleeding continues, compensatory mechanisms fail and hypovolemic
shock develops and results in death.
Investigations
Hemoglobin and hematocrit:
–  Normal in early stages (before hemodilution)
–  Reduced in 24–36 hours due to hemodilution
Peripheral smear shows normocytic normochromic anemia and
polychromasia (due to increased reticulocytes). A transient
leukoerythroblastic blood picture may be seen in very early stages.
Treatment:  Replacement of blood loss by transfusion of whole blood or packed red cells.
Anemia of Chronic Blood Loss
In chronic blood loss, compensatory mechanisms replenish the plasma
volume and red cell loss. It produces anemia when the rate of blood loss
exceeds the regenerative capacity of the bone marrow or when iron reserves
are depleted and results in iron deficiency anemia.
Anemia of Chronic Disease
Q. Write short essay/note on anemia of chronic disease.
One of the most common types of anemia in developing countries, occurring
in patients with chronic infections (also known as anemia of inflammation).
Causes
It occurs in a wide variety of chronic diseases.
Chronic infections: Infective endocarditis, tuberculosis, osteomyelitis
Chronic immune disorders: Crohn’s disease, rheumatoid arthritis,
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
Associated with malignant tumors (e.g. carcinoma of lung and breast).
Term anemia of chronic disease is not usually applied to anemias
associated with renal, hepatic or endocrine disorders.

Pathogenesis
Impaired iron utilization: Chronic inflammatory diseases activate
macrophages to secrete cytokines like interleukin-6 (IL-6) and tumor
necrosis factor (TNF). There is decreased transfer of iron from the storage
pool to bone erythroid precursors.Decreased erythropoietin (EPO) production and response: Resulting in
inadequate proliferation of progenitors.
Decreased RBC survival  is due to extracorpuscular defect.
Investigations
Peripheral smear mainly shows normocytic normochromic red cells.
Increased storage iron  in the marrow and revealed by Prussian blue
staining.
Raised serum ferritin  because of the inflammatory process.
Reduced total iron-binding capacity (TIBC).
Reduced serum iron .
Reduced transferrin levels.
Normal serum soluble transferrin receptor level.
Management
Treat the underlying disorder.
Recombinant erythropoietin therapy may be tried if the anemia is not corrected after treatment of
the underlying disorder.
Aplastic Anemia
Q. Define aplastic anemia. Discuss the etiology/causes, clinical features,
investigations and management of aplastic anemia.
Definition
Aplastic anemia is characterized by pancytopenia (anemia, neutropenia and
thrombocytopenia) with hypocellular (aplasia) bone marrow (less than 30%
cellularity), and there are no leukemic or other abnormal cells in the
peripheral blood or bone marrow.
Causes (Table 8.18)

Clinical Features
Insidious in onset and initial presenting feature depends on which cell line is
predominantly affected.
Anemia: Causes progressive weakness, lassitude, fatigability, pallor and
dyspnea.
Neutropenia: Presents as frequent infections (mucocutaneous bacterial) or
fatal infections. These include sore throat, oral and pharyngeal ulcers,
fever with chills and sweating, chronic skin infections, recurrent
respiratory infections, pneumonia and septicemia.Thrombocytopenia: Results in bleeding manifestations in the form of
petechiae, bruises and ecchymoses. These include: bleeding into skin
(ecchymoses, petechiae), epistaxis, menorrhagia, bleeding from gums and
GI tract, retinal hemorrhage and cerebral hemorrhage. Bleeding is often
the predominant initial presentation with bruising, with minimal trauma or
blood blisters in the mouth.
Physical findings: Include ecchymoses, bleeding gums and epistaxis. Mouth
infections are common. Lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly are
rare. In the presence of splenomegaly, the diagnosis of aplastic anemia
should not be made.Aplastic anemia may coexist or progress to clonal disorders, such as
paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH), myelodysplastic syndrome
(MDS) or acute myeloid leukemia.
Fanconi’s AnemiaFanconi’s anemia is inherited as an autosomal recessive disorder
It is associated with skeletal (short stature), renal (ectopic kidney, horse-
shoe kidney) and central nervous system (hydrocephalus) abnormalities. It
usually presents between 5 to 10 years of age. Progressive pancytopenia.
Predisposition to hematologic malignancies (MDS < acute myeloid
leukemia) and solid tumors (squamous cell carcinomas of head and neck
and anogenital region).
Investigations
Diagnosis is made with: (1) pancytopenia, (2) absence of reticulocytes and
(3) hypocellular or aplastic bone marrow with increased fat spaces.

Hemoglobin is decreased.
PCV decreased.
Reticulocytopenia (varies from 0.5 to 1%) is a characteristic feature.
Peripheral blood  shows pancytopenia
Bone marrow study: Marked hypocellularity with replacement of more
than 70% of the marrow cells by fat. Hematopoiesis: Paucity of all
erythroid, myeloid and megakaryocytic precursors. Initial stages may
show focal areas of hematopoiesis. Lymphocytes and plasma cells are
prominent. Bone marrow iron stores are usually increased.Serum iron and transferrin saturation: Increased
Ferrokinetic studies: Delayed clearance of radioactive iron from the blood
and increased uptake by the liver.
Table 8.18: Common causes of aplastic anemia.
Inherited
Fanconi anemia
Diamond-Blackfan anemia
Telomerase defects
Acquired
IdiopathicAcquired defects in stem cell
Immune mediated6“I”s of aplastic anemia
Idiopathic
Ingestion of drugs and chemicals
Idiosyncratic
Irradiation
Infections
InheritedSecondary
Chemical agents
–   Dose related
♦   Cytotoxic drugs (alkylating agents,
antimetabolites)
♦   Benzene
♦   Inorganic arsenicals
♦   Chloramphenicol
Idiosyncratic
–   Chloramphenicol
–   Phenylbutazone
–   Penicillamine
–   Carbamazepine
–   Gold salts
–   Organic arsenicals
–   Methylphenylethylhydantoin

Physical agents: Whole-body irradiation
Viral infections
–   Hepatitis (unknown type)
–   Epstein-Barr virus infections
–   Cytomegalovirus infections
–   Herpes zoster (Varicella zoster)
–   HIV
Severe aplastic anemia
Presence of two of the following four features is needed to diagnose severe
aplasia (1) neutrophil count of <0.5 × 109/L,(2) platelet count of < 20 ×
109/L, (3) reticulocyte count of < 40 × 109/L, 4) marrow cellularity <25%.
Treatment/Management
Removal of the causative factor/agent wherever possible (refer causes of aplastic anemia in Table
8.18).
Providing supportive care while awaiting bone marrow recovery:Prevention and treatment of infections
Treatment of hemorrhage
Treatment of anemia by red cell transfusion
Growth factors:  Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), Thrombopoietin (TPO) receptor
agonists
Severe aplastic anemia
Bone marrow (stem cell) transplantation  is the treatment of choice for patients under 40 years
of age who have an HLA-identical sibling donor. Patients over the age of 40 have high risk of
graft-versus-host disease.
Immunosuppressive therapy is used for patients without HLA-matched siblings and those above
40 years of age.
–   Eltrombopag, horse ATG, cylcosporine, and prednisone in combination produces
hematological response rate of 60–80%. These agents destroy activated suppressor cells.
–   Androgens (e.g. oxymetholone) are sometimes useful in patients not responding to
immunosuppression and those with moderately severe aplastic anemia.
–   Steroids have little role in severe aplastic anemia but are useful for serum sickness induced by
ALG. However, steroids used in children with congenital pure red cell aplasia (Diamond-
Blackfan syndrome) and in some adults with pure red cell aplasia associated with a thymoma.
–   Anti-IL-2 receptor antibody (daclizumab) and arsenic trioxide (ATO) plus cyclosporine have
been tried.
Acquired PRCA may develop for unknown reasons, but more commonly it
develops in association with specific types of malignancy, infection or drugs.
Most commonly, acquired PRCA develops as a complication of a neoplastic
process such as a thymoma B- or T-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia, non-

Hodgkin’s lymphoma or an autoimmune disorder such as rheumatoid arthritis
or SLE.
Investigation of a case of anemia is presented in Flowchart 8.1.
Pancytopenia
Q. Write short essay/note on the causes of pancytopenia.
Definition: Combination of anemia, leukopenia and thrombocytopenia.
Causes of Pancytopenia (Table 8.19).
Table 8.19: Causes of pancytopenia.
Decreased bone marrow function
–   Aplastic anemia
♦   Idiopathic
♦   Secondary
♦   Inherited
–   Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS)
–   Bone marrow infiltration with:
♦   Leukemia (e.g. Hairy cell leukemia)
♦   Lymphoma
♦   Myeloma♦   Tumors (carcinoma)
♦   Granulomatous diseases (e.g.
disseminated tuberculosis, sarcoidosis)
–   Nutritional deficiencies:
♦   Megaloblastic anemia (vitamin B 12
and folic acid deficiency)
–   Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
–   Myelofibrosis (rare)
–   Others: Hemophagocytic syndrome,
overwhelming sepsis, systemic lupus
erythematosus
–   DrugsIncreased peripheral destruction
–   Hypersplenism
DISORDERS OF WHITE BLOOD CELL
NON-NEOPLASTIC DISORDERS OF WBC
Leukocytosis
Q. Write short note on leukocytosis.
An increase in the total  number of leukocytes in the blood more than
11,000/cu mm (11 × 109/L). Usually due to increase in the neutrophils, but
may also be due to increased lymphocytes (or rarely monocytes and
eosinophils).

Causes: Common causes of leukocytosis are shown in Box 8.10.
Flowchart 8.1:  Investigation of a case of anemia.

Leukopenia
Total leukocyte count is less than 4,000/cu mm (4 × 109/L).
Causes: Common causes of leukopenia are shown in Box 8.11.
Neutrophilia
An absolute neutrophil count of more than 8000/cu mm (8 × 109/L).
Differential count shows more than 70% neutrophils and is usually
accompanied by leukocytosis (15 to 30 × 109/L).
Causes of neutrophilia: Major causes of neutrophilia are shown in Box 8.12.
Box 8.10: Common causes of leukocytosis.
Infections
–   Bacterial

–   Viral infections (e.g. infectious mononucleosis)
Leukemia
–   Acute
–   Chronic: Chronic lymphocytic leukemia and chronic myeloid leukemia
Leukemoid reactions
Physiological
–   Pregnancy
–   Exercise
Box 8.11: Common causes of leukopenia.
Typhoid and paratyphoid
Anemia
–   Aplastic anemia
–   Megaloblastic anemia
Hypersplenism
Drugs including cytotoxic drugs
Radiation
Rarely leukemia
Box 8.12: Major causes of neutrophilia.
Pathological:
Acute bacterial and fungal infections:
–   Localized: Pyogenic microorganisms causing infections, e.g. pneumonias, pyogenic meningitis,
cellulitis, diphtheria, abscess, tonsillitis, etc.
–   Generalized: Septicemia, acute rheumatic fever
Acute inflammatory processes: Inflammatory conditions (acute appendicitis), vasculitis
Tissue necrosis: Burns, myocardial infarction, gangrene, neoplasms (tumor necrosis)
Acute stress or hypoxic states: Following hemorrhage, hemolysis and surgery
Myeloproliferative neoplasms: Chronic myeloid leukemia, polycythemia vera
Metabolic: Uremia, acidosis, gout
Miscellaneous: Eclampsia, steroid therapy
Physiological:
Exercise (shift from marginating pool to circulating pool), newborns, extremes of temperature,
pain, emotional stress and during obstetric labor
Neutropenia and Agranulocytosis
Q. Write short note on neutropenia/agranulocytosis and its causes.
Mention the drugs that causes agranulocytosis.
Reduction in the absolute neutrophil count (total WBC × % segmented

neutrophils and band forms) below 1.5 × 109/L (1500/cu mm).
Agranulocytosis is the term used when neutrophil count decreases below 0.5
× 109/L. These patients are highly susceptible to bacterial and fungal
infections.
Etiology
The causes of neutropenia are presented in Table 8.20.
Table 8.20: Causes of neutropenia.
1. Inadequate production:
Suppression of stem cells:  In these
disorders granulocytopenia represents a
component of pancytopenia
–   Aplastic anemia
–   Marrow infiltration
–   Metastatic tumors
–   Granulomatous disorders2. Increased destruction of neutrophils:Immunologically mediated destruction
–   Idiopathic
–   Secondary
♦   Drugs (Chemotherapeutic drugs,
carbimazole, propylthiouracil,
phenothiazines, antibiotics,
naproxen)
♦   Autoimmune disorders: For
example, systemic lupus
erythematosus
Suppression of committed granulocytic
precursors
–   Drugs and chemicals (e.g. sulfonamides,
analgesics, arsenicals)
–   Ionizing radiation
Diseases associated with ineffective
hematopoiesis
–   Megaloblastic anemias: Vitamin B 12 or
folate deficiency
–   Myelodysplastic syndromes
Congenital: Kostmann syndrome (rare)
Severe infections
–   Bacterial (e.g. typhoid, paratyphoid,
septicemia)
–   Viral (e.g. influenza, infectious
mononucleosis, hepatitis, measles)
–   Rickettsial (e.g. scrub typhus)
–   Protozoal (e.g. malaria, kala-azar)Splenic sequestration  may be associated
with pancytopenia.
3. Shift from the circulating pool to
marginating pool:
Hemodialysis and cardiopulmonary bypass
4. Idiopathic:
Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
Viral infections (HIV, hepatitis)
Cyclic neutropenia
Treatment of neutropenia/agranulocytosis (refer page 1065).

Eosinophilia
Q. Define eosinophilia and mention the causes of eosinophilia.
Eosinophilia is an absolute eosinophil count of more than 450/cu mm  (0.45
× 109/L).
Causes of eosinophilia are presented in Table 8.21.
Table 8.21: Causes of eosinophilia.
Allergic/atopic conditions
–   Asthma
–   Urticaria
–   Hay fever
–   Drug reactions
–   Allergic rhinitisHematological diseases
–   Chronic myeloid leukemia
–   Polycythemia
–   Hodgkin lymphoma
–   Acute myelomonocytic leukemia
–   Eosinophilic leukemia Parasitic/helminthic infestations (with
tissue invasion)
–   Roundworm infestation
–   Hookworm infestation
–   Filariasis
Fungal infections (e.g. coccidioidomycosis)
Skin diseases
–   Dermatitis (eczema)
–   Pemphigus
–   Scabies
–   Dermatitis herpetiformisMiscellaneous
–   Tropical eosinophilia
–   Pulmonary eosinophilia
–   Löffler’s syndrome
–   Hypereosinophilic syndrome
–   Eosinophilic granuloma
–   Drugs: Sulfonamides, aspirin, penicillins,
cephalosporins, allopurinol,
carbamazepine
LymphocytosisQ. Write short note on lymphocytosis and its causes.
Lymphocyte count more than 4,000/cu mm (4 × 109/L) in adults and more
than 8,000/cumm (8 × 109/L) in child.
Common causes of lymphocytosis are given in the Table 8.22.
Table 8.22: Causes of lymphocytosis.
1. Acute infections
Viral infections
Infectious mononucleosis, mumps, measles,
chickenpox, infectious hepatitis3. Hematologic malignancies
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia

Toxoplasmosis Non-Hodgkin lymphoma with spill over
Adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma
Hairy cell leukemia 2. Chronic infections/inflammatory diseases
Tuberculosis
Syphilis
Brucellosis
Inflammatory bowel disease: Crohn’s
disease and ulcerative colitis
Basophils
Conditions associated with alterations in numbers of blood basophils are
presented in Table 8.23.
Table 8.23: Conditions associated with alterations in numbers of blood
basophils.
1. Decreased Numbers (Basopenia)
Hereditary absence of basophils (very rare)
Elevated levels of glucocorticoids
Hyperthyroidism or treatment with thyroid
hormonesOvulation
Hypersensitivity reactions
Leukocytosis (in association with diverse
disorders)
2. Increased Numbers (Basophilia)
Allergy or inflammation
–   Ulcerative colitis
–   Drug, food, inhalant hypersensitivity
–   Erythroderma, urticaria
–   Juvenile rheumatoid arthritisEndocrinopathy
–   Diabetes mellitus
–   Estrogen administration
–   Hypothyroidism (myxedema)
Infection
–   Chicken pox
–   Influenza
–   Smallpox
–   TuberculosisIron deficiencyExposure to ionizing radiation
Neoplasia
–   Basophilic leukemia
–   Myeloproliferative neoplasms (especially
chronic myelogenous leukemia; also
polycythemia vera, primary
myelofibrosis, essential
thrombocythemia)
–   Carcinoma
ACUTE LEUKEMIAS
Q. Define leukemia.

Definition
Leukemia is defined as a group of malignant stem cell neoplasms
characterized by:
Failure of cell maturation and proliferating of leukocyte precursors
(blast/immature cells) which fill the bone marrow.
Abnormal numbers and forms of immature white blood cells ultimately
spill over into the peripheral blood.
Classification of Leukemias
Q. Write short essay/note on classification of leukemias.
1. General/traditional classification: According to the light microscopic
appearance of the cell and the speed of evolution (Table 8.24).
2. Revised FAB classification of acute leukemias (Table 8.25).
According to FAB, the marrow should show a blast count of 30% or
more.
It includes parameters which affect namely morphology, cytochemistry,
immunophenotyping, cytogenetics and molecular genetics.
3. WHO classification (2016) of acute myeloid (Table 8.26) and lymphoid
leukemia (Table 8.27).
WHO classification of acute leukemia incorporates parameters namely
morphology, cytochemistry, cytogenetic, molecular genetics (which are
related to prognosis) and clinical features.The number of blasts necessary for the diagnosis is more than 20% in
bone marrow when compared to 30% in FAB classification.
Table 8.24: Traditional classification of leukemia.
Acute Chronic
Acute myeloblastic/myelocytic leukemia (AML) Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)
Acute lymphoblastic/lymphocytic leukemia
(ALL)Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)
Table 8.25: Revised FAB classification of acute leukemias.
Type of AML
M0: Minimally differentiated AML

M1: AML without differentiation
M2: AML with maturation
M3: Acute promyelocytic leukemia
M4: Acute myelomonocytic leukemia
M5: Acute monocytic leukemia
M6: Acute erythroleukemia (DiGugliemo’s disease)
M7: Acute megakaryocytic leukemia
Type of ALL
L1: Small cells with homogeneous nuclear chromatin and scanty cytoplasm
L2: Large, heterogeneous cells with variable amount of cytoplasm
L3: Large, homogeneous cells with prominent nucleoli, abundant, and deeply basophilic vacuolated
cytoplasm
Etiology of LeukemiasQ. Discuss the etiology of leukemias.
Risk Factors
In the majority of acute leukemias, the cause is not known. Numerous risk
factors may cause mutations in the genes involved in regulating cell
proliferation and differentiation. These genes include oncogenes and tumor
suppressor genes. Sophisticated molecular techniques like fluorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH) and gene array technology have led to the
understanding of leukemia at molecular level.Environmental factors
Ionizing radiation: Ionizing radiation and X-rays are associated with
increased risk of leukemias. The evidence for this association are:
–   Atomic bombing: Survivors of atomic bomb explosions in Hiroshima
and Nagasaki, who had high incidence of AML and CML (chronic
myeloid leukemia).
–   Therapeutic radiation: Increased risk of AML (secondary leukemia)
in patients with malignancies/neoplasms treated by radiation.
–   X-ray exposure to fetus during pregnancy.Drugs: Drugs can cause secondary hematopoietic neoplasms.
–   Secondary AML can develop after exposure to chemotherapy drugs.
–   Alkylating agents such as cyclophosphamide can lead to AML that

develops after a median duration of 5 to 7 years, is usually preceded by
myelodysplastic syndrome and is associated with chromosome 5 or 7
abnormalities.
–   Topoisomerase inhibitors such as anthracyclines lead to AML after a
median duration of 1 to 3 years and is associated with MLL gene
abnormalities.
Chemicals:
–   Benzene used in paint industry, plastic glues, etc. It causes
chromosomal abnormalities resulting in higher incidence of acute
leukemia, myelodysplastic syndrome and aplastic anemia.
Retroviruses: HTLV-1 is associated with adult T-cell
leukemia/lymphoma.
Immunological: Immune deficiency states (e.g.
hypogammaglobulinemia).
Table 8.26: WHO classification (2016) of acute myeloid leukemia and
related precursor neoplasms.
Class FAB category Prognosis
1. AML with recurrent genetic abnormalities
AML with t(8;21)(q22;q22); RUNX1-RUNX1T1
AML with inv(16)(p13;1q22) or t(16;16)(p13.1;q22);
CBFB-MYH11
APL with t(15;17)(q22;q12); PML-RARA
AML with t(9;11)(p22;q23); MLLT3-MLL
AML with t(6;9)(p23;q34); DEK-NUP214
AML with inv(3)(q21q26.2) or t(3;3)(q21.3;q26.2);
GATA2, MECOM
AML(megakaryoblastic) with t(1;22) (p13;q13); RBM15-
MKL1
AML with mutated NPM1
AML with mutated CEBPAM2
M4eo
M3, M3v
M4, M5
–
–
–
VariableFavorable
Favorable
Intermediate
Intermediate
Poor
Poor
Variable
Favorable
Favorable
II. AML not otherwise specified
AML minimally differentiated
AML without maturation
AML with maturation
Acute myelomonocytic leukemia
Acute monoblastic and monocytic leukemia
Acute erythroid leukemia
Acute megakaryoblastic leukemiaM0
M1
M2
M4
M5a, M5b
M6a, M6b
M7
–Intermediate
Intermediate
Intermediate
Intermediate
Intermediate
Intermediate
Intermediate
Poor

Acute basophilic leukemia
Acute panmyelosis with myelofibrosis– Poor
III. Myeloid sarcoma – –
IV. Myeloid proliferation related to Down syndrome
 Transient abnormal myelopoiesis
 Myeloid leukemia associated with Down syndrome–
––
Variable
(AML: acute myeloid leukemia; APL: acute promyelocytic leukemia; MDS: myelodysplastic
syndrome)
Table 8.27: WHO classification (2016) of acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
B-cell lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma, not otherwise specified
B-cell lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma, with recurrent genetic abnormalitiesB-cell lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with hypodiploidy
B-cell lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with hyperdiploidy
B-cell lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with t(9;22)(q34;q11.2)[ BCR-ABL1]
B-cell lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with t(v;11q23)[ MLL  rearranged]
B-cell lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with t(12;21)(p13;q22)[ ETV6-RUNX1]
B-cell lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with t(1;19)(q23;p13.3)[ TCF3-PBX1]
B-cell lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with t(5;14)(q31;q32)[ IL3-IGH]
B-cell lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with intrachromosomal amplification of chromosome
21 (iAMP21)
B-cell lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma with translocations involving tyrosine kinases or
cytokine receptors (‘BCR-ABL1–like ALL’)
T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphomas
Early T-cell precursor lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL: acute lymphoblastic leukemia; WHO: World Health Organization).
Genetic disorders
A few genetic disorders may be associated with acute leukemias, e.g. Down’s
syndrome (ALL or AML), Fanconi’s anemia (AML), ataxia telangiectasia
(ALL, NHL) and Klinefelter syndrome.
Acquired disorders
Acquired stem cell disorders like PNH and aplastic anemia may transform
into acute leukemia.
Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS): AML may develop de novo or
secondary to MDS.

Clinical Features
Q. Discuss the clinical features, investigations, diagnosis and
management of acute leukemias.
Though ALL and AML are distinct (immunophenotypically and
genotypically), they usually have similar clinical features. Patient usually
presents with nonspecific ‘flu-like’ symptoms.
Majority of patients with acute leukemia, regardless of subtype present
with symptoms arising from:
–   Bone marrow failure: Due to replacement of normal marrow
hematopoietic cells by leukemic blast cells.
♦   Anemia
◊   Causes shortness of breath on effort, excessive tiredness/fatigue
and weakness.
♦   Neutropenia
◊   Results in life-threatening infections by bacteria or opportunistic
fungi, Pseudomonas and commensals. Fever due to septicemia.
◊   The infection may develop in the oral cavity, skin, lungs,
kidneys, urinary bladder and colon. The common presentations
include respiratory infections (pneumonia), cellulitis or sepsis.
♦   Thrombocytopenia
◊   Presents as bleeding manifestations in the form of petechiae,
atraumatic ecchymosis, gum bleeding, epistaxis, urinary tract
and fundal hemorrhages.
◊   Intracranial bleeding is a serious and fatal complication, usually
associated with headache, fundal hemorrhages and focal
neurological deficits.
♦   Marrow expansion and infiltration of the subperiosteum causes
◊   Bone pain (more common in ALL) and sternal tenderness.
–   Leukostasis: Stasis of blood flow may develop when the blast count is
above 50,000/cumm.
♦   Cerebral leukostasis may cause headache, confusion and visual
disturbances.
♦   Pulmonary leukostasis can cause dyspnea at rest, tachypnea, chest

pain, pulmonary infarction, and acute respiratory distress syndrome.
–   Coagulopathy: Both disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) and
primary fibrinolysis may lead to hemorrhagic diathesis. DIC is
observed in AML-M3 (promyelocytic leukemia).
–   Extramedullary leukemic infiltration:
–   Gingival hypertrophy and infiltration of skin (leukemia cutis)
Hepatosplenomegaly.
Generalized lymphadenopathy.
Leukemic meningitis is rare. It presents as headache and nausea. As the
disease progresses, papilledema, cranial nerve palsies, seizures and altered
consciousness develop. CSF characteristically shows leukemic blast cells,
elevated proteins and reduced glucose levels.Chloromas are localized, solid, soft-tissue tumor masses known as
myeloblastomas, granulocytic sarcomas or chloromas.
–   Metabolic abnormalities: Hyperuricemia, elevated serum liver
transaminases, serum LDH are found in patients with acute leukemia.
Investigations
Q. Write short essay on laboratory diagnosis of acute myeloid leukemia.
What are Auer rods?
Confirmation of Diagnosis
Blood count
–   Hemoglobin is low.
–   Total leukocyte count: Markedly raised, but usually less than 100 ×
109/L (range 1 × 109/L to 500 × 109/L). Leukopenia is common in
AML.
–   Platelet count: Markedly decreased.
Peripheral blood smear
–   Shows numerous blast cells (Figs. 8.28 and 8.29) and types of blasts
can be identified morphologically, and confirmed with
immunophenotyping.
–   Auer rods are seen as rod-shaped red inclusion in the cytoplasm of
myeloblast.

–   Severe normochromic anemia.
Bone marrow aspirate: Hypercellular with reduced erythropoiesis, and
reduced megakaryocytes. Blast cells >20% (often approaching 100%) and
type of blast is confirmed by flow cytometry, immunophenotyping
(FISH), cytogenetic and molecular genetics.Chest X-ray: Mediastinal widening is often seen in T lymphoblastic
leukemia.
CSF examination: To rule out occult CNS involvement.
For Planning Therapy
Biochemical parameters: Serum urate, liver function tests, renal function
tests, coagulation studies, serum LDH, etc.
Cardiac function: ECG and direct tests of left ventricular function (e.g.
echocardiogram or MUGA scan).
Fig. 8.28: Peripheral blood smear in acute lymphoblastic leukemia showing lymphoblasts. Inset shows
lymphoblast with block positivity with PAS stain.

Fig. 8.29: Peripheral smear in AML with myeloblasts. Inset shows myeloblast with Auer rod.
Q. Discuss the management of acute leukemias.
Management
Principles of Management
At initial presentation, acute leukemia may be:
Probably curable (childhood acute lymphoblastic leukemia).
Possibly curable (de nov low-risk AML).
Probably incurable (AML with adverse cytogenetic features in the elderly, secondary AML,
recurrent acute leukemia).
Type of therapy
Palliative therapy:  It is directed towards symptomatic benefit by means for medications,
transfusions with or without chemotherapy.
Curative intent:  The goal is to cure the patient, involves chemotherapy +/- stem cell transplant.
Active therapy
The first and major decision to be taken is whether to give specific therapy or supportive therapy.
Supportive care/therapy
Forms the basis of treatment for both curative and palliative therapy.
Treatment of anemia with repeated transfusion of packed red cells to avoid symptoms of anemia
(hemoglobin >10 g/dL).
Prevention or control of bleeding due to thrombocytopenia with platelet transfusions.
Treatment of infection:
a. Prophylactically: Education about handwashing and isolation facilities. Use of selected

antibiotics and antifungal agents barrier nursing.
b. Therapeutically:  Management of fever by identifying the microorganism and giving appropriate
antimicrobial treatment in bacterial, fungal, protozoal and viral infections.
Continuous monitoring of liver, kidney and hemostatic functions.
Maintenance of fluid and electrolyte balance: In patients receiving chemotherapy, rapid lysis of
leukemic cells may produce tumor lysis syndrome characterized by hyperuricemia, hyperkalemia,
hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia leading to renal injury, arrythmias, seizures and is
potentially life-threatening. It can be prevented by close attention to hydration, urine alkalinization
and prophylactic allopurinol before starting chemotherapy.Treatment of hyperleukocytosis: Reduction in leukocyte counts can be achieved by using
chemotherapy or hydroxyurea, and leukapheresis (removal of circulating cells and re-infusion of
leukocyte–poor plasma).Psychological support.
Bone marrow transplantation  has to be considered in following condition:
1. Acute myeloblastic leukemia (Intermediate and poor risk) in first remission in patients below 60
years of age.
2. Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) (high risk) in first, second or subsequent remission.
Specific therapy
The specific therapy is intended to return the peripheral blood and bone marrow to normal (complete
remission; CR).
The survival outcomes of acute leukemia are variable, they could be in excess of 90% in situations
like- APML, childhood ALL to as low as 10% in recurrent acute leukemia and high risk AML.
Q. Discuss the management of acute lymphocytic leukemias. Enumerate the drugs used in
acute lymphocytic leukemia.
Acute lymphocytic leukemia
Specific therapy (Table 8.28) involves:
1. Remission induction  with combination chemotherapy
–   Goal of induction therapy: To induce morphologic remission and to restore normal
hematopoiesis in the bone marrow with less than 5% blasts.
–   Remission induction consists of combination chemotherapy including vincristine, prednisolone
(dexamethasone), asparaginase (crisantaspase) and usually an anthracycline antibiotic, e.g.
doxorubicin. It induces complete morphologic response within 4–6 weeks.
2. CNS preventive therapy that includes administration of high-dose systemic therapy and CNS-
directed treatment.
–   Aim:  To eliminate disease in the CNS and to reduce systemic minimal residual leukemic
burden.
–   CNS-directed therapy:  Triple intrathecal chemotherapy
(cytarabine/methotrexate/hydrocortisone) or 1800 cGy cranial radiation.
3. Post-remission therapy similar to induction phase) reduces chances of relapse.
4. Remission maintenance  to prevent relapse and affect cure. It involves administering drugs for 2
years or more and consists of daily 6-mercaptopurine and weekly methotrexate.
Table 8.28: Treatment for ALL (acute lymphoblastic leukemia).

Induction therapy
t(9;22)/BCR-ABL1 negative ALL
Weekly administration of vincristine for three to four weeks, daily corticosteroids (prednisone,
prednisolone, or dexamethasone) and asparaginase
t(9;22)/BCR-ABL1 positive ALL
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) such as imatinib or dasatinib
Patients with trisomy 21
High-dose methotrexate
CNS preventive therapy
Triple intrathecal chemotherapy (cytarabine/methotrexate/hydrocortisone) or 1800 cGy cranial
radiation
Post-remission therapy
Consolidation
Cytarabine, methotrexate
Anthracyclines (daunorubicin, doxorubicin)
Alkylating agents (cyclophosphamide, ifosfamide)
Epipodophyllotoxins (etoposide, etopophosphamide)
Allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation
Maintenance therapy
Daily oral 6-mercaptopurine, weekly methotrexate with periodic vincristine, prednisone and
intrathecal therapy
Table 8.29: Treatment for AML (acute myeloid leukemia).
Initial treatment for AML
Intensive remission induction (7+3 therapy)
Continuous infusion of cytarabine (100 or 200 mg/m2 daily for seven days) together with
daunorubicin (by short infusion or bolus for the first three days)
Alternative remission induction approaches
Gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO)
6 mg/m2 on day 1, and 3 mg/m2 on day 8, and continue treatment with GO for up to eight
monthly cycles
Other regimens
FLAG (fludarabine, cytarabine, G-CSF) FLAG-IDA (idarubicin), MITO-FLAG (mitoxantrone)
and FLAMSA (amsacrine)
CLAG (cladribine, cytarabine, G-CSF)
Vorinostat (histone deacetylase inhibitor) plus idarubicin and cytarabine
Bortezomib, daunorubicin, and cytarabine
Lenalidomide

Post-remission management
Consolidation chemotherapy—cytarabine + daunorubicin or with gemtuzumab ozogamicin
Hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT)
Maintenance therapy—with gemtuzumab ozogamicin Or Midostaurin
Relapsed or resistant AML
Gemtuzumab ozogamicin midostaurin, enasidenib, lower intensity treatments (e.g. azacitidine,
decitabine) or palliative management
Q. Discuss the management of acute myeloid leukemias.
Acute myeloid leukemia (Table 8.29)
Initial therapeutic goal is to quickly induce complete remission (CR) and further therapy to prolong
survival and achieve cure. Curative therapy is given to the majority of adults below the age of 60
years (without any significant comorbidity).
Specific therapy (Table 8.29) of the newly diagnosed patient with AML usually divided into two
phases (1) induction and (2) consolidation phase (postremission) therapy.
1. Induction chemotherapy:
–   Moderately intensive combination chemotherapy that includes an anthracycline (e.g.
daunorubicin or idarubicin) and cytosine arabinoside (cytarabine) ± etoposide.
–   ‘High risk’ patients (include patients <70 years with high-risk karyotype) may only be treated
with curative intent if an HLA-identified sibling is available for stem cell transplantation.
2. Consolidation or post-remission therapy: For patients achieving remission with induction
therapy in young patients (<60 years) consists of 3 to 4 cycles of high-dose cytosine arabinoside.
–   Low risk patients in AML, patients with t(8;21) or inv(16) ( i.e. low risk karyotype) do not
benefit from allogeneic stem cell transplantation during their first complete remission.
–   Patients with high-risk karyotypes should have stem cell transplantation because they respond
poorly to conventional chemotherapy.
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (M3)Uncommon variant of AML associated with severe coagulation complications.
It has favorable prognosis.
Induction therapy is with all-trans-retinoic acid and anthracyclines or a combination of ATA with
arsenic trioxide.
Allogeneic transplantation: Necessary if the leukemia is not eliminated at the molecular level, only
in relapsed/refractory cases.
In relapsed cases, arsenic trioxide (induces apoptosis via activation of the caspase cascade) has
been also found to be effective.
Alternative chemotherapy
Used to curb excessive leukocyte proliferation and not for achieving remission.
Hydroxyurea up to 4 g daily and L asparaginase 10,000 units are used to reduce leukocyte count
without inducing bone marrow failure.
Poor Prognostic Factors in AML and ALL (Table 8.30)

Table 8.30: Poor prognostic factors in AML and ALL.
Features Acute myeloblastic leukemia (AML) Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL)
Age >60 years <1 year or > 9 years
TLC>1,00,000/mm3 > 30,000 in B ALL and >100,000 in T
ALL
French-American-
British (FAB)
typeM0, M5, M6, M7 L3 type
Chromosomal
abnormalityHigh-risk karyotype [t(6;9), inv(3)] Hypodiploidy (<45 chromosomes), pH
positive ALL t (1:19) MLL rearranged
Other featuresSecondary cause present
Following myelodysplastic
syndrome (MDS)
Relapsed disease
Secondary leukemia
Extramedullary diseaseMale gender
Mediastinal mass
CNS involvement
pH like ALL
Differences between acute lymphoblastic leukemia from acute
myeloblastic leukemia (Table 8.31)
Q. How do you differentiate acute lymphoblastic leukemia from acute
myeloblastic leukemia?
Table 8.31: Differences between acute lymphoblastic leukemia from acute
myeloblastic leukemia.
Clinical features Acute lymphoblastic
leukemiaAcute myelogenous
leukemia
Age Predominantly children Predominantly adults
Coagulopathy (DIC) Absent Seen in M3
Gingival hypertrophy and dermal
infiltrate (chloromas)Absent Seen in M4 and M5
Hepatosplenomegaly In majority (50–75%) Frequent
Lymphadenopathy More common Less common
Leukemic meningitis More common Less common
Testicular involvement In 10–20% -
Eye involvement More common Less common
Investigations
Type of leukemic blasts Lymphoblasts (10–15 µm)
are smaller thanMyeloblasts (12–20 µm) are
larger than lymphoblasts,

myeloblasts, with a thin rim
of agranular cytoplasm and
round or convoluted nucleuswith discrete nuclear
chromatin and multiple
nucleoli
Auer rods (in the cytoplasm) Absent Present in 10–20%
(diagnostic)
Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase
(Tdt) in leukemic blastsIn more than 90% Rare
Cytochemistry
Myeloperoxidase -ve +ve
Sudan Black B -ve +ve
Nonspecific esterase -ve +ve in M4 and M5
Periodic acid Schiff (PAS) +ve in >50% of cells (Block
positivity)Negative
Subleukemic Leukemia/Aleukemic Leukemia
Q. Write short note on subleukemic leukemia.
In acute leukemia, the immature neoplastic leukemic ‘blast’ cells
proliferate and accumulate, but fail to mature. The blasts diffusely replace
the normal bone marrow and a variable number of these accumulate in the
peripheral blood.Acute leukemia should be diagnosed when the blast cells constitute more
than 20% of the nucleated cells in the marrow (normally blast cells <5%)
with an increase in total leukocyte count.Subleukemic/aleukemic leukemia is characterized by a total leukocyte
count is normal or lower than 4 × 109/L and peripheral blood shows very
few abnormal blasts. It is observed in a small percentage of patients with
acute leukemia.
Diagnosis is confirmed from the bone marrow examination which shows
replacement by leukemic cells.
Leukemoid Reaction
Q. Write short note on leukemoid reaction (including its definition).
Extreme neutrophilia sometimes is associated with the presence of
immature white cells and is called as leukemoid reaction.
A leukemoid reaction  is a benign leukocytic proliferation characterized
by a total leukocyte count of more than 50 × 109/L with many immature

white cells (like metamyelocytes, myelocytes and promyelocytes and even
a few myeloblasts) in the peripheral smear.
Leukemoid reaction is the response of the normal healthy bone marrow to
various stresses.
Causes: Include infections (including tuberculosis), acute hemorrhage,
hematological and non-hematological malignancies and various toxic
states.Bone marrow is normal with accelerated leukopoiesis.
LAP source is increased.
Philadelphia chromosome negative.
No absolute eosinophilia or basophilia (versus CML).
Treatment of underlying disorder corrects the blood picture.
Type of leukemoid reactions are listed in Box 8.13.
It should be differentiated from chronic myelocytic leukemia (Table 8.32).
Box 8.13: Types of leukemoid reactions.
1. Myeloid
2. Lymphoid
Table 8.32: Differences between leukemoid reaction and chronic myeloid
leukemia.
Clinical features Leukemoid reaction Chronic myeloid leukemia
Peripheral blood findings Features of causative disease Splenomegaly, lymphadenopathy and
bone pain are common
WBC series
Total WBC count Moderately increased, rarely
exceeds 50 × 109/LMarkedly increased and usually
exceeds 50 × 109/L
Differential leukocyte countShift to the left with few
immature forms
Toxic granulation seenShift to the left with numerous
immature forms
Myelocyte and neutrophil peak
Eosinophilia and basophilia Variable Present
Leukocyte alkaline
phosphatase (LAP)Increased Decreased
RBC series
Anemia Usually minimal or absent Severe and progressive
Platelets

Number Variable Normal or increased
Extramedullary myeloid
tumorsAbsent Present
Philadelphia chromosome Absent Present
Hairy Cell Leukemia
Q. Discuss the clinical features, investigations and management of hairy
cell leukemia.
Clinical Features
Hairy cell leukemia (HCL) is an uncommon chronic malignant disorder of
mature B-cells with characteristic fine cytoplasmic projections.
The term hairy cell leukemia is derived from the appearance of fine
hairlike cell membrane projections on the leukemic cells, under the phase-
contrast microscope.
Hairy cell leukemia affects middle-aged to elderly men, with a male-to-
female ratio of 5:1.
Clinical features are mainly due to leukemic infiltration of bone marrow,
liver and spleen
–   Massive splenomegaly is the most common finding, hepatomegaly is
less common and lymphadenopathy is distinctly rare.
–   Pancytopenia is due to marrow failure and splenic sequestration, and
is found in more than 50% of cases.
–   Infections: About one-third of patients present with infections
especially with atypical mycobacteria, which may be due to
monocytopenia. Infections are the most common cause of death.
–   Risk of secondary malignancies: Such as Hodgkin’s lymphoma, non-
Hodgkin’s lymphoma and thyroid cancer.
Investigations
Total leucocyte count: Normal or low. Majority of patients have
pancytopenia.
Peripheral smear: Shows the characteristic hairy cells. These are the
medium-sized malignant B lymphocytes with filamentous hairy structures
on the surface of the cell. They have a reniform nucleus and abundant pale

blue cytoplasm. Cytochemically, these hairy cells stain positively for
tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP).
Bone marrow: Aspirate yields a dry tap and biopsy shows fibrosis with
infiltration by mononuclear cells and hairy cells (fired-egg or honeycomb
appearance).
LAP score is very high. Flow cytometry reveals CD 11c, 25, 103, 123
positivity.
Treatment
Indications for treatment: If patient develops
1. Cytopenia
2. Symptomatic splenomegaly
3. Constitutional symptoms (e.g. fever, night sweats and fatigue)
Treatment of infections with antibiotics.
Chemotherapy: The purine analogues 2-chloroadenosine acetate (2-CDA) (cladribine) and
pentostatin are highly effective with just one cycle of treatment. Rituximab is used in patients who
do not respond to the above drugs. Pentostatin, interferon alfa and splenectomy are other treatment
options available.Contraindicated drugs: Corticosteroids and myelotoxic drugs.
Prognosis: Follows an indolent course and prognosis is excellent.
CHRONIC MYELOID LEUKEMIA
Q. Define chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). Write a short note on
Philadelphia chromosome and its significance.
Definition: Chronic myeloid leukemia is one of the myeloproliferative
neoplasms (MPN) of pluripotent hematopoietic stem cell  characterized by
overproduction  of cells of the myeloid series (results in marked
splenomegaly and leukocytosis) and the presence of the Philadelphia
chromosome.
Molecular Pathogenesis
Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome
–   Acquired chromosomal abnormality of hematopoietic stem cells
–   Balanced reciprocal translocation between the long arms of
chromosomes 9 and 22 (t 9,22)  increases the length of chromosome 9
and shortening of 22. The shortened chromosome 22  is known as

Philadelphia chromosome (Ph).
BCR-ABL1 fusion gene
–   Translocation results in fusion of the breakpoint cluster region ( BCR )
gene on chromosome 22q with the ABL1 (named after the Abelson
murine leukemia virus) gene located on chromosome 9q.
–   It produces a new hybrid oncogene namely BCR-ABL1 fusion gene.
The products of this gene are oncoproteins which have uncontrolled
kinase activity and triggers the excessive proliferation and reduced
apoptosis of CML cells.
–   Significance: Apart from CML, Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome can be
found in acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL, 25–30% in adult and 2–
10% in pediatric cases) and occasionally in acute myeloid leukemia
(AML). In patients with Ph positive/negative and BCR-ABL1 positive,
the survival rate and therapeutic response is better than those with both
Ph and BCR-ABL1 negative patients.
Natural Course of CMLQ. Discuss the natural course and clinical features of chronic myeloid
leukemia.
It has three phases:
1. Chronic stable phase: Most of the CML are diagnosed in this phase and
lasts for about 3–5 years if untreated.
2. Accelerated phase: More aggressive and lasts for few months.
3. Blast crisis phase: It resembles acute (myeloid or lymphoid) leukemia and
has poor prognosis.
Clinical Features in Chronic Stable Phase of CML
Q. Discuss the clinical features in chronic stable phase.
Age: Usually occurs between 40 to 60 years of age.
Onset: Insidious.
Symptoms
Many patients are asymptomatic during early stage of CML and may be
diagnosed during routine peripheral blood examination.
Nonspecific symptoms: Fatigue, weakness, weight loss, anorexia.

Symptoms due to massive splenomegaly: Fullness of abdomen
(abdominal distension, post-prandial fullness), reflux esophagitis, dyspnea
and dragging discomfort in the left hypochondrium due to splenomegaly
(caused by leukemic infiltration and extramedullary hematopoiesis).
Splenomegaly is moderate to severe and is characteristic feature in
majority (80–90%) of patients.Symptoms of hypermetabolic state: Due to rapid turnover of cells may
result in symptoms like fatigue, weakness, fever, sweating, heat
intolerance weight loss, anorexia.Priapism: Painful penile erection due to leukostasis (associated with
marked leukocytosis or thrombocytosis).
Bleeding tendencies occur late in the disease.
Signs
Pallor due to anemia.
Splenomegaly: Moderate to massive, non-tender splenomegaly. It is due
to leukemia infiltration and extramedullary hematopoiesis. Presence of
tender spleen and splenic friction rub indicate splenic infarction.Mild hepatomegaly  as a result of leukemic infiltration may develop in
60–70% of cases.
Sternal tenderness and bone pain: It is due to hypercellularity of
marrow and irritation of periosteum.
Investigations
Q. Discuss the investigations/laboratory investigations/diagnosis of
chronic myeloid leukemia.
Hemoglobin  is usually less than 11 g/dL.
Total leucocyte count is markedly raises, almost always more than
20,000/µL, often exceeding 1,00,000/µL. In untreated patients, the
leukocyte count progressively increases.
Peripheral Smear (Fig. 8.30)RBC shows moderate degree of normocytic normochromic anemia.
WBC:
–   Shift to left (shift to immaturity) with granulocytes at all stages of

development (neutrophils, metamyelocytes, myelocytes,
promyelocytes and occasional myeloblasts). Predominant cells are
neutrophils and myelocytes in an untreated patient. Blasts are usually
less than 10% of the circulating white blood cells.
–   Increase in basophils (<20%) and eosinophils.
Platelets: Count may be normal, increased or decreased. Automated
analyzers may give falsely elevated platelet counts due to disruption of
granulocytes.
Bone Marrow Study
Markedly hypercellular due to marked hyperplasia of all granulocytic
elements.
About 20–30% of the patients may develop bone marrow fibrosis in late
stages.
Philadelphia Chromosome (Ph)
It is positive in more than 95% of cases, in all three phases. In Ph negative
cases, evidence of translocation can be demonstrated by cytogenetics,
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH).BCR-ABL1 fusion gene can be demonstrated in peripheral blood or bone
marrow.
Fig. 8.30:  Peripheral blood picture in chronic stable phase of chronic myeloid leukemia.

Decreased NAP/LAP Score
It is usually below 20 (normal score range from 40 to 100) in majority o f
patients. This is helpful in differentiating CML from leukemoid reaction.
Biochemical Findings
Serum LDH and uric acid is increased.
Serum alkaline phosphatase is increased.
Serum vitamin B12 is markedly elevated due to production of binding
protein (transcobalamin) by the granulocyte series.
Marked thrombocytosis may raise serum potassium spuriously as platelets
release potassium during clotting.
Blood sugar may be falsely decreased due to glucose uptake and
metabolism by leukocytes.
Q. Write short essay/note on the treatment and complications of chronic
myeloid leukemia. Enumerate the drugs used in chemotherapy.
Q. Write short note on Imatinib.
Treatment of CML
Goal of therapy in CML:  Complete molecular remission.
Achieve prolonged, durable, non-neoplastic, nonclonal hematopoiesis.
Eradication of any residual cells containing the BCR-ABL1 transcript.
Chemotherapy (Table 8.33)
Imatinib mesylate is the first-line treatment for the chronic phase of CML.
If there is failure of response or progress on imatinib, options include: (1) second-generation
tyrosine kinase inhibitors (such as dasatinib or nilotinib), (2) allogeneic bone marrow
transplantation or (3) classical cytotoxic drugs such as hydroxycarbamide (hydroxyurea) or
interferon-α or melphalan, and busulphan (4) Omacetaxine/homoharringtonine (plant alkaloid).
Imatinib mesylateImatinib mesylate is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) provides targeted therapy, i.e. high
specificity blocks the enzymatic action of the BCR-ABL fusion, providing a broader therapeutic
window with less toxicity.In all newly diagnosed CML, imatinib (400 mg/d) is more effective and has replaced IFN-α and
cytarabine. It reduces the uncontrolled proliferation of white cells, producing apoptosis of cancer
cells.In chronic stable disease, it can produce complete hematological response in >95% of cases and
complete cytogenetic response (disappearance of the Ph chromosome and BCR-ABL transcripts in
the blood) in >76% at 18 months of therapy. Imatinib can be continued indefinitely.

Over expression of the BCR-ABL chimeric gene or genetic alteration can produce resistance to
imatinib mesylate.
Side effects of imatinib: Nausea, headaches, fluid retention, muscle cramps, diarrhea, skin rash
and myelosuppression (causing cytopenias).
Recombinant interferon-α
Recombinant interferon- α (rINF-α) was considered first-line treatment before the invention of
imatinib.
It was given alone or combined with the chemotherapy agent cytosine arabinoside, and induced
remission and controlled chronic stable phase of CML in about 70% of cases. But has no role as a
single agent in most patients.It should be considered in patients not responding to imatinib.
It is not effective in accelerated phase or blast crisis phase.
Dosage: 3–9 mega units/day intramuscularly or subcutaneously.
Actions of rINF-α:
–   Reduces cellularity of the bone marrow.
–   Reduces the number of Philadelphia positive tumor cells in 20% of patients.
–   Total eradication of Philadelphia chromosome in ~5% of patients.
–   Reduces platelet count when it is very high.Side effects: Flu-like syndrome, weight loss, fatigue, nausea, vomiting and headache.
Table 8.33: Drugs used and their dosage for induction and maintenance in
chronic stable phase of CML.
Drug Induction dose Maintenance dose
Imatinib mesylate 300–400 mg/day 300–400 mg/day
Hydroxyurea
(hydroxycarbamide)0.5–2.0 g/day 0.5–2.0 g/day
Melphalan 4–12 mg/day 2–4 mg/day
Busulphan 4 mg/day 2–4 mg/day
Splenectomy
Indicated to relieve the symptoms due to massive splenomegaly and in repeated splenic
infarctions.
Stem cell transplantation (SCT)
Indication:
–   Patients under the age of 60 years who have a suitable donor.
–   Those who do not respond to 2nd line TKI and those who present with accelerated phase or
blast crisis.
Best results are obtained if SCT is done in early chronic stable phase and can cure about 70% of
cases.
It can result in permanent disappearance of the Ph-positive clone.
Disadvantages: Risk of complications and death due to graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) and

opportunistic infections.
Factors determining complications:
–   Increasing age
–   In acute phase
–   Degree of histocompatibility between donor and recipient.
Features of failure of response:
–   Failure to achieve
–   Complete hematological response at 3 months
–   Complete cytogenetic response at 6 months
–   Major molecular response at 12 months
MonitoringBone marrow biopsy: At 6 month intervals to determine the cytogenetic response.
Quantitative RT-PCR (qPCR): From peripheral blood at 3–6 month intervals should be done once
cytogenetic response has been achieved.
Prognostic Scores in CML
Sokal score: Age, spleen size, platelet count, blast cell counts
Euro score: Age, spleen, platelet, blast cell counts, basophil counts,
eosinophil counts
EUTOS score/Hassford: Basophils and spleen size.
Accelerated Phase of Chronic Myeloid Leukemia
Chronic myeloid leukemia may transform to a more aggressive blastic phase
with or without going through an accelerated phase after 1–5 years of onset.
It lasts for a few months.
Features of Accelerated Phase
Increasing anemia
Increasing white blood cell count with an increase in circulating immature cells unresponsive to
therapy
Blasts 10–19% are seen in the blood or bone marrow
Increase in the size of spleen
Increase in basophil count (<20%)
Persistent thrombocytopenia or persistent thrombocytosis unresponsive to therapy
Hydroxyurea is the most effective drug in accelerated phase.
Blast Crisis Phase of Chronic Myeloid Leukemia
Blast crisis phase of CML represents the transformation of CML into an
acute leukemia.
This final phase lasts for a few weeks to months and has a poor prognosis.

Blasts constitute 20% or more and may be:
–   Myeloid blast crisis that occurs in 70% when the disease transforms
into acute myeloblastic leukemia.
–   Lymphoid blast crisis occurs in 30% when the disease transform into
acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
Features of Blast Crisis
Refractory to treatment
Abrupt increase in the size of spleen
Bone pain and sternal tenderness
Anemia and bleeding tendencies
Generalized lymphadenopathy may appear
Peripheral smear and bone marrow showing >30% cells simulating acute leukemia
Basophils may increase to 20%
Thrombocytopenia may result in bleeding episodes.
Treatment of blast crisis is same as that for acute myeloblastic or
lymphoblastic leukemia. Complications of chronic myelogenous leukemia is
enlisted in Box 8.14.
Box 8.14: Complications of chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML).
Fatigue due to anemia.
Excess bleeding due to thrombocytopenia
Bone pain or joint pain due to expansion of bone marrow.
Enlarged spleen
Vulnerable to infection due to impaired immune system
Death
CHRONIC LYMPHOCYTIC LEUKEMIA
Q. Discuss the types, clinical features, investigation, clinical staging and
management of chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
Definition
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is a tumor of immature small round
lymphocytes characterized by the accumulation of neoplastic mature looking
lymphocytes in the peripheral blood, bone marrow and lymphoid organs
(spleen and lymph nodes).

Types
B-cell origin: More than 95% of the cases of CLL express the pan B-cell
markers CD19 and CD20. And also aberrant expression of T-cell antigen
CD5 (found only in a small subset of normal B-cells).
T-cell origin: Constitute less than 5%.
Clinical Features
Most common form of chronic leukemia.
Age: Most of the patients at the time of diagnosis are over 50 years of age.
Sex: More common in males than in females with a ratio of 2:1.
Asymptomatic: In about 25% of patients and are detected either because
of nonspecific symptoms or routine blood examination for some other
disease.Nonspecific symptoms: This includes fatigue, loss of weight and
anorexia.
Painless generalized lymphadenopathy: Initially, the cervical lymph
nodes are enlarged and in later stages there may be generalized
lymphadenopathy. Involved nodes are rubbery, discrete, non-tender, small
and mobile.Splenomegaly and hepatomegaly: Mild degree is observed in very few
cases.
Presenting symptoms may be:
–   Slowly developing anemia: Due to immune hemolysis and bone
marrow infiltration.
–   Recurrent infections: Develops due to hypogammaglobulinemia.
Streptococcus pneumonia, Staphylococcus and Haemophilus
influenzae cause most of the infections. Herpes zoster is also common.
–   Bleeding manifestations: Uncommon.
Transformation
CLL may transform to:
Prolymphocytic transformation with appearance of ‘prolymphocytes’ in
the peripheral blood (>10%).
Transformation to diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (Richter syndrome).
Monoclonal B-cell lymphocytosis (MBL): WHO criteria for monoclonal

B-cell lymphocytosis (MBL) is the presence of monoclonal B-cell
populations in the peripheral blood (PB) of up to 5 × 109/L either with the
phenotype of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), atypical CLL, or non-
CLL (CD52) B cells in the absence of other lymphomatous features. It has
been found that MBL precedes almost all cases of CLL/SLL. In 2016
WHO subdivided MBL into “low count” MBL (characterized by PB CLL
count of <0.5 × 109/L) and “high count” MBL. The distinction is
important because low count MBL does not require routine follow-up
whereas, high count MBL requires routine/yearly follow-up.
InvestigationsHemoglobin: Usually below 13 g/dL and as the disease progresses, it may
decrease below 10 g/dL. This is due to marrow failure, but associated
autoimmune hemolysis may also be contributory, when present.
Blood counts:
–   Total leukocyte count is increased and varies from 20 × 109/L to 50 ×
109/L.
–   Platelet count may be normal or low.
Peripheral blood smear (Fig. 8.31):
–   Mild to moderate normocytic normochromic anemia.
–   Lymphocytosis is the characteristic features and constitute more than
50% of the white cells and absolute lymphocyte count should be more
than 5000 × 109/L.
–   Lymphocytes are of mature type in majority of the cases.
–   Smudge cells or basket cells are disintegrated lymphocytes and is due
to the rupture of neoplastic lymphocytes while making the peripheral
smear due to its fragile nature.
–   Platelets: Normal or reduced in number (autoimmune
thrombocytopenia).
Bone marrow: Involved in all cases of CLL and its infiltration by mature
lymphocytes results in hypercellular marrow.
Direct Coombs’ test: About 15–20% of patients manifest autoimmune
hemolytic anemia and have positive direct Coombs’ test.
Lymph node biopsy shows well-differentiated, small, non-cleaved
lymphocytes.

Immunoglobulins: Low or normal.
Serum folic acid levels are low.
Fig. 8.31: Peripheral blood smear in chronic lymphocytic leukemia showing numerous small
lymphocytes and few smudge cells (arrow).
Diagnostic Criteria for Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (Table
8.34)
Table 8.34: Diagnostic criteria for chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
Lymphocytosis Immunophenotype
Absolute lymphocyte count should be more than
5000 × 109/LPositive for B-cell surface antigens (CD19,
CD20, CD23)
Aberrant expression of T-cell antigen CD5
Lymphoid cells ≤55% prolymphocytes Evidence of monoclonality in the form of ‘light
chain restriction’
Clinical Staging
Binet staging and Rai staging of CLL are presented in Tables 8.35 and 8.36
respectively.
Table 8.35: Binet staging for CLL.
Stage Features Survival

A No anemia or thrombocytopenia
Less than 3 lymphoid areas enlarged>10 years
B No anemia or thrombocytopenia
Three or more lymphoid areas enlarged7 years
C Anemia (Hb ≤10 g/dL) and or thrombocytopenia
(<10,000/mm3) present, regardless of the number
of areas of lymphoid enlargement2 years
Lymphoid enlargement includes cervical, axillary and inguinal lymph nodes.
Table 8.36: Rai staging of CLL.
Stage Features Survival
0 Peripheral blood lymphocytosis alone >10 years
I Lymphocytosis with lymphadenopathy 9 years
II Lymphocytosis with splenomegaly or
lymphadenopathy or both7 years
III Lymphocytosis with anemia (hemoglobin <11
g/dL) and organomegaly5 years
IV Lymphocytosis with anemia, thrombocytopenia
and organomegaly5 years
Treatment
Absolute indications for treatment: When any of the following features is present:
1. Anemia or thrombocytopenia that can be attributed to CLL.
2. Recurrent fever, extreme fatigue, night sweats and weight loss.
3. Bulky or progressive lymphadenopathy; massive or progressive splenomegaly with discomfort.
4. Autoimmune cytopenias not responsive to corticosteroids.
5. Progressive disease manifest by doubling of the lymphocyte count in 6 months.
Treatment options based on Binet staging (Table 8.37)
Chlorambucil (Leukeran ): Two regimes
1. Continuous low dose therapy: 5 mg/day orally.
2. Intermittent high dose therapy (pulse therapy): 0.4 mg/kg for every 2 weeks.Complications: Development of myelodysplasia and acute myeloid leukemia.
Newer drugs:
1. Anti CD 20 antibodies: Ofatumumab, obnituzumab
2. BTK inhibitors: Ibrutinib
3. PI3K inhibitors: Idelalisib

Table 8.37: Treatment options based on Binet staging.
Binet staging Treatment
Stage A No specific therapy required
Stage BNo specific treatment if asymptomatic
Medically unfit elderly patients with symptoms:
Chlorambucil (oral)
Young patients: Fludarabine (IV)
Local radiotherapy to troublesome lymph nodes.
Stage CYoung patients: Chemoimmunotherapy:
Fludrabine, cyclophosphamide, rituximab,
bendamustineRefractory cases: Combination chemotherapy with
cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine and
prednisolone (CHOP)Rituximab in combination with fludarabine
Packed red cell transfusion (for anemia) with
fludarabine
Prednisolone for patients with hemolytic anemia
and thrombocytopenia
Splenectomy for symptomatic splenomegaly
Palliative total body irradiation
Fludarabine:  It is a purine nucleoside analogue that is drug of choice in young patients.
Dose: 25–30 mg/m2 IV/day for 5 days every 4 weeks.
Complications: Autoimmune hemolytic anemia, opportunistic infections (e.g. Legionella
pneumophila, Pneumocystis jiroveci , Listeria monocytogenes and Cytomegalovirus ).
Cladribine: It is also a purine nucleoside analogue, an alternative to fludarabine.
Dose:
0.2 mg/kg continuous infusion daily for 7 days every 4 weeks or
0.14 mg/kg over 2 hours daily for 5 days every 4 weeks.
Pentostatin : It is a purine nucleoside analogue that can be used instead of fludarabine or cladribine.
Rituximab and alemtuzumab:  They are monoclonal antibodies against CD20 and CD52 respectively.
CD20 is expressed on normal and malignant B-cells.
CD52 expressed on all CLL cells.
Side effects:  Fever, chills, nausea, headache, myalgias.

Alkylating agents:  Cyclophosphamide, bendamustine.
MYELOPROLIFERATIVE NEOPLASMS
Q. Define and write short essay/note on myeloproliferative diseases
(disorders) or myeloproliferative neoplasms and enumerate
myeloproliferative neoplasms.
Definition
Myeloproliferative neoplasms (old synonym myeloproliferative
disorder/diseases) are clonal hematopoietic stem cell disorders which are
characterized by proliferation of one or more of the myeloid lineages
(erythroid, granulocytic, megakaryocytic and mast cells).
It is seen usually in adults with a peak in the 5th to 7th decade.
Splenomegaly and hepatomegaly occurs commonly due to sequestration of
excess hematopoietic cells or proliferation of abnormal hematopoietic cells.
Box 8.15: WHO classification of myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN).
Chronic myelogenous leukemia, BCR-ABL1  positive
Chronic neutrophilic leukemia
Polycythemia vera (PV)
Essential thrombocythemia (ET)
Primary myelofibrosis (PMF)
Chronic eosinophilic leukemia not otherwise specified
Myeloproliferative neoplasm, unclassifiable
Mastocytosis is no longer listed under the broad heading of MPN in WHO
(2016) classification.
WHO Classification (2016) of Myeloproliferative Neoplasm
(MPN): (Box 8.15) Polycythemia
Q. Write short essay/note on polycythemia and its classification.
Definition
Polycythemia, or erythrocytosis, refers to an increase in the number of
RBCs above normal in the circulating blood, usually with a corresponding
increase in hemoglobin and PCV level. PCV is a more reliable indicator of

polycythemia than is hemoglobin.

Classification and Causes of Polycythemia (Table 8.38)
Q. Write short note on causes of secondary polycythemia.
Table 8.38: Pathophysiologic classification of polycythemia.
Relative
Reduced plasma volume with normal red cell mass (hemoconcentration) due to dehydration—low
fluid intake, vomiting, diarrhea, sweating, acidosis
Gaisböck syndrome (spurious polycythemia)
Absolute (increased red cell mass)
Primary (Low erythropoietin level)
–   Polycythemia vera (erythremia)
Secondary (High erythropoietin level) —erythrocytosis
♦   Compensatory
◊  Lung disease [e.g. chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)]
◊  Living in high-altitude
◊  Cyanotic congenital heart disease (Tetralogy of Fallot, Eisenmenger’s complex)
◊  Chronic carbon monoxide poisoning
◊  Sleep apnea syndrome
◊  Smokers
♦   As a consequence of local hypoxia:  Renal artery stenosis, end-stage renal disease,
hydronephrosis, renal cysts (Polycystic kidney disease), postrenal transplant erythrocytosis
♦   Paraneoplastic:  Erythropoietin-secreting tumors. Examples: Renal cell carcinoma,
hepatocellular carcinoma, cerebellar hemangioblas-toma, uterine leiomyoma,
pheochromocytoma
Clinical Features of PolycythemiaQ. Write short essay/note on clinical features of polycythemia.
Usually appears insidiously, in late middle age (median age at onset: 60
years).
Most symptoms are due to the increased red cell mass and hematocrit.
Plethora and cyanosis due to stagnation and deoxygenation of blood in
peripheral vessels are early findings. Headache, dizziness, and visual
problems result from vascular disturbances in the brain and retina.Increased incidence of thrombotic episodes and bleeding.
Secondary polycythemia, in addition shows manifestations of the

underlying disease.
Polycythemia Vera
Q. Discuss the clinical features, diagnosis and management of
polycythemia vera.
Definition
Polycythemia vera (PV) is an acquired myeloproliferative neoplasm
arising from malignant transformation of hematopoietic stem cell .
It is characterized by trilineage (erythroid, granulocytic, and
megakaryocytic) hyperplasia in the bone marrow.
It leads to uncontrolled production of red cells, granulocytes and
platelets (panmyelosis) and leads to erythrocytosis (polycythemia) and or
granulocytosis and thrombocytosis.
Etiology
The etiology of PV is not known. PV is partly due to a failure of apoptosis as
a result of deregulation of the Bcl-x gene (anti-apoptotic gene), in addition a
mutation in the tyrosine kinase JAK 2 V617F  (which causes the substitution
of phenylalanine for valine at position 617) has been found; this stimulates
low grade erythropoiesis.
Clinical FeaturesOnset is insidious.
Age and gender: Late middle age (median age at onset is 60 years) and
more common in males.
Features due to increased viscosity and/or decreased cerebral perfusion
–   Plethora (excessive fullness of blood) and deep dusky cyanosis due to
stagnation and deoxygenation of blood in peripheral vessels are early
findings.
–   Headache, dizziness, vertigo, a sense of fullness in the head, rushing in
the ears, visual problems, tinnitus, tiredness, syncope and even chorea
result from vascular disturbances in the brain and retina.Severe itching (pruritus) after a hot bath or when the patient is warm is
frequent and may be disabling.

Thrombotic episodes: For example, deep venous thrombosis, myocardial
infarction, thrombosis of hepatic veins (producing Budd-Chiari
syndrome).
Bleeding manifestations: include epistaxis, bleeding from peptic ulcer,
bruising and intramuscular hemorrhages.
Peptic ulcer is seen in few patients and is five times more frequent than
general population.
Hyperuricemia: May result in urate stones, gout and uric acid
nephropathy.
Physical findings
Injection of the conjunctivae, deep red palate, dusky red hands and retinal
venous engorgement.
Splenomegaly is very common (~70%) and is useful in distinguishing PV
from secondary polycythemia.
Hepatomegaly occurs in ~50%.
Diagnosis
Hemoglobin increased ranging from 14 to 28 g/dL.
PCV (hematocrit) increased to about 60%. However, in many patients,
the plasma volume is also increased giving rise to near normal hematocrit.
Hence, it is important to determine the red cell mass.Red cell count: Increased and usually about 6 million/cu mm (6 ×
1012/L)
Increased red cell volume and blood viscosity: Isotope dilution using
the patient’s 51 Cr-tagged red cells (>36 mL/kg in males and 32 mL/kg in
females).
Total white cell count (~70% ) and platelet count (~50%) usually
increased.
Absolute basophil count: Increased to >100/µL in majority of patients.
Arterial oxygen saturation  (PO2) is normal and is useful for
differentiating it from secondary polycythemia.
Erythropoietin (EPO) levels are decreased  in urine and serum, in
contrast to secondary polycythemia.
Bone marrow: Shows either erythroid hyperplasia or hyperplasia of all

elements (trilineage hyperplasia) and depletion of iron stores.
Leukocyte alkaline phosphatase (LAP): Increased in majority of
patients.
Serum vitamin B12 and vitamin B12-binding protein  transcobalamin I
(TC I) levels: Increased (not routinely measured)
Serum uric acid: Increased indicating increased cell turnover.
Abnormal liver function tests.
Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) mutations (e.g. JAK2V617F mutation)
–   In ~95% patients with polycythemia vera, and in ~50% of essential
thrombocytosis and primary myelofibrosis.
–   Janus kinases belong to tyrosine kinase family located on chromosome
9.
–   JAK2 is used by the EPO, thrombopoietin and G-CSF receptors to
transmit signals and are involved in hematopoiesis.
–   JAK2 inhibitors are used for managing these patients.
WHO diagnostic criteria for polycythemia vera (PV) (Table 8.39)
Table 8.39: WHO (2016) diagnostic criteria for polycythemia vera (PV).
Major criteria Minor criteria
1. Hb >16.5 g/dL (men), >16.0 g/dL (women)
OR
Hematocrit >49% in men, >48% in women
OR
Elevated red cell mass >25% above mean normal
predicted value
2. Bone marrow biopsy showing hypercellularity for age
with trilineage growth (panmyelosis) including
prominent erythroid, granulocytic and megakaryocytic
proliferation with pleomorphic, mature megakaryocytes
(differences in size)
3. Presence of JAF2V617 F (a mutation in JAK2) or JAK2
exon 12 mutationSubnormal serum EPO level
Diagnostic criteria for PV
Either all three major criteria, or the first two major criteria and the minor criterion.
Clinical Course
The clinical course tends to proceed as a series of phases.

Proliferative phase: Erythroid proliferation with increased red cell mass.
Spent phase: Excessive proliferation of erythroid cells ceases, resulting in
stable or decreased erythrocyte mass
Progression to myelofibrosis
Acute myelogenous leukemia in 2–5% of cases.
Complications of PV (Box 8.16)
Box 8.16: Complications of PV.
Thrombotic and bleeding episodes
Peptic ulcer
Hyperuricemia (gout)
Sudden increase in splenic size
Acute nonlymphocytic leukemia
Myelofibrosis and myeloid metaplasia
Erythromelalgia (thrombocytosis, involving the lower extremities with erythema, warmth, and pain
and occasionally digital infarction)
Treatment (Fig. 8.32)
PV generally has a very slow course.
Aim of treatment:  To maintain a normal blood count, PCV below 0.45 L/L and the platelet count
below 400 x 109/L and to prevent the complications (mainly thrombosis and hemorrhage).
Venesection:  Repeated venesection (phlebotomy) is the treatment of choice and relieves many of
the symptoms of PV.
Chemotherapy
–   Chemotherapy is indicated if the patient is intolerant to venesection, or thrombocytosis occurs,
or symptomatic or progressive splenomegaly develops.
–   Continuous or intermittent treatment with hydroxycarbamide (hydroxyurea)  is the treatment
of choice in patients above 40 years. It controls thrombocytosis and generally safer than
alkylating agents (e.g. busulfan) and 32P (Phosphorus) which carry an increased risk of acute
leukemia.
–   In younger patients, interferon-α is used.
Radioactive 32P: One dose may give control for up to1½ years, but carries an increased risk to
acute leukemia. In elderly patients (>70 years), 32P or low-dose intermittent busulphan may be
more convenient.
Other measures:
–   Low dose aspirin: May be used to reduce thrombotic episodes.
–   Anagrelide (inhibits platelet aggregation): May be used if thrombotic features develop despite
above treatment.
–   Itching should be treated with antihistamines. If do not relieve, hydroxyurea, interferon-α and
psoralens with UV light in ‘A’ range (PUVA) may be helpful.

–   Asymptomatic hyperuricemia does not require treatment.

Fig. 8.32:  Approach to polycythemia.
Q. How will you differentiate primary polycythemia (polycythemia
vera) from secondary polycythemia with hypoxia [(e.g. chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)]?
Differences between polycythemia vera and secondary
polycythemia (Table 8.40)

Table 8.40: Differences between polycythemia vera and secondary
polycythemia.
Feature Polycythemia vera Secondary polycythemia
1. Oxygen saturation Normal Low
2.  EPO (erythropoietin) levels Decreased Increased
3.  Blood counts
–   Total white cell count
–   Absolute basophil count
–   Platelet countIncreased
Increased
IncreasedNormal
Normal
Normal
4.  Leukocyte alkaline
phosphatase (LAP)Raised Normal
5.  Vitamin B 12 levels Increased Normal
6.  Bone marrow Trilineage (panhyperplasia) Erythroid hyperplasia
7.  Splenomegaly Present Absent
Primary Myelofibrosis
Q. Discuss the clinical features, investigations and management of
primary myelofibrosis (agnogenic myeloid metaplasia, myelofibrosis
with myeloid metaplasia).
Definition: Primary myelofibrosis is a clonal MPN characterized by
increased fibrosis within the marrow, which replaces hematopoietic cells
leading to cytopenias, splenomegaly and extensive extramedullary
hematopoiesis. The extramedullary hematopoiesis is seen in the spleen, liver
and at times in lymph nodes, kidneys and adrenals.It can arise from polycythemia vera (PV) or essential thrombocytosis
(ET).
Clinical Features
Usually found above 60 years of age.
A significant number of cases develop acute myeloid leukemia.
Symptoms
Symptoms due to progressive anemia: Fatigue, weakness and anorexia.
Symptoms due to massive splenomegaly: Abdominal distension,
postprandial fullness, reflux esophagitis, dyspnea and dragging discomfort

in the left hypochondrium.
Symptoms resulting from hypermetabolic state: Fever, fatigue, weight
loss, night sweats and heat intolerance.
Bleeding tendencies due to thrombocytopenia develops at late stages.
Death usually occurs due to portal hypertension and infections.
Median survival is about 5 years.
Signs
Massive splenomegaly and hepatomegaly.
Anemia, lymphadenopathy, bleeding manifestations, ascites, cardiac
failure, and jaundice.
Hyperuricemia and secondary gout due to a high rate of cell turnover.
Extramedullary hematopoiesis: May produce paraspinal masses with
spinal cord compression, ascites, and effusions (pleural and pericardial).
Investigations
Hemoglobin level: Normal in the early stages, but markedly reduced in the
late stages.
Total leukocyte count: Normal/increased (early stages)/decreased (late
stages).
Platelet count: Increased in early stages and decreased in the late stages.
Peripheral smear:
–   RBC series
♦   Moderate to severe degree of normochromic normocytic anemia
accompanied by leukoerythroblastic blood picture (precursors of
granulocytes and nucleated RBCs being present simultaneously).
♦   Many tear drop-shaped red cells (dacryocytes) probably due to
damage in the fibrotic marrow.
♦   Basophilic stippling.
–   Giant platelets with vacuoles.
Bone marrow: The peripheral smear findings are not specific and bone
marrow biopsy is diagnostic.
–   Cellularity: Early stages (cellular phase), it is often hypercellular and
in later stages (hypocellular phase), it becomes hypocellular and

diffusely fibrotic.
–   Megakaryocytes are large, dysplastic and abnormally clustered.
LAP score: Raised
Philadelphia chromosome: Negative.
JAK2 V617F mutation occurs in ~50% patients. CALR mutation is also
present.
Serum vitamin B12: Moderately increased.
Radiological examination shows increased bone density of vertebrate
and proximal ends of long bones.
Treatment
No specific therapy exists for primary myelofibrosis.
1. Treatment of anemia
Correct other causes of anemia like gastrointestinal blood loss and folic acid deficiency (Folic
acid 5 mg daily).
Packed red cell transfusions.
Neither recombinant erythropoietin nor androgens (such as Danazol) is consistently effective in
controlling anemia but can be tried in some patients.
Glucocorticoids (prednisolone) may control constitutional symptoms and autoimmune
complications.
Combination with low-dose thalidomide (50–100 mg/day) with prednisolone can control
anemia and splenomegaly in a significant number of patients.
2. Treatment of splenomegaly
Patients with cellular bone marrow and marked leukocytosis : Busulphan 2 mg daily.
Indications for splenectomy in selected cases
–   With hypersplenism
–   If splenomegaly impairs alimentation and should be performed before cachexia sets in.
Splenic irradiation: To reduce splenic size is reserved for patients, who cannot undergo
splenectomy. Patients often develop severe cytopenias.
Hydroxyurea is useful to control splenomegaly, but can produce myelosuppression that may
exacerbate underlying anemia.
3. Treatment of extramedullary hematopoiesis:  By low dose irradiation
4. Curative treatment: Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation  is the only curative treatment. It
should be performed in younger patients as most patients in IMF are above 60 years of age.
5. Others
Allopurinol can control hyperuricemia.
Etanercept (TNF-α antagonist) used in patients with severe constitutional features.
JAK2 inhibitors ruxolitinib is used in clinical practice.
Prognosis

Median survival varies from 27 to 135 months and depends on prognostic
factors (Table 8.41).
Table 8.41: Shows poor prognostic factors.
Age > 65 years Hemoglobin level <10 g/dL Total WBC count
>25,000/mm3
Presence of blasts in peripheral
bloodPresence of constitutional
symptoms
Table 8.42: Various causes of secondary myelofibrosis.
Malignant conditions Non-malignant conditions
Hematological
Leukemia
–   Acute leukemia (lymphoid/myeloid)
–   Chronic myeloid leukemia
–   Hairy cell leukemia
Multiple myeloma
Polycythemia vera
Hodgkin’s lymphoma
Essential thrombocytosisInfections
HIV infection
Tuberculosis
Exposure to thorium dioxide
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Renal osteodystrophy
Hyperparathyroidism
Radiation therapy or treatment with
radiomimetic drugs
Gaucher disease
Non-hematological
Metastasis to marrow
–   Carcinoma breast, lung or prostate
–   Neuroblastoma
Myelophthisis
Q. Write short note on myelophthisis and its causes.
Fibrosis of the bone marrow can occur as a primary hematologic disease is
known as primary myelofibrosis (myeloid metaplasia), and as a secondary
reactive process, known as myelophthisis (secondary myelofibrosis).
Causes of myelophthisis (other causes of myelofibrosis) are presented in
Table 8.42. These causes may also produce splenomegaly.
Q. How will you differentiate chronic myeloid leukemia from
myelofibrosis?

Difference between chronic myeloid leukemia from myelofibrosis (Table
8.43).
Table 8.43: Difference between chronic myeloid leukemia from
myelofibrosis.
Features Chronic myeloid leukemia Myelofibrosis
Total leukocyte count Markedly raised usually
more than 20,000/µL.May be raised, but always less than
20,000/µL
Peripheral blood
Peripheral smear Shows full range of
granulocyte precursors,
predominantly mature formsShows leukoerythroblastosis with tear
drop cells
Nucleated red cells Few or absent Numerous
Thrombocytopenia Occurs late Common
Marrow fibrosis Uncommon and minimal Common and dense
LAP (leukocyte alkaline
phosphatase) scoreVery low, usually <5 High, usually >100
Philadelphia chromosome Positive Negative
Serum vitamin B 12 levels Very high Moderately raised
Myelodysplastic Syndromes
Q. Describe the etiology, classification, clinical features, diagnosis and
treatment of myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS).
Definition
Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are a heterogeneous group of acquired
clonal stem cell disorders characterized by:
Progressive cytopenias (low blood cell counts)
Dysplasia in one or more major cell lines (erythroid, myeloid and
megakaryocytic forms)
Ineffective hematopoiesis
Increased risk of development of AML
A subtype of myeloid neoplasms.
Etiology
In primary MDS the exact cause is not known, however genetic factors

may play a role.
Causes of secondary/t-MDS: Exposure to radiation, benzene,
postchemotherapy (particularly alkylating agents and topoisomerase
inhibitors), viruses, cigarette smoking and PNH.
Median age is 65 years.
WHO (2016) Classification of MDS
The revised WHO (2016) diagnosis and classification of MDS introduces
refinements in morphologic interpretation, cytopenias assessment and genetic
information. Cytopenia is necessary for diagnosis of any MDS and in WHO
(2008) classifications, MDS nomenclature included references to ‘cytopenia’
or to specific types of cytopenia (e.g. refractory anemia). Present WHO
(2016) classification depends mainly on the degree of dysplasia and blast
percentages and specific cytopenias have only minor impact. Hence, the
terminology for adult MDS has replaced the terms such as ‘refractory
anemia’ and ‘refractory cytopenia’ with ‘myelodysplastic syndrome’
followed by the appropriate modifiers: single versus multilineage dysplasia,
ring sideroblasts, excess blasts, or the del (5q) cytogenetic abnormality
(Table 8.44).
Clinical FeaturesUsually found in patients above 60 years and slightly more common in
males.
Detected incidentally on routine blood examination in about 50% of
patients.
Symptoms are due to cytopenias which may be single-lineage cytopenia,
bicytopenia or pancytopenia. Symptoms include:
–   Weakness (anemia)
–   Infections (leukopenia)
–   Hemorrhage (thrombocytopenia).Extramedullary hematopoiesis may cause hepatomegaly and splenomegaly
but is uncommon.
About 10–40% progresses to AML because of which MDS was referred to
as preleukemic syndrome.

Table 8.44: WHO (2016) classification, peripheral smear and bone marrow
findings of myelodysplastic syndromes.
Disease Dysplastic
lineagesCytopenias1 Ring sideroblasts
as % of marrow
erythroid
elementsBone marrow
(BM) and
peripheral blood
(PB) blasts
1. MDS with single
lineage
dysplasia (MDS-
SLD)1 1 or 2<15%/<5%2 BM <5%, PB
<1%, no Auer
rods
2. MDS with
multilineage
dysplasia (MDS-
MLD)2 or 3 1–3<15%/<5%2 BM <5%, PB
<1%, no Auer
rods
3. MDS with ring
sideroblasts
(MDS-RS)
–   MDS-RS
with single
lineage
dysplasia
(MDSRS-
SLD)1 1 or 2≥15%/≥5%2 BM <5%, PB
<1%, no Auer
rods
–   MDS-RS
with
multilineage
dysplasia
(MDS-RS-
MLD)2 or 3 1–3≥15%/≥5%2 BM <5%, PB
<1%, no Auer
rods
4. MDS with
isolated del (5q)1–3 1–2 None or any BM <5%, PB
<1%, no Auer
rods
5. MDS with
excess blasts
(MDSEB)
–   MDS-EB-1 0–3 1–3 None or any BM 5–9% or PB
2–4%, no Auer
rods
–   MDS-EB-2 0–3 1–3 None or any BM 10–19% or
PB 5–19% or
Auer rods
6. MDS,
unclassifiable

(MDS-U)
–   with 1%
blood blasts1–3 1–3 None or any BM <5%,
PB=1%3, no
Auer rods
–   with single
lineage
dysplasia
and
pancytopenia1 3 None or any BM <5%, PB
<1%, no Auer
rods
–   based on
defining
cytogenetic
abnormality0 1–3<15%4 BM <5%, PB
<1%, no Auer
rods
7. Refractory
cytopenia of
childhood1-3 1–3 None BM <5%, PB
<2%
1Cytopenias defined as hemoglobin <10 g/dL, platelet count <100 × 109/L, and absolute neutrophil
count <1.8 × 109/L; rarely, MDS may present with mild anemia or thrombocytopenia above these
levels. PB monocytes must be <1 × 109/L.
2If SF3B1 mutation is present.
31% PB blasts must be recorded on at least two separate occasions.
4Cases with ≥15% ring sideroblasts by definition have significant erythroid dysplasia, and are
classified as MDS-RS-SL.Diagnosis
Minimal morphologic criterion for the diagnosis of an MDS: Dysplasia in
at least 10% of cells of any one of the myeloid lineages.
Complete blood count: May give clues to this diagnosis.
Peripheral smear:
–   RBC: Mild to moderate degree of macrocytic or dimorphic anemia
with evidence of dyspoiesis.
–   WBC count may be normal or low. Neutropenia with few blasts.
Number of blasts determines the type of MDS (see Table 8.44). The
cytoplasm of neutrophils is hypogranular or agranular. The nuclei of
neutrophils may show hyposegmentation with only two nuclear lobes
(Pseudo-Pelger-Hüet cells), hypersegmentation or ringed neutrophils.
–   Platelets: Variable thrombocytopenia, presence of large hypogranular
or giant platelets is seen.

–   NAP score is moderately or severely decreased.
Bone marrow: The most characteristic features are varying degree of
dyspoietic (disordered) differentiation affecting all non-lymphoid lineages
(erythroid, granulocytic, monocytic and megakaryocytic) associated with
cytopenias.Cytogenic study of the marrow: Most important for establishing the
diagnosis. Chromosome abnormalities of chromosome 5 or 7 are frequent.
Treatment
Therapy is supportive:
–   Packed red cell transfusion for anemia.
–   Platelet transfusions for bleeding due to thrombocytopenia.
–   Antibiotic therapy for infections.
–   Iron chelators to reduce iron overload from multiple transfusions.EPO (erythropoietin) and G-CSF (granulocyte colony stimulating factor) may be useful in some
patients, to ameliorate symptoms.
Others: Use of thalidomide, lenalidomide (a derivative of thalidomide), 5-azacitidine and
decitabine. 5-azacytidine and decitabine (hypomethylating agents) may reduce requirements of
blood transfusion and to retard the progression of MDS to AML. Lenalidomide is found useful in
the 5q-syndrome.Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation: Curative. However, it may be performed in
less than 5–10% of patients because MDS is most common during seventh or eighth decade of
life.
PLASMA CELL NEOPLASMS
Q. Write short essay/note on plasma cell neoplasms/disorders.
Classification of plasma cell proliferative disorders (Table 8.45).
Multiple Myeloma
Q. Discuss the immunopathology, pathology, clinical features,
investigations, diagnosis and treatment of multiple myeloma.
Multiple myeloma (MM) is a malignant plasma cell neoplasm derived
from a single clone plasma cells of the bone marrow and produces
multiple, lytic bone lesions.
Plasma cells are derived from B lymphocytes.
Normal plasma cells secrete equal quantities of heavy and light chains.
But the neoplastic plasma cells frequently synthesize excess of light (L) or

heavy (H) chains along with complete Igs. Rarely, only light chains or
heavy chains are produced.
The excess of free light chains are small with low molecular weight and
therefore excreted in the urine. They are known as Bence-Jones proteins.
Classification of myeloma: It is based on the type of paraprotein secreted
namely: (1) IgG (55%), (2) IgA (25%), (3) IgD (uncommon), (4) IgE
(uncommon), and (5) light chain disease (20%). In non-secretory
myeloma, there is no M-protein in the blood or urine but bone marrow
shows plasmacytosis.The cause of multiple myeloma is unclear. Exposure to radiation, benzene,
and other organic solvents, herbicides, and insecticides may play a role.
Multiple myeloma has been reported in familial clusters of two or more
first-degree relatives and in identical twins.
Table 8.45: Classification of plasma cell proliferative disorders.
I. Monoclonal gammopathies of undetermined significance (MGUS) Benign (IgG, IgA, IgD, IgM, and rarely, free light chains)
Associated neoplasms or other diseases not known to produce monoclonal proteins
Biclonal gammopathies
Idiopathic Bence-Jones proteinuria
II. Malignant monoclonal gammopathies
Multiple (plasma cell) myeloma (IgG, IgA, IgD, IgE, and free light chains)
–   Overt multiple myeloma
–   Smoldering multiple myeloma
–   Plasma cell leukemia
–   Nonsecretory myeloma
–   IgD myeloma
–   Osteosclerotic myeloma (POEMS syndrome)
–   Solitary plasmacytoma of bone
–   Extramedullary plasmacytomaWaldenström’s macroglobulinemia
III. Heavy chain diseases (HCDs)
A. γ-HCD
B. α-HCD
C. μ -HCD
IV. Cryoglobulinemia
V. Primary amyloidosis (AL)

Clinical Features
Insidious in onset.
Age and gender: Peak incidence is seen during 6th to 7th decade, and
males are more affected than females.
Symptoms (Flowchart 8.2 and Table 8.46).
–   Some patients may be asymptomatic, and is accidentally detected
during the preclinical phase.
Osteosclerotic Myeloma (POEMS Syndrome)
This syndrome is characterized by polyneuropathy, organomegaly,
endocrinopathy, M-protein, and skin changes (POEMS). The major clinical
features are a chronic inflammatory-demyelinating polyneuropathy with
predominantly motor disability and sclerotic skeletal lesions.
Flowchart 8.2:  Clinical features and laboratory findings in myeloma.

Table 8.46: Clinical features in multiple myeloma based on involved
organ/system.
Involved organ/system Features (Box 8.17)
Bone Localized bony swellings over vertebrae,
skull, sternum, ribs and clavicle
Bone pain due to pathological fractures,
backache due to involvement of vertebra
(60%)Neurological symptoms of sensory and/or
motor loss due to lesion in the vertebra
compressing the spinal cord nerve root
Bone marrowAnemia, leukopenia and thrombocytopenia
Immune system Humoral immune deficiency leading to
increased susceptibility to infections
(recurrent infections), particularly of the
respiratory system and urinary tract
Renal damage is multifactorial due to Bence-
Jones proteinuria, hypercalcemia, humoral
immune deficiencyNephrocalcinosis, amyloidosis, renal
insufficiency (renal failure in 20–30%),
infections or nephrotic syndrome
Bleeding tendency due to thrombocytopeniaPurpura, epistaxis, gastrointestinal bleeding
Cryoglobulinemia and hyperviscosity
(uncommon) syndromeHyperviscosity may affect the:
CNS (leading to confusion, headache, vertigo,
nystagmus, postural hypotension and
dizziness)Retina (producing blurred vision, retinal
venous congestion, papilledema)
CVS (congestive cardiac failure)
Neurological manifestations Amyloid peripheral neuropathy, carpal tunnel
syndrome, and compressive myelopathy
Diagnosis of Multiple Myeloma
Q. Write short essay/note on diagnosis and management of multiple
myeloma.
Requires at least two of the following:
1. Monoclonal immunoglobulin (M protein) or light chains in the blood (>3 g/dL) and/or urine.
2. Infiltration of bone marrow with (clonal) plasma cells (≥10%) or plasmacytoma.
3. Evidence of myeloma-related organ or tissue impairment (≥1)-CRAB
Hypercalcemia: Serum (ionized) >5.5 mEg/L.
Renal insufficiency creatinine clearance <40 mL/min, calcium >2.75 mmol/L or >0.25 mmol/L

than the ULN.
Anemia (hemoglobin or 2 g/dL below the LLN).
Lytic bone lesions and/or osteoporosis.
4. Other criteria
Free light chain ratio between involved to uninvolved light chains >100
Presence of >1 bone lesion on MRI
Bone marrow plasma cell percentage >60.
Box 8.17:  Mnemonic to remember common symptoms of multiple myeloma.
CRAB:  C = Calcium (elevated), R = Renal failure, A = Anemia, B = Bone lesions.
Smoldering (asymptomatic) multiple myeloma
Smoldering multiple myeloma is defined by the presence of serum M-
protein level greater than 3 g/dL and/or 10% or more plasma cells in bone
marrow and patients are asymptomatic.
This entity lies in between multiple myeloma and monoclonal
gammopathy of uncertain significance. Patients with smoldering multiple
myeloma carry a much higher risk of progression to myeloma or related
malignancy compared to MGUS.
Investigations in Multiple Myeloma
Peripheral blood
–   Usually shows anemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia and raised ESR.
–   Peripheral blood smear: May show rouleaux formation due to
increased immunoglobulins.
Bone marrow examination is important. Normal bone marrow contains
2–10% plasma cells. In myeloma, the bone marrow is hypercellular as a
result of increased number of plasma cells and myeloma cells (neoplastic
plasma cells). Increased number of myeloma cells, more than 30% of the
cellularity is diagnostic.
Urine: Bence-Jones proteins may be present
Serum findings:
–   Serum β2 microglobulin:  It is a useful prognostic marker and high
values signify poor prognosis.
–   Hypercalcemia is due to extensive osteolytic lesions and osteoporosis
and there are also increased levels of serum phosphate.

–   Serum alkaline phosphatase: Usually normal in the absence of
complications.
–   Blood urea and serum creatinine raised in 20% of cases and along with
electrolytes are used to assess renal function.
–   Serum proteins: Total serum protein level is increased, albumin is
decreased and globulins are markedly increased.
–   Serum uric acid: Raised.
–   Serum immunoglobulin estimation reveals a reduction of normal
immunoglobulins below normal levels.
Electrophoretic studies on serum and urine: Electrophoretic studies
reveal raised levels of immunoglobulins in the blood and/or light chains
(Bence-Jones proteins) in the urine. The monoclonal immunoglobulin (M-
protein) is identified as abnormal protein ‘spikes’ in serum or urine
electrophoresis. The type of immunoglobulin can be determined by
immunofixation. The most common M-protein is IgG type, followed by
IgA.Radiological examination:
–   Reveals generalized osteoporosis.
–   Radiographs of flat bones: Such as skull (Fig. 8.33), vertebral bodies,
ribs and pelvis show the characteristic punched-out osteolytic lesions.
–   Collapse of multiple vertebrate is a common finding.
MRI and PET: May detect bone involvement when skeletal survey is
normal.

Fig. 8.33:  X-ray of skull in myeloma showing punched out lesions.
Staging (Tables 8.47 and 8.48)
Table 8.47: Modified from Durie-Salmon staging.
Stage Criteria
Stage-I Low M-component: IgG < 5 g/dL, IgA < 3 g/dL, Urine Bence-Jones (BJ)
protein < 4 g/24 hours
Normal hemoglobin, serum calcium, Ig levels (non-M protein)
Stage-II Overall values between stage I and III
Stage-III One or more of the following:

Hemoglobin < 8.5 g/dL, serum calcium >12 mg/dL
High M-component: IgG > 7 g/dL, IgA > 5 g/dL, urine light chain >12 g/24
hours
Advanced multiple lytic lesions on X-rays
Subclassification based on renal function
Subclass A = Serum creatinine <2 mg/dL
Subclass B = Serum creatinine >2 mg/dL
Table 8.48: International staging system.
Stage Characteristic features Median survival
I Serum β 2-microglobulin < 3.5 mg/dL and serum
albumin > 3.5 g/dL62 months
II Serum β 2-microglobulin < 3.5 mg/dL and serum
albumin <3.5 g/dL and or serum β 2-
microglobulin < 3.5–5.5 mg/dL44 months
III β2-microglobulin < 5.5 mg/dL 29 months
Treatment
General measures
High fluid intake of about 3 L/day to treat renal impairment and hypercalcemia.
Prompt treatment of infections with antibiotics.
Treatment of anemia may require blood transfusion and erythropoietin often helps.
Analgesics to be given for relief of bone pain.
Allopurinol 300 mg daily should be given to reduce/prevent hyperuricemia and urate nephropathy.
Hyperviscosity syndrome is managed by plasmapheresis.
Bisphosphonates (e.g. zoledronate, pamidronate, clodronate) which inhibit osteoclast activity.
Long-term treatment with this, reduce skeletal events such as pathological fracture, cord
compression and bone pain. An important complication of bisphosphonates is osteonecrosis of
jaw.Orthopedic assistance and physiotherapy can significantly improve the quality of life.
Renal failure: Treated by rehydration and oral prednisolone.
Autologous stem cell transplantation
Young patients (<65 years) without renal failure: Standard treatment is first-line high-dose
chemotherapy for myeloablation (melphalan 200 mg/m2 intravenously) to maximum response and
then an autologous stem-cell transplantation.
Box 8.18:  Median survival.
Patients with advanced myeloma: 7–8 months.
With good supportive care and chemotherapy: 3 to 5 years. Asymptomatic stage I patients are
generally not given chemotherapy.
Young patients with intensive therapy may live longer.

Chemotherapy
Older patients
Thalidomide combined with the alkylating agent (melphalan or cyclophosphamide or
chlorambucil) and prednisolone. Thalidomide is teratogenic. Recent studies have suggested that
combination with thalidomide, results in improved response rates and overall survival, albeit with
increased toxicity (Box 8.18).Bortezomib is a proteasome inhibitor, which is used for upfront and relapsed is combined with
doxorubicin and dexamethasone.
Lenalidomide in combination with steroids has been tried.
Younger patients (<65–70 years)
Bortezomib, cyclophoshamide and dexamethasone. OR Newer drugs include carfilzomib,
Ixazomib, pomalidomide, daratumumab and elotuzumab.
Orally active cyclophosphamide, thalidomide and dexamethasone-based induction (CTD),
followed by a high-dose melphalan autograft.
Radiotherapy
Effective for local problems like severe bone pain, pathological fractures and tumorous lesions.
As an emergency treatment of spinal cord compression complicating extradural plasmacytomas.
Renal Involvement in Multiple Myeloma
Q. Write short note on the cause of renal failure of multiple myeloma.
Renal involvement is observed in 50% of myeloma patients.
Renal failure develops in ~25% of patients with multiple myeloma.
Various factors contributing to renal failure in multiple myeloma are:
–   Tubular damage from excretion of light chains (Bence-Jones proteinuria).
–   Hypercalcemia resulting in nephrocalcinosis and renal damage.
–   Amyloid deposition  in the glomeruli (renal amyloidosis).
–   Hyperuricemia producing in urate nephropathy.
–   Recurrent urinary tract infections .
–   Infiltration  of the kidney by myeloma cells .
Poor prognostic factors in multiple myeloma (Table 8.49)
Q. Write short note on the indications of poor prognosis in multiple
myeloma.
Table 8.49: Poor prognostic factors in multiple myeloma.
High levels of β 2-microglobulin Low serum albumin
High serum calcium >12 g/dL at presentation Low hemoglobin (<8.5 g/dL)
Advanced lytic bone lesions Thrombocytopenia

Renal failure Plasma cell leukemia
Radiographic features in multiple myeloma (Table 8.50)
Q. Write short note on the role of radiographic examination in the
diagnosis of multiple myeloma.
Table 8.50: Radiographic features helpful in the diagnosis of multiple
myeloma.
Site of X-ray Appearance
Skull and pelvis Multiple punched out osteolytic lesions
osteoporosis
Chest Pathological fractures and punched out lesions of
ribs, clavicle and scapulae
Osteoporosis
Spine Collapse of multiple vertebrae
Osteoporosis
Kidney Ureter and Bladder (KUB) Nephrocalcinosis
Monoclonal gammopathy of uncertain significance (MGUS)
Q. Write short essay/note on monoclonal gammopathy of uncertain
significance (MGUS).
Definition: MGUS is defined as presence of serum M-protein concentration
lower than 3 g/dL, bone marrow clonal plasma cells < 10% plasma cells and
no end organ damage [CRAB (refer Box 8.17) no hypercalcemia, no renal
impairment, no anemia or no osteolytic lesions] or no evidence of other B-
cell neoplasms.MGUS is one of the most common plasma cell dyscrasias, occurring in
about 3–5% of general population above the age of 50 years.
Progression: MGUS should be considered as pre-neoplastic condition. It
can progress to multiple myeloma, Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia,
primary AL amyloidosis, or a lymphoproliferative disorder at a rate of 1–
1.5% per year. Risk of progression to multiple myeloma and related
disorders depends upon:
–   Size of M-component (risk of progression with an M-protein value of
1.5 g/dL almost twice that of a patient with an M-Protein value of 0.5

g/dL)
–   Type of m-component (IgM and IgA increased risk compared to IgG),
and
–   Abnormal free light chain ratio (kappa; lambda ratio-normal being
0.26–1.65).
Follow-up: Patients should be followed with serum protein electrophoresis
at 6 months and, if stable, can be followed every 1–2 years.
No treatment is indicated.
Differences between multiple myeloma and monoclonal
gammopathy of undetermined significance (Table 8.51)
Q. How do you differentiate between multiple myeloma and monoclonal
gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS)?
Solitary Plasmacytoma
Q. Write short essay/note on solitary plasmacytoma of bone.
Solitary plasmacytoma (osseous plasmacytoma) is a solitary tumor
occurring in the bone consisting of collection of monoclonal plasma cells.
Comprises 3–5% of plasma cell neoplasms.
Sites: Common sites are bones with active hematopoiesis and usually
occur in the same sites as in multiple myeloma (vertebrae, ribs, skull,
pelvis, femur, clavicle and scapula).Clinical features: Localized bone pain or pathological fracture. Vertebral
lesions may produce neurologic symptoms secondary to spinal cord or
root compression.Investigations:
–   M-protein in serum or urine observed 24–72% of patients by immune
fixation
–   MRI is useful to rule out occult systemic disease.
Treatment: Local control is achieved by radiotherapy. Up to two-thirds of
patients develop systemic disease.
Prognosis: Median survival is 7–12 years.
Table 8.51: Differences between multiple myeloma and monoclonal

gammopathy of undetermined significance.
Characteristic features Multiple myeloma MGUS
M-protein Found in serum and /or urine except in
patients with non-secretoryIntact immunoglobulin (e.g. IgG,
IgM, IgA)
Bone marrow Clonal plasma cells 10% or more Clonal plasma cells < 10%
No evidence of other B-cell
proliferative disorders
Organ/tissue
involvementAt least one of the following:
Serum calcium (ionized) >5.5
mEq/L
Renal insufficiency (creatinine >2
mg/dL)
Anemic (hemoglobin <10 g/dL)
Bone involvement-osteolytic bone
lesions and /or osteopeniaNo hypercalcemia, renal
impairment, anemia or bone
involvement
Solitary Extraosseous Plasmacytoma
Q. Write short essay/note on solitary extraosseous plasmacytoma.
Extraosseous (extramedullary) plasmacytoma are localized plasma cell
neoplasms that arise in tissues other than bone.
Comprises 3–5% of all plasma cell neoplasms.
Sites:
–   Upper respiratory tract (80%): Oropharynx, nasopharynx, sinuses and
larynx.
–   Other sites: GI tract, lymph nodes, bladder, CNS, breast, thyroid, testis,
parotid and skin.
Only about 20% of patients have M protein (most commonly IgA).
Diagnosis: Requires exclusion of occult systemic disease by extensive
radiographic imaging.
Treatment: Eradicated with local radiation therapy.
Prognosis:
–   About 15% of patients subsequently develop multiple myeloma.
–   About 70% of patients remain disease free at 10 years.
Plasma Cell Leukemia

Q. Write short essay/note on plasma cell leukemia.
Plasma cell leukemia (PCL) is the term used when the peripheral blood
has more than 20% plasma cells with an absolute plasma cell count of
2000/μL or greater.
Classification: Plasma cell leukemia may be classified as:
–   Primary plasma cell leukemia: It develops without any preceding
evidence of multiple myeloma. It is diagnosed in the leukemic phase
(60%). It develops in younger individuals and presents with
hepatosplenomegaly and lymphadenopathy, a higher platelet count,
few bone lesions, mild serum M-protein component and longer
survival rate when compared to those with secondary plasma cell
leukemia.
–   Secondary: When leukemic transformation develops in a patient with
multiple myeloma (40%).It is an aggressive disease associated with a high tumor burden and
extramedullary dissemination.
Waldenstorm Macroglobulinemia
Q. Write short essay/note on Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia.
Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia is a syndrome characterized by IgM
monoclonal gammopathy sufficient to cause a hyperviscosity of the blood
and bone marrow infiltration.Most commonly occurs in association with lymphoplasmacytic
lymphoma. The tumor cells undergo terminal differentiation to plasma
cells and secrete monoclonal IgM.It occurs in older adults (median age 60 years).
Clinical Features
May be asymptomatic.
Usual presenting complaints are nonspecific and include weakness,
fatigue, and weight loss. Symptoms develop due to:
–   Tumor infiltration: Most patients present with weakness and fatigue
due to anemia caused by marrow infiltration. Other features include
fever, night sweats, weight loss, lymphadenopathy, hepatomegaly and
splenomegaly.

–   Monoclonal protein: About 10% of patients have autoimmune
hemolysis caused by cold agglutinins (monoclonal IgM bind to red
cells at temperatures of less than 37°C). IgM may be associated with
systemic amyloidosis. IgM-secreted by the tumor, because of its large
size, at high concentrations increases the viscosity of the blood, giving
rise to hyperviscosity syndrome. Features of hyperviscosity syndrome
are:
♦   Visual impairment associated with venous congestion (e.g. blurring
or loss of vision)
♦   Neurologic problems (e.g. dizziness, headache, vertigo, nystagmus,
hearing loss, ataxia, paresthesias, diplopia)
♦   Bleeding
♦   Cryoglobulinemia produces symptoms such as Raynaud
phenomenon and cold urticaria
–   Tumor cells can infiltrate organs and result in hepatomegaly,
splenomegaly and lymphadenopathy in about 20% patients.Diagnosis
Demonstration of monoclonal IgM: By serum electrophoresis, sample may
require warming to 37 °C, to avoid interference of cold agglutinins.
Immunofixation is required to characterize monoclonal protein.
Bone marrow aspirate and biopsy: It shows more than 10%
lymphoplasmacytic cells (CD20+).
Treatment
It is a chemotherapy- and immunotherapy-sensitive disease controllable with currently available
therapies.
No specific treatment needed for patients who do not have systemic symptoms.
Single agent therapy with rituximab alone is used in symptomatic patients with modest
hematologic compromise, IgM-related neuropathy or hemolytic anemia unresponsive to
corticosteroids.Combination chemotherapy and rituximab (anti CD20): Patients with severe constitutional
symptoms, profound hematologic compromise, bulky disease or hyperviscosity syndrome should
be treated with the dexamethasone, rituximab and cyclophosphamide Or Bortezomib,
dexamethasone and rituximabv Or Bendamustine rituximab.Plasmapheresis: Most of IgM secreted by tumor cells is intravascular. Patient with symptoms due
to high IgM levels (such as hyperviscosity and hemolysis) should first undergo plasmapheresis
which helps in alleviating these symptoms.

Prognosis: Transformation to large-cell lymphoma occurs but is uncommon.
Median survival is 4 years.
HODGKIN LYMPHOMA
Q. Discuss the pathological classification, clinical features, clinical
staging, investigations, diagnosis and treatment/management of
Hodgkin’s lymphoma.
Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) is a malignant lymphoma characterized by a
heterogeneous cellularity comprising of minority (1–3%) of specific
neoplastic cells (Hodgkin cells and Reed-Sternberg cells—Figs. 8.34A
and B) in a ‘characteristic background’ of reactive non-neoplastic cells
(majority) of various types.Cell of origin: The neoplastic Reed-Sternberg cells are derived from
germinal center or immediate post-germinal center B-cells indicating that
most HLs are unusual tumors of B-cell origin.Age: Bimodal age incidence
–   One pack in young adults (15–35 years)
–   Other peak in older adults (45–75 years)
The neoplastic cells in Hodgkin lymphoma are Reed-Sternberg cells
(Figs. 8.34A and B) and its variants.
Immunophenotype:
–   Reed-Sternberg cells in classical forms of HL are CD15+ and CD30+.
–   Reed-Sternberg cells in lymphocyte predominance HL are CD15-ve
and CD30-ve.

Figs. 8.34A and B:  Microscopic appearance of Hodgkin lymphoma showing RS cells and Hodgkin
cells within the background of mixed population of reactive cells.
Etiology
EBV: Young adults, who have had previous EBV infection (infectious
mononucleosis), have an increased risk of developing HL and the EBV
genome is frequently identified in the Reed-Sternberg cells.
Genetic factors may play a role because HLA subtypes, particularly
HLA-B18, are higher in patients with HL.
Immune status: HL seems to be more frequent in immunocompromised
patients or those with autoimmune diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis.
Classification of Hodgkin Lymphoma
Rye classification (Table 8.52): According to this Hodgkin lymphoma was
divided into four types and the prognosis varies depending upon the
histological type. The nodular sclerosing type is the most common.

WHO classification of Hodgkin lymphoma (Box 8.19): It is the presently
followed classification.
Table 8.52: Rye classification of Hodgkin lymphoma.
Histological type Prognosis
Lymphocyte predominant Very good
Nodular sclerosing Good
Mixed cellularity Fair
Lymphocyte depleted Poor
Box 8.19: WHO classification of Hodgkin lymphoma.
Classical Hodgkin lymphoma (> 95%)
–   Nodular sclerosis (NS) classic Hodgkin lymphoma
–   Mixed cellularity (MC) classic Hodgkin lymphoma (most common type in India)
–   Lymphocyte-rich (LR) classic Hodgkin lymphoma
–   Lymphocyte depletion (LD) classic Hodgkin lymphomaNodular lymphocyte predominance (LP) Hodgkin’s lymphoma (< 5%)
Clinical Manifestations
Most common presentation: Painless enlargement of one lymph node
group (unifocal origin) usually of cervical lymph node, consistency of
lymph nodes is described as ‘Indian rubber’ consistency. Then it spreads
in a predictable manner to the adjacent lymph node group (contiguous
spread).Other presentation
–   Localized disease of the mediastinum (often young women), with
cough due to mediastinal lymphadenopathy or axillary nodes, and
rarely in the abdominal, pelvic or inguinal nodes.
–   Generalized disease: With hepatosplenomegaly and constitutional ‘B’
symptoms is uncommon in the beginning, but may become prominent
as the disease advances.
–   Rare sites: It include Waldeyer’s ring, mesenteric, epitrochlear and
popliteal nodes.
–   Involvement of extralymphatic organs: Not common and may occur in
the later stages.

Classical Pel-Ebstein fever:  It occurs in a cyclical pattern, characterized
by several days or weeks of fever alternating with afebrile periods. It is
rarely seen.
Table 8.53: Clinical staging of Hodgkin lymphomas (Cotswold revision of
Ann Arbor staging classification).
Stage Definition
I Involvement of a single lymph node region or lymphoid structure (e.g. spleen, Waldeyer’s
ring, thymus) or involvement of a single extralymphatic site
II Involvement of two or more lymph node regions on the same side of the diaphragm (the
mediastinum is a single site; hilar nodes, when involved on both sides, constitute stage II
disease); localized contiguous involvement of only one extranodal organ or site and
lymph-node region(s) on the same side of the diaphragm (IIE). The number of anatomic
sites should be indicated by suffix (e.g. II 3)
III Involvement of lymph node regions or structures on both sides of the diaphragm, which
may also be accompanied by involvement of the spleen (IIIS) or by localized involvement
of only one extranodal organ site (IIIE) or both (IIISE)
III1 With or without splenic, hilar, celiac or portal nodes
III2 With para-aortic, iliac or mesenteric nodes
IV Diffuse or disseminated involvement of one or more extranodal organs or tissues, with or
without associated lymph node involvement
E, involvement of a single extranodal site, or contiguous or proximal to known nodal site
of disease
A: No ‘B’ symptoms
B: Place the patient in the ‘B’ category when at least one of the following is observed:
–   Unexplained weight loss >10% of bodyweight during 6 month before staging
–   Recurrent unexplained fever >38 °C during the previous month
–   Recurrent heavy night sweats during the previous month
Common symptomsAlcohol-induced pain at the site of lymphadenopathy.
Pruritus is troublesome at times.
Nephrotic syndrome: It may develop due to immune complex deposition
in the kidneys. It is associated with depressed cell-mediated immunity and
increases the risk of infections like herpes zoster, tuberculosis, and
infections with Cryptococci/ Cytomegalovirus and Candida species.Symptoms due to compression of various organs by lymph node masses or
infiltration of various organs may develop with mediastinal involvement.

These include dysphagia, dyspnea, Horner’s syndrome, hoarseness of
voice, superior vena cava syndrome and inferior vena cava obstruction.
Clinical staging: It is currently according to the Cotswolds modification of
the Ann Arbor Classification (Table 8.53).
Lymphatic structures: It includes lymph nodes, spleen, thymus,
Waldeyer’s rings, appendix and Peyer’s patches; liver and bone marrow
are excluded.Each stage is further divided into A or B based on the absence or presence
of systemic symptoms (B symptoms), respectively.
Investigations
Peripheral blood: Normocytic normochromic anemia is common and in
advance stage, microcytic anemia develops due to defective utilization of
iron. Total leukocyte count is usually normal, but sometimes may show
neutrophil leukocytosis. Eosinophilia is observed in ~20% of patients and
thrombocytosis in some patients. Lymphopenia (indicates lymphocyte
depletion) is associated with bad prognosis. In the terminal stages, there
may be leukopenia and thrombocytopenia.Serum alkaline phosphatase: If raised usually indicate bone marrow or
liver involvement.
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR): It may be raised
Biopsy: Fine needle aspiration of involved lymph node may be helpful in
the diagnosis.
–   Lymph node biopsy: Surgically or by percutaneous needle biopsy
under radiological guidance will establish the diagnosis.
–   Liver biopsy may be useful for diagnosis in patients with
hepatomegaly.
Staging of HL (Table 8.53): It is important not only for predicting the
prognosis but also for guiding the choice of therapy. The involves careful
physical examination and investigations such as: (1) chest radiographs, (2)
liver function tests, (3) renal function tests, (4) abdominal ultrasound, (5)
bone marrow trephine and aspirate (indicated in patients with clinically
advanced disease, i.e. stage III, IV, those with ‘B’ symptoms and those
who are HIV-positive) and (6) CT scans of neck, chest, abdomen and
pelvis.

Positron emission tomography (PET) scan: It is utilized for staging as well
management of Hodgkin lymphoma.
Table 8.54: Popular chemotherapy regimens used in the treatment of
Hodgkin lymphoma.
Regimen Drugs used
ABVD Doxorubicin (adriamycin), biomycin, vinblastine, dacarbazine
MOPP Mechlorethamine (mustine hydrochloride), vincristine (oncovin),
procarbazine, and prednisone
ABVD/MOPP Alternating cycles of MOPP and ABVD
BEACOPP escalated Bleomycin, etoposide, adriamycin, cyclophosphamide, vincristine,
procarbazine, prednisone in escalated dose
Table 8.55: Treatment plan for adults with Hodgkin lymphoma.
Stage of Hodgkin
lymphomaPrognostic category Choice of treatment
IA or IIA, no bulky disease* ABVD × 4 if complete remission after
2 cycles
or ABVD × 2 + involved-region
radiation therapy (IRRT)
IB, IIB, or any stage III or
IV
or bulky disease, any stage≤ 3 adverse factors** ABVD until 2 cycles past complete
remission (minimum 6, maximum 8)
≥ 4 adverse factors** BEACOPP escalated
*Bulky = largest diameter of any single mass equal to or greater than 10 cm.
**Adverse factors: Male sex, older than 45 years of age, stage IV, hemoglobin less than 10.5 g/dL,
WBC count greater than 15,000/mL, lymphocyte count less than 600/mL or less than 8% of the white
cell count, or serum albumin less than 4 g/dL.
Management
Aim of treatment:  Curative intent with expectation of success. Patients with localized or good-
prognosis disease receive a brief course of chemotherapy followed by radiotherapy to sites of node
involvement and cured HD in >90% of cases. Presently, patients with all stages of Hodgkin
lymphoma are treated initially with chemotherapy. Patients with more extensive disease or those with
B symptoms receive a complete course of chemotherapy.
Chemotherapy:  Combination chemotherapy has been shown to be highly effective. Popular
chemotherapy regimens (Table 8.54) used is as follows:
Treatment plan for adults with Hodgkin lymphoma (Table 8.55)
Early stage, ‘low-risk’:  Moderate’ chemotherapy, consisting of 2–4 cycles of ABVD followed by
involved field irradiation (20–30 Gy). It has a 90% cure rate.
Advanced disease (including locally advanced unfavorable early stage):

Cyclical chemotherapy with 6–8 cycles of ABVD with involved field irradiation to sites which
were initially bulky
Stanford V for ABVD:  Consists of weekly chemotherapy regimen of doxorubicin, vinblastine,
mechlorethamine, etoposide, vincristine, bleomycin, and prednisone) administered for 12 weeks
and includes radiation therapy
Escalated BEACOPP (bleomycin, etoposide, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, vincristine,
prednisone, and procarbazine)
Autologous bone marrow transplantation  is successful in about 40% cases even after the failure of
chemotherapy.
Late complications: Develop due to high cure rates achieved with modern
treatment.
Development of second malignancies: Such as acute leukemia and solid
organ cancers. Acute leukemia usually develops within 10 years of use of
alkylating agents in combination with radiotherapy. The risk is higher with
MOPP as compared to ABVD. Solid organ cancers usually develop after
10 years of radiotherapy.Cardiac failure and accelerated coronary artery disease: Following
radiotherapy pulmonary fibrosis and hypothyroidism.
Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma
Q. Discuss the pathological classification, clinical staging, clinical
features, investigations and management of non-Hodgkin
lymphoma.
Lymphomas represent solid tumors of the immune system.
Lymphomas can be divided into two major categories: (1) non-Hodgkin
lymphoma (NHL) and (2) Hodgkin lymphoma.
About 80% of NHL are of B-cell origin and 20% of T-cell origin.
Etiology (Table 8.56)
Table 8.56: Various factors associated with the development of non-
Hodgkin lymphoma.
Genetic factors/inherited immune disorders
Family history of lymphoma: Siblings and first-degree relatives of patients with lymphoma or
other hematologic malignancies
Certain inherited syndromes, e.g. ataxia-telangiectasia and Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome

Acquired immune disorders
Immune suppression and immunosuppressant drugs, used for solid organ transplantation
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)
Rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus, Sjögren syndrome, Hashimoto thyroiditis
Infectious agents
Epstein-Barr virus: associated with Burkitt lymphoma and Hodgkin lymphoma
Human T- lymphotropic virus type 1with adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma
Human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8, Kaposi’s sarcoma–associated herpesvirus) associated with primary
effusion lymphoma
Hepatitis C virus: Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma and splenic marginal zone lymphoma
Helicobacter pylori:  Associated with gastric lymphoma of extranodal marginal zone/mucosa-
associated lymphoid tissue (MALT)
Occupational and environmental exposure
Ionizing radiation, herbicides, organic solvents, hair dyes, ultraviolet light, high-fat diets and
nitrates in drinking water, heavy smoking (associated with follicular lymphoma)
Pathology and Classification
Grading of NHL (Box 8.20)
Size of the lymphoid cells is a guide to prognosis. NHL with small
lymphoid cells (mature lymphocytes) is associated with low-grade and
those with large lymphoid cells (immature lymphoid cells) are found in
high-grade disease.Follicular lymphomas are low grade and have good prognosis, and most
diffuse lymphomas are high grade and have poor prognosis.
Box 8.20: Grading of non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL).
Indolent or low grade
Small lymphocytic
Follicular, predominantly small cleaved cells
Follicular, mixed, small cleaved and large cleaved cells
Aggressive or intermediate grade
Follicular, predominantly large cell, cleaved and /or non-cleaved
Diffuse, small cleaved cell
Diffuse, large cell, cleaved or non-cleaved
Highly aggressive or high grade
Large cell, immunoblastic (B- or T-cell type)
Lymphoblastic
Small non-cleaved cell (Burkitt and non-Burkitt)

WHO classification of lymphoid neoplasm (Table 8.57)
It requires immunophenotyping, cytogenetics, fluorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH) and antigen receptor gene rearrangement studies.
Clinical Features
Age: NHL can occur at any age, but the peak incidence is around 60 years.
Most common presentation:
–   Painless firm, lymph node enlargement or symptoms due to lymph
node mass.
–   Extranodal involvement is more common in T-cell lymphoma and
involves the bone marrow, gut, thyroid, lung, skin, testis, brain and
more rarely, bone.
–   Bone marrow involvement is more common in low-grade (50–60%)
than high-grade (10%) NHL and can produce cytopenia.
–   Primary extranodal lymphomas present with soft tissue masses and
symptoms relevant to the site. Waldeyer’s ring and epitrochlear lymph
nodes are frequently involved.
–   Pressure effects: Due to NHL includes gut obstruction, ascites,
superior vena cava obstruction and spinal cord compression.
–   Involvement of liver and spleen results in hepatosplenomegaly.
–   Patients with lymphoblastic lymphoma often present with an anterior
mediastinal mass.
–   Burkitt lymphoma typically disseminates to the bone marrow and
meninges and involves extranodal sites.
It may be associated with ‘B’ or systemic symptoms. These include weight
loss, sweats, fever and itching.
Immunologic abnormalities: For example, autoimmune hemolytic anemia
and immune thrombocytopenia
Paraneoplastic neurologic complications of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma
include demyelinating polyneuropathy, Guillain-Barré syndrome,
autonomic dysfunction and peripheral neuropathy. Paraneoplastic
syndromes associated with non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma can affect the skin
(e.g. pemphigus), kidney (e.g. glomerulonephritis) and miscellaneous
organ systems (e.g. vasculitis, dermatomyositis, and cholestatic jaundice).

Clinical Staging (Ann Arbor Classification)
Same staging system (Table 8.53) is used for both HL and NHL.
Ann Arbor classification is also used for the clinical staging of non-
Hodgkin’s lymphoma but is more useful in Hodgkin lymphoma. However,
‘B’ symptoms are not included as they are not useful in predicting
prognosis.
Investigations
Investigations required for staging the disease are the same as that for
Hodgkin lymphoma. Laparotomy is rarely required, only when
retroperitoneal nodes are involved.Peripheral blood: Moderate degrees of anemia may be observed when
there is significant bone marrow involvement.
–   Blood counts: Usually normal, but few patients may show
lymphocytosis.
–   Splenomegaly with hypersplenism or autoimmune hemolytic anemia
may lead to reduced hemoglobin level, reticulocytosis and positive
Coombs test.Bone marrow aspiration and trephine biopsy: It should be performed
early, since marrow involvement is common with NHL.
Others investigations:
–   Immunophenotyping of surface antigens to distinguish T- and B-cell
tumors. This may be done on blood, marrow or lymph node material. It
can be performed by flow cytometry and/or immunohistochemistry
utilizing a minimal antibody panel (CD45, CD20, and CD3) to identify
B, T or NK subtypes.
–   Immunoglobulin determination: Some lymphomas are associated
with IgG or IgM paraproteins.
–   Measurement of uric acid levels: Few very aggressive high-grade
NHLs are associated with very high uric acid levels that can precipitate
renal failure when treatment is started.HIV testing.
Serum levels of LDH, β2-macroglobulin, and serum protein
electrophoresis are often needed.

Diagnostic spinal tap: Required when a first prophylactic instillation of
cytarabine and or methotrexate is indicated in high-risk patients, especially
with involvement of CNS, orbit, bone marrow, testis, spine or base of the
skull. It is also indicated in HIV-associated lymphoma and highly
aggressive lymphoma.
Table 8.57: WHO classification of the lymphoid neoplasms (2016).
I.   Precursor lymphoid neoplasms
–   B lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma
–   T lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma
II.  Mature B cell neoplasms
–   Chronic lymphocytic leukemia/small lymphocytic lymphoma
–   Monoclonal B-cell lymphocytosis
–   B cell prolymphocytic leukemia
–   Splenic B cell marginal zone lymphoma
–   Hairy cell leukemia
–   Lymphoplasmacytic lymphoma
–   Heavy chain disease
–   Plasma cell neoplasm
–   Follicular lymphoma
–   Mantle cell lymphoma
–   Diffuse large B cell lymphoma
–   Burkitt lymphoma
III. Mature T and Nk cell neoplasms
–   T cell prolymphocytic leukemia
–   T cell large granular lymphocytic leukemia
–   Mycosis fungoides
–   Sézary syndrome
–   Peripheral T cell lymphoma, NOS
–   Angioimmunoblastic T cell lymphoma
–   Anaplastic large cell lymphoma
–   Adult T cell leukemia/lymphoma
–   Extranodal NK/T cell lymphoma, nasal type
Management (Box 8.21)
Low-grade NHL
The various options available are:
1. Radiotherapy:  For localized stage I disease
2. Chemotherapy:
–   Oral therapy with chlorambucil (not curative).

–   Intensive intravenous chemotherapy in younger patients produces better quality of life without
any survival benefit. Bendamustine rituximab is the recommended first line therapy.
3. Humanized monoclonal antibody therapy: Three monoclonal antibodies (rituximab, 131I-
tositumomab, and 90Y-ibritumomab) are approved. The anti-CD20 antibody rituximab(R) alone or
with chemotherapy, i.e. R-CVP (cyclophosphamide, vincristine and prednisolone) is recommended
as first-line therapy.
4. Bone marrow transplantation.
High-grade NHL
1. Chemotherapy:  Majority (>90%) of patients are treated with intravenous combination
chemotherapy, with the CHOP regimen (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine and
prednisolone).
2. Radiotherapy:  Indication Residual localized site of bulk disease after chemotherapy.
Spinal cord and other compression syndromes.
3. Humanized monoclonal antibody therapy: In combination with CHOP chemotherapy, rituximab
(R) improves overall survival. R-CHOP is recommended as first-line therapy for those with stage
II or greater diffuse large-cell lymphoma.
4. Autologous bone marrow transplantation:  In patients with relapsed chemosensitive disease.
Box 8.21:  Regimen for non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (NHL).
Regimen
CHOP-RCyclophosphamide
Hydroxydaunorubicin (Doxorubicin)
Oncovin (Vincristine)
Prednisone, fixed dose
Rituximab
CVP-R
Cyclophosphamide
Vincristine
Prednisone, fixed dose
Rituximab
FCR
Fludarabine
Cyclophosphamide
Rituximab
Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL)
Most common lymphoma in the adult population and constitutes about
30–50% of all NHL.
Present with painless lymphadenopathy at one or several sites. Intra-
abdominal disease presents with bowel symptoms due to compression or

infiltration of the GIT.
Treatment: Refer treatment of high-grade NHL mentioned above.
Differences between Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphomas (Table
8.58)
Q. How do you differentiate Hodgkin’s lymphoma from non-Hodgkin’s
lymphoma?
Table 8.58: Differences between Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
Characteristics Hodgkin lymphoma Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Age Bimodal peak incidence, 15–35 years
and 45–70 yearsPeak incidence around 60 years
‘B’ symptoms More common Less common
Alcohol induced
discomfort in
lymph nodal
regionCommon Not observed
Disease at the
time of diagnosisUsually well localized Usually widespread
Site of
involvementUnifocal origin and arises in a single
node or chain of nodes (cervical,
mediastinal, para-aortic)Mostly involves multiple peripheral
nodes (multicentric origin)
Pattern of spread Orderly spread by contiguity in a
predictable fashionNoncontiguous spread in an
unpredictable fashion
Epitrochlear node Rarely involved Commonly involved
Mediastinal
involvementCommon Uncommon
Mesenteric nodes
and Waldeyer’s
ringRarely involved Commonly involved
Bone marrow
involvementLate Early
Extranodal
involvementUncommon Common
Characteristic of
neoplastic cellsNeoplastic cells—Hodgkin or Reed-
Sternberg cells form minor tumor cell
mass (1 to 5%)Neoplastic cells form the major tumor
cell mass
Number of
neoplastic cellsFew neoplastic cells (RS cells) Majority of the cells are neoplastic

Burkitt Lymphoma
Q. Write short note on Burkitt lymphoma/leukemia.
Burkitt lymphoma (BL) is a highly aggressive, often extranodal B-cell
lymphoma.
Most common childhood malignancy worldwide and majority in children,
but can occur in all ages.
Male: female ratio is 3:1.
Often presents with extranodal involvement or as leukemia.
Burkitt lymphoma (about 80% of cases) is associated with a specific
chromosomal translocation involving myc oncogene from chromosome 8
to the immunoglobulin (Ig) heavy chain region on chromosome 14.
[t(8;14)].Categories of Burkitt lymphoma is explained in Box 8.22.
Box 8.22: Three categories of Burkitt lymphoma.
1. Endemic (African)
2. Sporadic (nonendemic) Burkitt lymphoma
3. Immunodeficiency-associated (HIV) lymphomas
Clinical Features
Endemic form: Occurs in Africa. Affects children and adolescents.
Associated with Epstein-Barr virus infection and corresponds to the
distribution of malaria. Involves extranodal sites, particularly the jaw,
gastrointestinal tract and gonads. Commonly presenting as a rapidly
growing jaw tumor in a young child (4–7 years). Involvement of mandible
and maxillary bone leads to deformity, loosening of teeth and extrusion of
the eye with loss of vision.Sporadic from: It presents as an abdominal mass.
Immunodeficiency-associated  (HIV) form: It usually occurs with CD4
counts above 200/mm3. It again presents with abdominal involvement.
Abdominal involvement: It presents as mass due to bilateral involvement
of kidneys adrenals, ovaries, bowel and lymph nodes.
Other sites of involvement: CNS (common in adults), long bones,
salivary glands, thyroid, testes, heart, breast and bone marrow.

Investigations
Histological examination: Involved tissues show diffuse monotonous
infiltrate of medium-sized (intermediate-sized) lymphoid cells, numerous
mitoses and plenty of tumor cells undergoing apoptosis. The nuclear
remnants of these apoptotic cells are phagocytosed by benign
macrophages creating a characteristic ‘starry sky’ pattern  (resembling
stars in the sky)(Fig. 8.35).Chromosome analysis: The most common form of translocation results
in the movement of the MYC -containing segment of chromosome 8 to
chromosome 14q32, placing it close to the IGH gene. The genetic notation
for the translocation is t (8:14) (q24; q32). As a result of translocation,
MYC protein is overexpressed and results in cell proliferation and
stimulates apoptosis.Antibodies to EB viral capsid antigen: It may be detected (in endemic
type, and in many with sporadic and HIV-associated tumors).
Fig. 8.35: Burkitt lymphoma composed of medium-sized lymphoid cells admixed with benign

macrophages (arrows) giving a “starry sky” appearance.
Management
Treatment must be initiated urgently with curative intent whenever feasible.
Adequate hydration prior to the initiation of specific therapy to prevent the risk of tumor lysis
syndrome.
Standard treatment comprises of high—intensity, brief-duration cyclical combination
chemotherapy. Regimens include:
CHOP (cyclophosphamide, hydroxydoxo-rubicon or doxorubicin, oncovin (vincristine),
prednisolone) regimen OR
Rituximab plus EPOCH (etoposide, prednisolone, oncovin (vincristine), cyclophosphamide and
doxorubicin) OR
CODOX-M/IVAC regimen (cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin,
methotrexate/ifosfamide, etoposide or VP-16, cytarabine)
Prophylactic central nervous system therapy is essential, intrathecal methotrexate or cytosine
arabinoside is given in addition to high-dose systemic administration.
Cure rates: High as 70–80%.
Adult T-cell Lymphoma/Leukemia
Q. Write short note/essay on adult T-cell lymphoma/leukemia.
Adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma is a neoplasm of CD4+ T-cells and
develops in adults infected by human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-
1).
Mode of infection of HTLV-1: Transplacental transmission, blood
transfusion or sexual contact.
Latency period between infection and development of lymphoma is long
(10–30 years).
Four major presentations:
1. Acute aggressive form: It is characterized by peripheral blood
lymphocytosis, lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly, skin
infiltration, hypercalcemia, lytic bone lesions and raised LDH levels in
blood. Opportunistic infections are common. Peripheral smear usually
reveals characteristic, neoplastic cells with multilobulated nuclei and
petal-like nuclear lobules connected by thin chromatin strands, known
as ‘cloverleaf’ or ‘flower’ cells are found in the involved tissues and
peripheral blood. Bone marrow involvement is usually not prominent.
2. Lymphomatous form: Constitute ~20% of cases and is associated with
generalized lymphadenopathy without leukemia

3. Chronic form: Constitute ~15% of cases and may have a low level
absolute lymphocytosis in the peripheral blood associated with an
exfoliative skin rash.
4. Smoldering form: Constitute ~5% of cases and have a normal
peripheral blood lymphocyte count and a small number of circulating
tumor cells and skin rashes.
Treatment
Combination chemotherapy prolongs life but does not produce remissions.
Combination antiretroviral drugs (zidovudine + interferon-α) may be helpful in some patients.
Prognosis: Most cases progress rapidly and are fatal.
Mucosa-Associated Lymphoid Tissue Lymphoma
Q. Write short note/essay on mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue
lymphoma or primary gastric lymphoma.
It is a small-cell NHL of B-cells that is extranodal in origin.
Sites: MALT lymphoma is often localized to the organ from which it
arises in ~40% cases and to the organ and surrounding lymph nodes in
~30% cases. Bone marrow involvement is uncommon and occurs in ~15%
cases.
–   Gastric type of MALT lymphoma is associated with H. pylori
infection. Salivary gland MALT is associated with Sjogren’s
syndrome.
–   Other sites: It may occur in the stomach, orbit, intestine, lung, skin,
soft tissue, bladder, kidney, salivary gland and CNS.Age: Mainly in elderly patients with median age of 60 years.
Gastric type of MALT lymphoma
–   It may present as a mass or produce local symptoms such as upper
abdominal discomfort and dyspepsia.
–   Endoscopy: Often mimic benign conditions like chronic gastritis or a
peptic ulcer. Multiple biopsies are required for establishing diagnosis.
–   Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) useful for staging of gastric MALT
lymphoma.
–   Low-grade gastric MALT lymphoma can achieve remission in 80% of
cases with eradication of the infection.

Prognosis: Good in most cases with 5 year survival of 75%.
Treatment
Localized MALT lymphomas can be treated with surgery or local radiotherapy.
–   Anti H. Pylori  therapy in gastric MALToma.
Extensive disease is treated with single chemotherapy agents like chlorambucil,
cyclophosphamide, fludarabine or cladribine. Combination regimens that include rituximab are
also highly effective.
Mycosis Fungoides
Q. Write a short note on mycosis fungoides.
Mycosis fungoides is a rare type of cutaneous T-cell NHL composed of
small to medium-sized lymphoid cells with irregular nuclear outlines.
Insidious in onset and are derived from CD4+T cells of skin-associated
lymphoid tissue.
Age: They usually present between 55 to 60 years.
The tumor cells show epidermotropism (predilection for the epidermis)
and dermis.
Clinical features: There are three stages:
1. Patch stage (inflammatory premycotic phase), characterized by
erythematous macules usually occurring on areas not exposed to
sunlight.
2. Plaque stage, with elevated scaly plaques which may be pink or
red/brown and are often intensely pruritic.
Tumor stage, with dome-shaped firm tumors which may ulcerateSézary syndrome: Patients with mycosis fungoides may develop
generalized erythroderma and malignant T-cells with serpentine nuclei are
found in the peripheral blood and this condition is known as Sézary’s
syndrome.
Immunophenotype: Tumor cells express pan-T-cell markers CD3, CD5
and CD2.
Prognosis: These are indolent tumors with a median survival rate of 8 to 9
years.
Treatment
Localized early-stage mycosis fungoides: Can be cured with radiotherapy, often total-skin electron
beam irradiation.

More advanced stage: Palliative treatment such as topical glucocorticoids, topical nitrogen
mustard, phototherapy, psoralen with ultraviolet A (PUVA), and systemic cytotoxic therapy.
Several rare lymphoproliferative disorders other than lymphoma have
distinctive clinical courses.
Differential Diagnosis of Generalized Lymphadenopathy
Q. Discuss the differential diagnosis (causes) of generalized
lymphadenopathy in an adult.
Q. Assessment of the extent of lymph nodal enlargement.
Generalized lymphadenopathy is defined as significant enlargement of
more than 2 or more noncontiguous lymph node groups. Various lymph
node areas are depicted in Figure 8.36.
Clinical examination of lymph nodes: (1) sites of lymph node
enlargement, (2) size, (3) consistency, (4) mobile/fixed,(5) presence or
absence of tenderness and (6) draining area.Systemic abnormalities if any.
Investigations:
–   Chest X-ray and CT scan of thorax: To detect lymphadenopathy in the
mediastinal, hilar and paratracheal region.
–   Ultrasound scanning and CT scan of abdomen: To detect intra-
abdominal lymph nodes.
–   Lymph node groups: Location, lymphatic drainage and differential
diagnosis are mentioned in Table 8.59.

Fig. 8.36:  Lymph node areas.
Table 8.59: Lymph node groups: Location, lymphatic drainage and
differential diagnosis.
Location Lymphatic drainage Causes
Submandibular Tongue, submaxillary gland, lips
and mouth, conjunctivaeInfections of head, neck, sinuses, ears,
eyes, scalp, pharynx
Submental Lower lip, floor of mouth, tip of
tongue, skin of cheekMononucleosis syndromes, Epstein-
Barr virus, cytomegalovirus,
toxoplasmosis
Jugular Tongue, tonsil, pinna, parotid Pharyngitis organisms, rubella,
tuberculosis

Posterior cervical Scalp and neck, skin of arms and
pectorals, thorax, cervical and
axillary nodesTuberculosis, lymphoma, head and
neck malignancy
Suboccipital Scalp and head Local infection
Postauricular External auditory meatus, pinna,
scalpLocal infection
Preauricular Eyelids and conjunctivae,
temporal region, pinnaExternal auditory canal
Right supraclavicular
nodeMediastinum, lungs, esophagus Lung (right lung and left lower lobe),
retroperitoneal or gastrointestinal
cancer, tuberculosis
Left supraclavicular
nodeThorax, abdomen via thoracic
ductLymphoma, lung (left upper lobe)
Carcinoma of bronchus, bowel
(gastric), bladder, breast and testes,
tuberculosis
Axillary Arm, thoracic wall, breast,
parietal pleuraInfections, cat-scratch disease,
lymphoma, breast cancer, brucellosis,
melanoma, tuberculosis
Epitrochlear Ulnar aspect of forearm and hand Infections, NHL, sarcoidosis,
tularemia, cat-scratch disease
secondary syphilis, disseminated
tuberculosis, HIV
Inguinal Penis, scrotum, vulva, vagina,
perineum, gluteal region, lower
abdominal wall, lower anal canalInfections of the leg or foot, STDs
(e.g. herpes simplex virus, gonococcal
infection, syphilis, chancroid,
granuloma inguinale,
lymphogranuloma venereum),
lymphoma, pelvic malignancy,
bubonic plagueDifferential Diagnosis (Table 8.60)
Castleman’s disease, or angiofollicular lymph node hyperplasia
Patients often present with a localized lymphoid mass, but some patients
have a systemic illness with fevers, night sweats, weight loss and fatigue.
Frequently, the systemic symptoms of Castleman’s disease are related to
excessive production of IL-6.
Castleman’s disease in HIV-infected patients is frequently associated with
HHV-8.
Patients with disseminated and plasma cell–rich forms of Castleman’s
disease may occasionally progress to lymphoma.
Patients with localized Castleman’s disease can be treated with surgical

removal or radiotherapy. Patients with systemic disease may respond to
treatment with high-dose corticosteroids.
Sinus histiocytosis with massive lymphadenopathy, also known as Rosai-
Dorfman disease
Manifests as bulky lymphadenopathy in children and young adults.
Extranodal sites such as the skin, upper airways, gastrointestinal tract and
CNS can be involved. There is a characteristic pattern of lymphoid
proliferation with a thick fibrous capsule, distention of lymphoid sinuses,
accumulation of plasma cells, and proliferation of large, often atypical
histiocytes.The disease is usually self-limited, but it has been associated with
autoimmune hemolytic anemia.
Kikuchi’s disease (histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis)
Disease of unknown origin that most commonly affects young women.
Symptoms most commonly consist of painless cervical lymphadenopathy
that is often accompanied by fever, flu-like symptoms and rash.
Sometimes associated with SLE. Treatment is symptomatic, and
symptoms usually resolve within weeks or months.
Lymph node biopsies reveal foci of necrotic histiocytes.
Table 8.60: Differential diagnosis of generalized lymphadenopathy.
Cause
A. Malignant neoplasms
1. Lymphomas (Hodgkin and non-Hodgkin)
2. Leukemias
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
Chronic myeloid leukemia in blast crisis
3. Metastatic disease (head and neck cancers, lung and breast cancers, GIT malignancies)
Infections
1. Disseminated tuberculosis
2. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection
3. Secondary syphilis
4. Infectious mononucleosis

5. Brucellosis
6. Local infections (cellulitis, pharyngitis)
7. Plague
8. Other infections: Toxoplasmosis, cytomegalovirus infection, hepatitis B, atypical
mycobacteria, histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, cryptococcosis
B.  Autoimmune diseases
1. Systemic lupus erythematosus
2. Rheumatoid arthritis
C.  Drugs induced  (phenytoin, allopurinol, hydralazine, primidone, quinidine)
D.  Systemic disorders:  Amyloidosis,
sarcoidosis, serum sickness, hyperthyroidism, Gaucher’s disease, Kawasaki disease, Kimura
disease, Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
E.  Rare: Castleman’s disease, Kikuchi Fujimotos disease, Rosai- Dorfman disease
HEMOSTASISQ. Discuss the mechanism of hemostasis.
Q. Write short essay/note on platelets and their functions.
Components of Hemostasis
Three major components namely: (1) platelet component, (2) vascular
component (endothelium) and (3) coagulation component participate in
normal hemostatic mechanism. The first two components are involved in
primary hemostasis while the last component is involved in secondary
hemostasis.
Coagulation system
Coagulation factors are listed in Table 8.61. Coagulation can be activated by
two pathways namely extrinsic and intrinsic  (Fig. 8.37). Both the pathways
converge on the activation of factor X to produce factor Xa (activated X).Extrinsic pathway:
–   It requires an exogenous trigger; hence the name extrinsic. But now it
is observed that released tissue factor (a protein-phospholipid complex
normally present on vascular cells and activated monocytes) from
vascular injury can initiate this pathway. It converts factor VII into
activated factor VII (VIIa) in presence of calcium. Activated tissue

factor VII complex activates factors IX and X.
–   The coagulation factors utilized in extrinsic pathway are factors VII, X,
II, V, and fibrinogen.
–   Prothrombin time (PT) is the laboratory test which assesses the
function of the coagulation factors involved in the extrinsic pathway.
Intrinsic pathway:
–   This gets activated with exposure of prekallikrein, high-molecular
weight kininogen and factor XII (Hageman factor) to any
thrombogenic (negatively charged) surfaces (including glass beads).
–   Prekallikrein is converted to kallikrein and factor XII becomes
activated factor XII (XIIa).
–   Factor XIIa converts factor XI into XIa.
–   Factor XIa activates factor IX, and factor IXa with its co-factor FVIIIa
activates X to Xa.
–   The coagulation factors utilized in intrinsic pathway are, in order of
reaction, factors XII, pre-K, HMWK, XI, IX, VIII, X, V, II and
fibrinogen.
–   The partial thromboplastin time (PTT) assesses the function of the
coagulation factors utilized in the intrinsic pathway. PTT is initiated by
adding negatively charged particles like ground glass.
Common pathway:
–   Above two pathways have in common factors X, V, prothrombin and
fibrinogen; and this part of coagulation pathway is known as the
common pathway.
–   Common pathway is initiated by factor Xa. Factor Xa converts
prothrombin to thrombin (Factor IIa). This is facilitated by Va.
–   Factor IIa converts fibrinogen into fibrin and also activates factor XIII
to XIIIa that cross links fibrin to fibrin polymers.
Table 8.61: Coagulation factors.
Factor Synonym
I Fibrinogen
II Prothrombin
III Thromboplastin

IV Calcium
V Proaccelerin
VI No specific name or function
VII Proconvertin
VIII Antihemophilic factor
IX Christmas factor
X Stuart-Prower factor
XI Plasma thromboplastin antecedent
XII Hagemen factor
XIII Fibrin stabilizing factor
Fig. 8.37: Different pathways of coagulation (extrinsic, intrinsic and common) pathways.
Mechanism of Hemostasis (Fig. 8.38)
Primary hemostatic plug: The platelet component undergoes three
different events-platelet adhesion and shape change, platelet secretion
(release of granule contents) and platelet aggregation.

Fig. 8.38: Mechanism of hemostasis.
Secondary hemostatic plug
–   Exposure of tissue factor at the site of injury activates the extrinsic
coagulation system (Box 8.23).
–   The process generates thrombin, which cleaves circulating fibrinogen
into insoluble fibrin, creating a fibrin meshwork at the injured site.
–   The platelets contract and form an irreversibly fused mass known as
secondary hemostatic plug.
–   The sequence of conversion of the initial temporary primary
hemostatic (platelet) plug into a permanent secondary hemostatic plug
is known as secondary hemostasis.
Box 8.23:  Functions of platelets.
Maintain vascular integrity.
Spontaneously arrest bleeding through platelet plug formation.
Participate in the intrinsic coagulation system.
Promote repair and healing through release of growth factors.
Coagulation regulatory mechanism (Fig. 8.39)
Q. Briefly outline the natural inhibitors of coagulation.
The activated coagulation system must be limited to the site of vascular
injury so as to prevent coagulation in the entire vascular system. This is

achieved by three endogenous anticoagulants.
Inhibitors of Coagulation
1. Antithrombin  is a circulating serine protease inhibitor (serpin) which
inhibits the activity of thrombin and factors IXa, Xa, XIa and XIIa. One of
these is antithrombin III which gets activated by binding to heparin-like
molecules on endothelial cells. The heparin used to minimize thrombosis
acts by activating antithrombin III.2. Proteins C and S  are vitamin K-dependent proteins that act in a complex.
Thrombin generated by activation of coagulation cascade, binds with
thrombomodulin present on the endothelial cell membrane and activates
the coagulation regulatory system called protein C system. Activated
protein C (APC) binds with protein S to form APC-protein S complex.
This complex inactivates factors Va and VIIIa. Impaired activity of protein
C as occurs in factor V Leiden produces thrombophilia.3. Tissue factor pathway inhibitor (TFPI): It is a protein which inactivates
tissue factor—factor VIIa complexes and inactivates factor VIIa.

Fig. 8.39:  Coagulation regulatory system consisting of antithrombin, protein C and S and tissue factor
pathway inhibitor.
Endothelial cells produce prostacyclin and nitric oxide which inhibit platelet
aggregation.
Fibrinolytic System
Q. Describe fibrinolytic system.
Activation of the coagulation also initiates the fibrinolytic system so that
the size of the clot is limited. Fibrinolytic system does this by removal of
fibrin from the clot. Otherwise, the clot may progress and involve the
entire circulation with its consequences.

BLEEDING DISORDERS (HEMORRHAGIC
DIATHESES)
Q. Discuss the evaluation of a patient with bleeding disorder.
Definition
Increased tendency to hemorrhage (usually with insignificant injury) are
collectively called as bleeding disorders (hemorrhagic diatheses). Broad
classification of bleeding disorders are listed in Box 8.24.
Box 8.24:  Broad classification of bleeding disorders.
Coagulation defects
Platelet disorders
Vessel wall abnormalities
Evaluation/Investigation of Bleeding Disorders
History
Information to be obtained from the history to determine:
1. Whether there is a generalized hemostatic defect?
Evidence includes bleeding from multiple sites, spontaneous bleeding
and excessive bleeding after injury.
2. Whether the hemostatic defect is inherited or acquired?
Features of inherited defect: (1) A family history of a bleeding (2) Age
of onset: Severe inherited defects usually become apparent in infancy,
while mild inherited defects are detected later in life (3) Lifelong
history.Features of acquired defects: (1) Short duration and (2) Evidence of
disease causing the defects. Examples, evidence of liver disease, renal
failure, disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC).3. Whether the bleeding pattern is suggestive of a vascular/platelet defect or a
coagulation defect?
Distinguishing features of bleeding in platelet, vascular and coagulation
disorders are shown in Table 8.62.
Table 8.62: Distinguishing patterns of bleeding in platelet, vascular and

coagulation disorders.
Characteristics Platelet/vascular disorders Coagulation disorders
Onset Spontaneous and develops
immediately after trauma/surgeryDelayed bleeding after trauma/surgery
Type of lesion Petechiae (Fig. 8.40A), purpura (Fig.
8.40B), ecchymosis (Fig. 8.40C)Hematomas
Sites Skin, mucous membrane Deep tissues
Mucous
membraneCommon from nose, mouth,
gastrointestinal and genitourinary
tractsUncommon except from
gastrointestinal or genitourinary tract
Into the joint Absent Common in severe factor deficiencies
Into the muscle Following trauma Spontaneous
Local pressure Effective Ineffective
Physical Examination
Physical examination consists of search for the following:Type of lesions
–   Purpura, bruises, ecchymoses.
–   Examination of joints, particularly knees, ankles and elbows for
hemarthrosis.
–   Scars over elbows and knees in factor XIII deficiency.
Signs of liver cell disease
Neurological signs
Hepatosplenomegaly and lymphadenopathy.
Laboratory Investigations
Screening tests (Table 8.63)
Q. Write short note on screening tests for hemostasis/bleeding
disorders.
1. Bleeding time
Normal range: 4–9 minutes.
Prolonged in platelet disorders.
Table 8.63: Screening tests used in bleeding disorders.

Name of the test Evaluation
Blood count and film Show the number and morphology of platelets
and any blood disorder such as leukemia or
lymphoma
Platelet count (Normal count: 150 to 450 ×
109/L)Platelets
Bleeding time (Normal: <9 minutes) Platelet function, von Willebrand factor
Prothrombin time (Normal: 12–14 seconds) Extrinsic pathway, factors II, V, VII, X
Activated partial thromboplastin time (Normal
33–45 seconds)Intrinsic pathway, factors II, V, VIII, IX, X, XI,
XII
Thrombin time (Normal: 3–5 second > control) Common pathway, factors I, II
Clot retraction Platelets
Fibrinogen concentration Fibrinogen
Fibrin degradation products (FDPs) Lysis of fibrin
2. Prothrombin time (PT)
Q. Write short note on prothrombin time.
It is measured by adding tissue factor (thromboplastin) and calcium to
the patient’s plasma.
Normal is 12–16 seconds
Measures VII, X, V, prothrombin and fibrinogen (classic ‘extrinsic’
pathway)
Prolonged
–   With abnormalities of above factors (II, V, VII and X)
–   In liver disease, DIC, vitamin K deficiency and if the patient is on
oral warfarin therapy.
3. Activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT)
Also known as the PTT and is performed by adding a surface activator
(such as kaolin, micronized silica or ellagic acid) phospholipid (to
mimic platelet membrane) and calcium to the patient’s plasma.
Normal APTT is 26-37 seconds
APTT measures XII, XI, IX, VIII, X, V, prothrombin and fibrinogen
(classic ‘intrinsic’ pathway).
Causes of prolonged APTT
–   With deficiencies of one or more of above factors (II, V, VIII, IX,
X, XI and XII including hemophilia A and B, von Willebrand
disease

–   DIC, heparin therapy, and presence of lupus anticoagulant and
acquired factor inhibitors.
4. Correction tests/mixing studies: It may be used to differentiate various
causes of prolonged PT, APTT and TT
Prolonged PT, APTT or TT due to coagulation factor deficiencies can
be corrected by addition of normal plasma to the patient’s plasma.
Failure to correct after addition of normal plasma is indicates the
presence of an inhibitor of coagulation.
5. Factor assays: It confirms coagulation defects.
Figs. 8.40A to C: (A) Petechiae which appear as small (1 to 2 mm in diameter), red to purple
hemorrhagic spots in the skin, mucous membranes or serosal surfaces; (B) Purpura—slightly larger (>3
mm) than petechiae; (C) Ecchymoses are larger (>1–2 cm) and result from blood escaping.
Table 8.64: Laboratory tests in various bleeding disorders.
Disorder PT A PTT Platelets Bleeding time
Vit K deficiency Prolonged Prolonged Normal Normal
vWF dz Normal PT Prolonged Normal Prolonged/normal
DIC Prolonged Prolonged Reduced Prolonged
ITP Normal Normal Reduced Prolonged
Aplasia and leukemia Normal Normal Reduced Prolonged
Factor VII deficiency Prolonged Normal Normal Normal
Factor VIII deficiency
(Hemophilia A)Normal Prolonged Normal Normal
Factor IX deficiency
(Hemophilia B)Normal Prolonged Normal Normal
Factor XI, XII deficiency Normal Prolonged Normal Normal
Factor XIII deficiency
(bleeding esp from
umbilicus)Normal Normal Normal Normal

(PT: prothrombin time; APTT: activated partial thromboplastin time; vWF: von Willebrand factor;
DIC: disseminated intravascular coagulation; ITP: immune thrombocytopenic purpura)
Flowchart 8.3:  Approach to the differential diagnosis for petechiae/purpura.
(ITP: Immune thrombocytopenic purpura; TMP-SMX: trimethroprim-
sulfameathoxazole; SLE: systemic lupus erythematosis)
Special tests of coagulation
To confirm the precise hemostatic defect and includes estimation of
fibrinogen and FDPs.
Various laboratory tests in bleeding disorders are presented in Table 8.64.

DISORDERS OF PLATELETS
THROMBOCYTOPENIA
Q. Define thrombocytopenia. Enumerate the common causes, clinical
manifestations, investigations and management of
thrombocytopenia.
Definition
Decrease in the platelet count below the lower limit of 150,000/µL is known
as thrombocytopenia.
Causes (Table 8.65)
Table 8.65: Causes of thrombocytopenia.
1. Increased platelet destruction
–   Immune mediated
Primary: Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura—Acute and chronic
Secondary:
♦   Autoimmune: Systemic lupus erythematosus
♦   Alloimmune: Post-transfusion or during pregnancy
♦   Drug-induced: Quinidine, heparin, sulfa compounds
♦   Infections: HIV infection, infectious mononucleosis, cytomegalovirus.
–   Non-immune mediated
♦   Disseminated intravascular coagulation
♦   Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, hemolytic uremic syndrome
♦   Mechanical destruction
♦   Microangiopathic hemolytic anemias
2. Decreased production of platelets
–   Generalized diseases of bone marrow
♦   Aplastic anemia: Congenital and acquired
♦   Marrow infiltration: Leukemia, disseminated cancer
–   Selective impairment of platelet production
♦   Drug-induced: Alcohol, thiazides, cytotoxic drugs, alcohol
♦   Infections: Measles, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
–   Ineffective megakaryopoiesis
♦   Megaloblastic anemia
♦   Myelodysplastic syndromes

3. Sequestration
–   Hypersplenism: Portal hypertension, lymphomas, myeloproliferative disorders
4. Dilutional
General Clinical Manifestations
Bleeding into skin: It presents as purpura, petechiae, ecchymoses.
Bleeding into mucous membranes: It presents as epistaxis, hemorrhagic
bullae in oral mucosa, genitourinary bleeding, and gastrointestinal
bleeding.
Severe thrombocytopenia produces fundal hemorrhage and intracranial
bleeding (Table 8.66).
Approach to the differential diagnosis for petechiae/purpura is presented in
Flowchart 8.3.
Laboratory Investigations1. Platelet count: Reduced and clinical manifestations roughly correlate with
the platelet count.
Table 8.66: Clinical features associated with decreased platelet count.
Platelet count /µL Clinical features
30,000 to 50,000 Post-traumatic bleeding
< 30,000 Spontaneous bleeding
< 10,000 Intracranial bleeding
2. Hess test  (capillary fragility test/tourniquet test) may be positive
Principle:  It measures the ability of capillaries to withstand the increased stress.
Procedure:
–   Sphygmomanometer cuff is tied to the upper arm above the elbow and the cuff is inflated to
80 mm Hg for 5 minutes.
–   Release the pressure after 5 minutes.
–   The number of petechiae present in a circle of 5 cm diameter on the flexor aspect of forearm
(below the bend of the elbow) is noted.
Normal:  0–5 petechiae.
Interpretation:  Positive test is indicated by more than 10 petechiae and is observed in:
–   Vascular purpura
–   Defective platelet function
–   Thrombocytopenia
–   Scurvy.

3. Bleeding time (BT): Prolonged, and it bears a close relationship to
platelet count.
4. Bone marrow:
a. Normal or increased number of megakaryocytes indicates increased
platelet destruction, hypersplenism or ineffective platelet
production.
b. Decreased number of megakaryocytes indicates reduced production
of platelets.
Table 8.67: Classification of platelet function disorders.
A. Hereditary
Disorders of platelet adhesion
–   Bernard-Soulier syndrome
Disorders of platelet secretion
–   Storage pool deficiency
Disorders of platelet aggregation
–   Glanzmann thrombasthenia
B. Acquired
Drugs: Aspirin, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID), dipyridamole, sulfinpyrazone
Renal failure (uremia)
Hematologic malignancies: Myeloproliferative and myelodysplastic disorders
QUALITATIVE PLATELETS DEFECTS
Qualitative defects of platelet function can be hereditary/congenital or
acquired (Table 8.67 and Fig. 8.41).
IMMUNE THROMBOCYTOPENIC PURPURA
Definition
Immune (idiopathic) thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) is an autoimmune
disorder characterized by increased destruction of platelets by
autoantibodies directed against platelet membrane GPIIb/IIIa and
GPIb/IX.
Pathogenesis

Q. Discuss the pathogenesis, clinical features, investigations/diagnosis
and management of immune (idiopathic) thrombocytopenic purpura
(ITP).
ITP is an autoimmune disorder with formation of antiplatelet antibodies,
directed against membrane glycoproteins most often IIb/IIIa or Ib/IX of
platelets.
The antiplatelet antibodies can be demonstrated in approximately 80% of
patients and are of the IgG type.
Fig. 8.41:  Qualitative/functional disorders of platelets
Clinical Features
ITP can be primary or secondary:
Primary: Most cases are primary. There are two major subtypes of

primary ITP, acute and chronic (Table 8.68).
a. Acute form is more common in children
b. Chronic form is characterized by the persistence of thrombocytopenia
for more than 6 months and is more common in adults.
Secondary: Observed in several diseases like systemic lupus
erythematosus, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS), Hepatitis
C, following viral infections and as a complication of drug therapy.
Clinical features are not specific but are due to thrombocytopenia in
general.
Patient has no physical signs other than those due to bleeding and anemia
(following menorrhagia and epistaxis) intracranial hemorrhage (ICH),
overt gastrointestinal bleeding, and hematuria, is uncommon.Splenomegaly and lymphadenopathy are uncommon in primary ITP and in
their presence one should consider the diagnoses other than ITP.
May be associated with hemolysis (Evan’s syndrome).
Majority of patients with acute ITP recover within 6 months.
Table 8.68: Differences between clinical features of idiopathic
thrombocytopenic purpura in children (acute) and adults
(chronic).
Children Adults
Peak age of occurrence 2–4 years 15–40 years
Gender (F:M) Equal 1.2 : 1.7
Clinical presentation
Onset Acute (most with symptoms
<1 week)Insidious (most with
symptoms >2 months)
Symptoms Purpura (<10% with severe
bleeding)Purpura (typically bleeding
not severe)
Platelet count Most <20,000/µL Most <20,000/µL
Antecedent infection Usually follows an upper
respiratory viral infectionUsually no preceding history of
viral infection
Course
Spontaneous remission 83% 2%
Chronic disease 24% 43%
Response to splenectomy 71% 66%

Eventual complete recovery 89% 64%
Morbidity and mortality
Cerebral hemorrhage <1% 3%
Hemorrhagic death <1% 4%
Mortality of chronic refractory
disease2% 5%
Investigations and Diagnosis
The diagnosis of ITP is one of exclusion. It requires only isolated
thrombocytopenia (i.e. without anemia or leukopenia) without another
apparent cause.
Platelet count is usually markedly reduced  (thrombocytopenia) and is
below 80 × 109/L. Platelet count should be repeated using sodium citrate
(anticoagulant) to exclude pseudothrombocytopenia caused by platelet
aggregation and clumping in the presence of EDTA anticoagulant.
Tourniquet test (Hess test): Positive
Bleeding time (BT): Prolonged
Bone marrow examination: Usually not performed in acute ITP, unless
treatment becomes necessary on clinical grounds. It is important in
chronic ITP to rule out thrombocytopenia resulting from bone marrow
failure. Bone marrow shows moderate increase in number of both
immature and mature forms of megakaryocytes. A decrease in the number
of megakaryocytes argues against the diagnosis of ITP.Antiplatelet antibodies: Tests for platelet autoantibodies are not widely
available but may be demonstrated in blood. However, a negative test does
not exclude ITP.In chronic ITP, secondary causes such as HIV, hepatitis C virus infection,
etc. should be excluded.
Treatment
Children with mild acute ITP usually do not require treatment.
Adults with platelet counts >30 × 109/L usually do not require treatment. Patients with even lower
platelet counts may require treatment, if they have spontaneous bruising or bleeding.
Indications for treatment:
–   Overt hemorrhage (treated with platelet concentrates).
–   Platelet counts below 20,000/mm3.
–   Organ or life-threatening bleeding irrespective of the circulating platelet count.

Platelet transfusion:  If platelet counts <20,000/mm3 or bleeding manifestations.
First-line therapy:  Consists of treatment with oral corticosteroids.
–   Indications for corticosteroids:
♦   To induce remission
♦   To maintain remission in chronic ITP (immune thrombocytopenic purpura).
♦   Postoperatively, in patients where splenectomy failed to achieve the result.
♦   Pregnant women after the 5th month of pregnancy.
–   Dosage of corticosteroids:
♦   Both adults and children: Initial dose is 1–2 mg/kg of prednisolone/day. Initial dose is
continued for at least 2 weeks (or if necessary 3–4 weeks), and then reduced slowly and
stopped.
♦   About 66% respond to prednisolone but relapse is common when the dose is reduced.Second-line therapy:  It is by splenectomy. Majority of patients respond well and achieve a
normal platelet count.
–   Indications of splenectomy:
♦   Chronic ITP in adults who fail to responded to corticosteroids.
♦   Patients requiring unacceptably high doses of corticosteroids to maintain a safe platelet
count.
♦   When there is severe bleeding or threatening cerebral hemorrhage (despite adequate
corticosteroid therapy).
♦   In the first 4–5 months of pregnancy, if steroids do not induce full remission.
–   Mechanism of action of splenectomy:
♦   Spleen being the major site of platelet destruction, splenectomy prevents its destruction.
♦   Reduces the concentration of circulating antiplatelet antibodies.
Third-line therapy:  Patients who fail to respond to splenectomy, a wide range of other therapies
are available. Major drawbacks of these therapies are modest response rates and slow onset of
action. The therapies include:
–   High dose corticosteroids
–   Intravenous immunoglobulin  (i.e. IgG): It is effective. Responses are only transient (3–4
weeks).
♦   Indications:
◊  Acute situation prior to surgery and child birth, and in patients with intracranial bleed.
◊  Patients with ITP where corticosteroid therapy and splenectomy are contraindicated.
♦   Side effects: Nausea, vomiting, fever and headache. Uncommonly neutropenia and
hemolytic anemia.
♦   Dose: 1–2 g/kg.
–   RhO(D) immune globulin (anti-D)
♦   Indications:
◊  Patients who do not respond to steroids and may be tried before splenectomy.
♦   Should be given only to Rh-positive patients.
♦   Effective in patients with ITP but the effect is usually temporary, and nearly 50–75%
patients relapse.
♦   Dose is 75 µg/kg intravenously.
♦   Side effects: Nausea, vomiting, fever, chills and intravascular hemolysis.

–   Immunosuppressive therapy
♦   Indications:
◊  Refractory cases which fail to respond to corticosteroids and splenectomy.
◊  Patients with ITP where corticosteroid therapy and splenectomy are contraindicated.
♦   Agents used are vinca alkaloids (vincristine, vinblastine), azathioprine, cyclophosphamide,
cyclosporine and combination chemotherapy, mycophenolate mofetil.
–   Plasmapheresis:  Employed as an emergency measure to remove antibodies from the plasma.
–   TPO mimetic drugs: Eltrombopag or romiplostim. Romiplostim, 500 μg subcutaneously.
–   Specific immunomodulatory monoclonal antibodies: Rituximab.
–   Others:
♦   Danazol is an androgen with low virilising activity has been tried in idiopathic
thrombocytopenic purpura.
♦   Dapsone
♦   Platelet transfusions are reserved for intracranial or other extreme hemorrhage, where
emergency splenectomy may be justified. Emergency treatment:  Necessary in case of life-threatening bleeding. It consists of intravenous
administration of methylprednisolone (30 mg/kg, maximum dose 1 g) over 20 to 30 minutes along
with platelet transfusion. This is followed by intravenous immunoglobulin (1 g/kg).
THROMBOCYTOSIS
Q. What are the common causes of thrombocytosis?
Definition
Platelet count more than 4,50,000/cumm is known as thrombocytosis.
Causes (Table 8.69)
Table 8.69: Causes of thrombocytosis.
Idiopathic/primary (autonomous production) Secondary (reactive thrombocytosis)
Myeloproliferative neoplasms
–   Essential thrombocytosis
–   Polycythemia vera
–   Chronic myeloid leukemia
Myelodysplastic syndromeIron deficiency
Malignancy (paraneoplastic feature)
Following hemorrhage: Acute or chronic
blood loss
Following splenectomy
Following major surgery
Inflammatory disorders, e.g. rheumatoid
arthritis and inflammatory bowel disease
DISORDERS OF COAGULATION (CLOTTING)

Q. Write short note on congenital bleeding disorders.
Hereditary coagulation disorders are listed in Box 8.25.
Hemophilia A (Factor VIII Deficiency)
Q. Discuss the etiology, classification, clinical features, diagnosis and
management of hemophilia A.
Hemophilia A is the most common hereditary X-linked recessive disease
with a reduction in the amount or activity of factor VIII (antihemophilic
factor). About 30% of hemophiliacs have no family history and may be
due to acquired mutations.Males are affected and females are carriers.
Incidence: 1 in 10,000 males.
Mode of Inheritance
Hemophilia A is an X-linked recessive disorder.
Usually males are the sufferers and females are the carriers.
Females can be hemophilic if:
–   She is born to an affected father and a carrier mother (25% risk).
–   Females with inactivation of the X-chromosome such as Turner’s
syndrome (45, XO)
–   She has inactivation of normal X-chromosome due to unfavorable
lyonization (rare).
Degree of deficiency of factor VIII and severity of bleeding tends to be
similar in all the affected members of the same family.
Normal level of factor VIII in the blood is 0.50–1.50 IU/mL. Hemophilia
A may be classified based on the factor VIII activity in blood.
Clinical Features
Clinical severity depends on the level of factor VIII activity and is
presented in the Table 8.70.
Excessive bleeding: Hemophilia A is characterized by excessive bleeding,
but is unusual until the child is about 6 months old.
Post-traumatic bleeding: Bleeding following trauma is characteristically
‘delayed’.

Severity of bleeding: Range from mild to severe.
Petechiae observed in platelet and vascular disorders are not seen in
hemophilia.
Box 8.25: Hereditary coagulation disorders.
1. von Willebrand disease
2. Hemophilia A
3. Hemophilia B
4. Hemophilia C – Inherited deficiency of factor XI (factor 11); also called Rosenthal syndrome; an
autosomal recessive disorder
Table 8.70: Clinical classification of hemophilia A.
Classification Factor VIII level Clinical features
Mild 6–30% of normal (0.06–0.30 U/mL) 1. Hemorrhage secondary to trauma or
surgery
2. Rare spontaneous hemorrhage
Moderate 1–5% of normal (0.01–0.05 U/mL) 1. Hemorrhage secondary to trauma or
surgery
2. Occasional spontaneous
hemarthrosis
Severe ≤1% of normal (≤ 0.01 U/mL) 1. Spontaneous hemorrhage from early
infancy
2. Frequent spontaneous hemarthrosis
and other hemorrhages, requiring
clotting factor replacement
Bleeding into joints (hemarthrosis)
Frequent and spontaneous hemorrhages occur into the large joints,
especially knees, elbows, ankles, wrists and hips, and are known as
hemarthrosis.
Nature of bleeding: Usually spontaneous or follows minor trauma.
Acute stage: Affected joint is swollen, hot and tender and movements
severely restricted. These changes gradually subside over a period of days.
Consequences: Recurrent bleeding into the joints will lead to crippling
deformities and disuse atrophy of muscles around the joint.
Bleeding into muscles
Common sites: calf and psoas muscles.

Consequences:
–   Psoas hematomas may compress the femoral nerve resulting in sensory
disturbances over thigh and weakness of quadriceps.
–   Calf hematomas can result in contraction and shortening of the
Achilles tendon.
Other manifestations
Easy bruising
Massive bleeding following trauma (from wounds) or operative
procedures (e.g. bleeding from sockets after dental extraction)
Cerebral hemorrhage
Hematuria and ureteric colic due to passage of blood clots.
Laboratory Investigations
Bleeding time is normal.
Clotting time is prolonged.
Platelet count is normal.
Prothrombin time is normal.
Activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) is increased (Normal
35–45 seconds) from 50 seconds to a few minutes.
Factor VIII assay is required for the confirmation of diagnosis and to
assess the Factor VIII levels and severity of disease.
Antenatal Diagnosis
Chorionic villous sampling (CVS): Done at 8–9 weeks gestation, sexing
the fetus and using informative factor VIII probes. It is the preferred
method.Amniocentesis: Sexing the fetus at 16 weeks gestation by amniocentesis
and, if fetus is male, a fetal blood sampling is done at about 19–20 weeks
of gestation.
Management
A. Local treatmentWounds and bleeding from mucous membrane:  Apply local pressure and pressure bandages
or sutures. Immobilize wounds by bandages, splinting etc.
Hematomas and hemarthrosis:
–   During acute stage:  Elevate the affected part and immobilize by splinting and bandages.

Pain is relieved by analgesics like acetaminophen or codeine.
–   During recovery phase:  Physiotherapy.
B. Replacement therapy
Agents used: Factor VIII concentrate is available as plasma-derived and recombinant
products. Recombinant products are the treatment of choice and are replacing the plasma-
derived factor VIII concentrate (Table 8.71).
Route of administration: Intravenous infusion to correction of deficiency of factor VIII and to
achieve normal levels.
Indications of replacement therapy:
–   Early treatment of spontaneous bleeding.
–   Severe or prolonged wound and tissue bleeding.
–   Control of bleeding during and after surgery and trauma.
–   Prophylaxis: In all patients with severe hemophilia so as to prevent recurrent bleeding into
joints and subsequent joint damage (arthropathy).Calculation of dose: Plasma factor VIII, 1 unit/kg will increases activity by 2% (0.02 IU/mL).
The desired factor VIII levels is about 50% (presuming the initial level to be 0). The dose is
calculated as:
–   Dose of factor VIII = Desired factor level (%) × body weight (in kg) × 0.5.
Complications of replacement with factor VIII concentrate therapy:  Former replacement
therapy with clotting factor concentrates prepared from pooled human plasma has led to other
diseases in patients receiving such treatment.
–   Viral Hepatitis (hepatitis B virus, delta virus and hepatitis C virus).
–   Infection with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
–   Development of factor VIII inhibitors.
C. Nontranfusion therapy in hemophiliaDDAVP (1-Amino-8-D-Arginine Vasopressin)
–   Desmopressin (DDAVP) is a synthetic vasopressin analog that causes a transient rise in
factor VIII activity by 3–5 times. It is given at a dose of 0.3 µg/kg body intravenously over
15 minutes.
–   Indication: Minor bleeding and minor surgery.
Antifibrinolytic drugs
–   Indications: To control local hemostasis/bleeding in the gums, nasal bleeding,
gastrointestinal tract, during oral surgery (e.g. dental extraction) and menstruation.
–   Drugs used: Epsilon ( ε) aminocaproic acid and tranexamic acid.
–   Action:  Inhibit the proteolytic activity of plasmin and results in inhibition of fibrinolysis.
–   Dose:
♦   Tranexamic acid: 25 mg/kg three to four times a day.
♦   EACA: Requires a loading dose of 200 mg/kg (maximum of 10 g) followed by 100 mg/kg
per dose (maximum 30 g/d) every 6 hours.
–   Contraindication:
♦   Not indicated to control hematuria because of the risk of formation of an occlusive clot in
the lumen of genitourinary tract structures.
♦   DIC.
♦   Thromboembolic disease.

Table 8.71: Doses of factor VIII for treatment of hemorrhage.
Site of
hemorrhageDesired factor
VIII level (% of
normal)Factor VIII dose
(U/kg body
weight)Frequency of
dose (every no. of
hours)Duration (days)
Hemarthrosis 30–50 ~25 12–24 1–2
Superficial
intramuscular
hematoma30–50 ~25 12–24 1–2
Gastrointestinal
tract~50 ~25 12 7–10
Epistaxis 30–50 ~25 12 Until resolved
Oral mucosa 30–50 ~25 12 Until resolved
Hematuria 30–100 ~25–50 12 Until resolved
Central nervous
system50–100 50 12 At least 7–10
days
Retropharyngeal 50–100 50 12 At least 7–10
days
Retroperitoneal 50–100 50 12 At least 7–10
days
Complications
About 15% of the patients receiving factor VIII therapy develop inhibitory
antibodies that bind and inhibit factor VIII.Treatment for patients with Factor VIII inhibitors: Immune tolerance
induction (ITI) is the most effective strategy of eradication of inhibitors
with steroids or other immunosuppressants. Emicizumab, a bifunctional
monoclonal antibody that can substitute for factor VIII is used in these
cases.Antibodies to AHG may occur de novo in non-hemophiliacs as part of
an immunological disorder such as systemic lupus erythematosus.
Chronic complications
–   Arthropathy
–   HIV and HCV infection
–   Inhibitor development.
Preventive Therapy for HemophiliaGene therapy
Concizumab- monoclonal antibody directed against tissue factor pathway inhibitor

Hemophilia B
Q. Write short essay/note on hemophilia B (Christmas disease) and its
management.
Hemophilia B is caused by a deficiency of factor IX.
Mode of inheritance: X-linked disorder
Clinical features: Similar to hemophilia A.
–   Patients with severe disease: Present with muscle hematomas and
hemarthrosis which progresses to crippling joint deformities.
Diagnosis: Factor IX assay shows deficiency of factor.
Management
Management is similar to hemophilia A.
–   Replacement therapy:
♦   Fresh frozen plasma to treat mild-to-moderated bleeding.
♦   Recombinant factor IX: To treat moderate-to-severe bleeding.
◊  Gene therapy: It may be effective in managing severe disease.
◊  Desmopressin is ineffective.
von Willebrand’s Disease
Q. Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations and treatment of
von Willebrand’s disease.
von Willebrand’s disease (vWD) is characterized by defective platelet
function as well as factor VIII deficiency, and both are due to a deficiency
or dysfunction of von Willebrand factory (vWF).
Major categories: The VWF gene is located on chromosome 12 and
numerous mutations of the gene produces vWD.
–   Quantitative deficiency in vWF:
♦   Type 1 is an autosomal dominant, relatively mild disorder.
♦   Type 3 is an autosomal recessive disorder and is severe.
–   Qualitative defects (dysfunction) in vWF: Type 2 von Willebrand
disease accounts for 25% of all cases and is usually an autosomal
dominant disorder. There are several subtypes.
♦   Type 2a is most commonly characterized by defective assembly of
multimers.

♦   Type 2b is caused by synthesis of an abnormal vWF with increased
affinity for platelets which results in thrombocytopenia.
von Willebrand Factor (vWF)(Fig. 8.42)
vWF is a protein synthesized by endothelial cells and megakaryocytes.
Main functions:
1. von Willebrand factor acts as a carrier protein  which binds to factor
VIII and forms plasma factor VIII-vWF complex. vWF protects factor
VIII and is important for its stability. It has no role in the coagulation
cascade, but deficiency of vWF causes a secondary reduction of factor
VIII causing coagulation defect.
2. vWF is the most important cofactor for adhesion of platelets to the
exposed subendothelial collagen matrix by GpIb/IX. Hence, the
deficiency of vWF results in a defect of platelet function.
Clinical FeaturesVariable and ranges from mild asymptomatic conditions to a severe
hemorrhagic disorder.
The common symptoms are spontaneous bleeding from mucous
membranes (e.g. epistaxis), excessive bleeding from wounds or
menorrhagia. In severe cases, manifestations may be similar to hemophilia
A.
Acquired causes of vWF deficiency are listed on Box 8.26.Laboratory Findings
Platelet count is normal.
Bleeding time is prolonged  despite a normal platelet count because of
defect in platelet function.
Tourniquet test (Hess test): Positive due to defect in platelet adhesion.
APTT: Prolonged  because vWF stabilizes factor VIII by binding to it. A
deficiency of vWF gives rise to a secondary decrease in factor VIII levels.
vWF assay: Plasma level of active vWF is decreased .
Platelet function test: Function of vWF is assessed by ristocetin
aggregation test. Ristocetin induces multivalent vWF multimers to bind
platelet glycoprotein Ib-IX and results in bridging of platelets to each

other. The resultant clumping (agglutination) of platelets is measured by
aggregometer. The degree of ristocetin-dependent platelet agglutination is
a measure of vWF activity. Defective ristocetin induced platelet
aggregation is diagnostic of vWF.
Fig. 8.42:  Functions of von Willebrand factor (vWF).
Box 8.26: Acquired causes of vWF deficiency.
Hematologic disorders
Lymphoproliferative disorders
Myeloproliferative neoplasms including essential thromobocytosis (ET)
SLE and other autoimmune disorders
Cardiovascular disease
Congenital heart disease
Aortic stenosis
Left ventricular assist device or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
Wilms tumor
Hypothyroidism
Valproic acid and other medications

Management
Management of bleeding:
Mild bleeding: Managed with desmopressin.
Severe bleeding: Controlled by intravenous cryoprecipitate or plasma-derived concentrates
containing vWF and factor VIII. Recombinant activated factor VII (rFVIIa,) has also been
successfully used in VWD patients with severe hemorrhage refractory to VWF replacement
therapy.
Vitamin K deficiency:Clinically it manifests as ecchymoses, bleeding from injection sites, bruises, gum bleeding,
hematemesis, melaena or hematuria.
Both the prothrombin time and activated partial thromboplastin time are prolonged.
Administration of vitamin K in a dose of 5–10 mg stops bleeding within 1–2 days.
If blood loss is severe or response to vitamin K is inadequate, transfusion of fresh blood or fresh
frozen plasma is indicated.
FIBRINOLYSIS
Causes of excessive fibrinolysis (Table 8.72).
MICROANGIOPATHIC HEMOLYTIC STATES
AND THROMBOCYTOPENIAS
This syndrome consists of two closely related entities— thrombotic
thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) and hemolytic uremic syndrome
(HUS).
Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic Purpura
Q. Discuss thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura.
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) is a severe microangiopathic
hemolytic anemia (MAHA), characterized by systemic platelet aggregation,
organ ischemia, profound thrombocytopenia (with increased marrow
megakaryocytes), fragmentation of erythrocytes, fever and renal failure.
Table 8.72: Causes of excessive fibrinolysis.
Obstetric: Abruptio placentae, amniotic fluid embolism
Surgical: Gastrectomy, lung resection, nephrectomy, prostatectomy, cardiopulmonary bypass,
splenectomy, pancreatectomy
Medical:

–   Liver diseases (cirrhosis of liver)
–   Leukemias (acute leukemia, chronic granulocytic leukemia type IV)
–   Anaphylactic shock
–   Autoimmune diseases (systemic lupus erythematosus)
Etiology and Pathogenesis
Normally endothelial cells and megakaryocytes secrete normal vWF
multimers into the plasma. These multimers spontaneously develop into
unusually large multimers which are most effective in mediating platelet
adhesion.A plasma protease enzyme called ADAMTS 13 (‘vWF metalloprotease’)
regulates the activity of vWF by cleaving the hemostatically active
unusually large multimers into normal multimers. Thus, ADAMTS-13
regulates the size of vWF multimers and prevents platelet adhesion.TTP patients have an inherited or acquired deficiency of ADAMTS-13.
The deficiency leads to accumulation of unusually large multimers of
vWF in plasma.These large multimers promote platelet adhesion or promote intravascular
platelet aggregation and cause spontaneous activation of the coagulation
cascade.This results in hyaline thrombi throughout the microcirculation, leading to
tissue ischemia and infarction that are characteristic of TTP.
Secondary causes of acute TTP: These include pregnancy, oral
contraceptives, SLE, infection and drugs (ticlopidine and clopidogrel).
They may or may not have associated antibodies to ADAMTS-13.
Clinical Features
The classic five symptoms of TTP are (1) microangiopathic hemolytic anemia (MAHA) with
schistocytosis (at least 3 cells per 100), (2) severe thrombocytopenia, (3) transient neurologic
symptoms secondary to central nervous system ischemia, (4) fever and (5) renal abnormalities
including hematuria and/or proteinuria.
Laboratory Findings
Platelet count markedly reduced  often below 20,000/µL
(thrombocytopenia).
Peripheral blood smear shows fragmented red cells (called schistocytes)
and numerous reticulocytes.

Prothrombin time (PT), partial thromboplastin time (PTT) and fibrinogen
concentration: Normal, because the coagulation system is not activated.
Urine shows moderate proteinuria and both gross and microscopic
hematuria.
Serum LDH: Raised  due to release from ischemic tissues.
ADAMTS-13 activity: Reduced  below 5–10% of normal.
Diagnosis
Schistocytes and elevated serum LDH (out of proportion to the degree of
hemolysis) suggest the diagnosis of TTP.
Treatment
Plasma exchange
–   Daily plasma exchange (removing 40 mL/kg body weight of plasma and replacing it with equal
volume of fresh frozen plasma) is the treatment of choice.
–   Provides ADAMTS-13 and removes associated autoantibody in acute TTP.
–   Continued for at least 2 days after remission, which is defined as stabilization of clinical
symptoms and return to normal of platelet count and LDH levels along with rising hemoglobin
level.
–   Cryoprecipitate and FFP (fresh frozen plasma) also contain ADAMTS-13 can be used.
Corticosteroids:  Pulsed intravenous methylprednisolone is given acutely and is generally added
to plasma exchange to suppress formation of antibody.
Rituximab:  It is a monoclonal antibody against CD20, suppresses antibody-producing cells. It is
used in those patients who are refractory to plasma exchange and corticosteroids.
Splenectomy:  Performed in resistant cases which remove antibody-producing cells.
Platelet concentrates are contraindicated.
Prognosis: Untreated cases have a mortality of up to 90% but with modern
management it has been reduced to about 10%.
Hemolytic-Uremic Syndrome (HUS)
Q. Discuss the clinical features, investigations and treatment of
hemolytic-uremic syndrome.
Hemolytic-uremic syndrome is distinguished from TTP by the absence of
fever and neurological symptoms, the prominence of acute renal failure
(uremia), frequent affection of children and different pathogenesis.
Etiology and Pathogenesis
HUS develops following damage to the endothelium by toxins, drugs or
radiation. One main cause of HUS in children and the elderly is infectious

gastroenteritis caused by Escherichia coli strain 0157:H7.
E. coli  produces a Shiga-like toxin which is absorbed from the inflamed
gastrointestinal mucosa.
The toxin enters circulation and damages endothelial cells of
microvasculature, mainly in the renal glomerular capillaries and initiates
platelet activation and thrombi formation.
Red cells get trapped in the formed thrombi, undergo fragmentation
resulting in schistocytes.
Splenic trapping of the fragmented red cells causes extravascular
hemolysis.
Differences between thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and hemolytic
uremic syndrome are presented on Table 8.73.
Table 8.73: Differences between thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura and
hemolytic uremic syndrome.
Features Thrombotic
thrombocytopenic purpura
(TTP)Hemolytic uremic syndrome(HUS)
Age Adults between 20–50 years Children<5 years
Hemolytic anemia With RBC fragmentation With RBC fragmentation
Renal dysfunction Mild to moderate Acute renal failure
Thrombocytopenia Present Present
CNS symptoms Severe Mild
Fever + -
Clinical FeaturesAge: HUS develops most commonly in children between 1 and 5 years of
age few days after an episode of bloody diarrhea. HUS can also develop in
adults following certain drugs and radiation therapy that damage
endothelial cells.Classical presentation: Triad of microangiopathic hemolytic anemia,
thrombocytopenia and renal failure (oliguria). Hematuria and
hypertension are also common. Despite thrombocytopenia, bleeding
manifestations are rare.Complications: Fluid overload may result in pulmonary edema and
hypertensive encephalopathy.

Investigations
Hemoglobin levels: Decreased (anemia).
Platelet count: Markedly reduced often below 20,000/µL
(thrombocytopenia).
Peripheral blood smear shows fragmented red cells (called schistocytes)
and numerous reticulocytes.
LDH: Elevated.
Blood urea and creatinine: Elevated.
Urine: May show proteinuria and red blood cells.
PT and aPTT: Normal
Stool: Culture for enterohemorrhagic E.coli —positive; shiga toxin—
positive.
Treatment
Supportive care: For the renal and hematological complications.
Antibiotics: If shigellosis is suspected/detected.
Experimental: Eculizumab, monoclonal antibody to C5.
Prognosis
With appropriate supportive care, they usually recover completely, but in
more severe cases renal damage may result in death.
DISSEMINATED INTRAVASCULAR
COAGULATION (DIC)
Q. Discuss the causes, pathogenesis, clinical features, laboratory
features and management of disseminated intravascular coagulation
(DIC: defibrination syndrome: consumption Coagulopathy).
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) is a widespread acute or
chronic thrombohemorrhagic disorder in which a combination of
thrombosis and hemorrhage develops as a secondary complication of a
wide variety of disorders (Table 8.74).
Table 8.74: Major disorders associated with disseminated intravascular
coagulation.

1. Infections 4. Massive tissue injury
Gram-negative bacterial sepsis
Meningococcemia and other bacteria
Fungi, viruses, Rocky mountain spotted
fever, MalariaTraumatic
Burns
Fat embolism
Surgery
2. Obstetric complications 5. Vascular disorders
Retained dead fetus
Septic abortion
Abruptio placentae
Amniotic fluid embolism
Toxemia and preeclampsiaAortic aneurysm, giant hemangioma
3. Neoplasms 6. Miscellaneous
Carcinomas of pancreas, prostate, lung, and
stomach
Acute promyelocytic leukemiaSnakebite, liver disease, acute intravascular
hemolysis, shock, heat stroke,
hypersensitivity, vasculitis
Pathogenesis (Fig. 8.43)
Fig. 8.43:  Pathogenesis of thrombosis, ischemic tissue necrosis and bleeding in disseminated
intravascular coagulation.
Table 8.75: Effects and signs of DIC.
Organ/site Due to thrombi in
microvasculatureDue to hemorrhagic diathesis
Central nervous system Multifocal, delirium, coma Intracerebral bleeding
Renal system Cortical necrosis-oliguria,
azotemiaHematuria
Skin Focal ischemic necrosis,
gangrenePetechiae, ecchymoses, bleeding at the
sites of venipuncture

Gastrointestinal tract Acute ulceration Massive bleeding
Respiratory tract Acute respiratory distress
syndrome
Mucous membranes Epistaxis, gingival bleeding
Peripheral circulation Fragmentation of trapped
RBCs-Microangiopathic
hemolytic anemia
Clinical Features
DIC is a serious, often fatal, important clinical condition which needs an
immediate diagnosis and management. The symptoms of DIC depend on
the nature, intensity and duration of the underlying disorder.
Signs and symptoms are related to the tissue hypoxia and infarction
caused by the microvascular thrombosis; or with bleeding diathesis due to
the depletion of factors and the activation of fibrinolytic mechanisms; or
both (Table 8.75).Bleeding is the most common clinical feature in acute DIC. It may
manifest as ecchymoses, petechiae or bleeding from mucous membranes
or at the sites of venipuncture.
Microvascular thrombi cause ischemic necrosis of the organ with resultant
dysfunction of the involved organ and occur most often with chronic
underlying diseases. Organ dysfunction may manifest as hepatic, renal,
cardiac or respiratory failure or neurological disturbances. It may also
result in gangrene of extremities and hemorrhagic necrosis of the skin.Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome: Occult thrombosis of adrenal vein
thrombosis resulting in adrenal hemorrhage.
Trousseau sign: Migratory venous thrombosis in cancers.
Multiorgan dysfunction syndrome (MODS): Frequent consequence of DIC
and is usually due to bleeding into organs or thrombotic alteration in
various organs (hepatic, cardiac, central nervous, renal and pulmonary
systems).
Laboratory Findings (Investigations) in DIC (Table 8.76)
Q. Write short note on investigations to diagnose DIC.
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR): Low
Peripheral smear: Presence of schistocytes.

Screening assays
–   Platelet count: Decreased because of utilization of platelets in
microthrombi.
–   Prothrombin time: Increased.
–   APTT: Increased  because of consumption and inhibition of the
function of clotting factors.
–   Thrombin time (TT): Increased because of decreased fibrinogen.
–   Plasma fibrinogen: Decreased.
–   Presence of schistocytes (fragmented RBCs) in the peripheral smear.Confirmatory tests
–   FDP (fibrin degradation/split products): Secondary fibrinolysis
results in generation of FDPs, which can be measured by latex
agglutination.
–   D-dimer test: D-dimer is formed during fibrinolysis as a result of
degradation of cross-linked fibrin by plasmin. D-dimer levels are
elevated and is specific for diagnosing DIC.
Table 8.76: Routine laboratory value abnormalities in DIC.
Test Abnormality
Platelet count Decreased
Prothrombin time Prolonged
aPTT Prolonged
Fibrin degradation products Elevated
Protease inhibitors (e.g. protein C, AT, protein S) Decreased
Q. Write short note on management of DIC.
Management
Control or elimination of the underlying cause (e.g. removal of a dead fetus, placenta, etc).
Correction of precipitating factors: For example, acidosis, dehydration, sepsis and hypoxia.
Management of hemorrhagic symptoms: It is necessary to maintain blood volume and tissue
perfusion. Hemorrhagic symptoms are managed by transfusions of platelet concentrates, FFP,
cryoprecipitate and red cell concentrates.
–   Dose:
♦   Platelet concentrates: 1–2 units/10 kg.
♦   Fresh frozen plasma: 15–20 mL/kg.
♦   Cryoprecipitate: 1 unit/10 kg.

Drugs to control coagulation such as heparin or antifibrinolytic drugs have been tried in DIC.
–   Heparin: Low doses of continuous infusion heparin (5–10 U/kg per h) are often used in patients
with thrombotic manifestations. It should be given after the correction of bleeding. Major
indications for heparin therapy are:
♦   Purpura fulminans during the surgical resection of giant hemangiomas and during removal
of a dead fetus.
♦   Acute promyelocytic leukemia.
–   Antifibrinolytic drugs: For example, EACA, or tranexamic acid prevent fibrin degradation by
plasmin may reduce bleeding episodes. However, they increase the risk of thrombosis and
concomitant use of heparin is indicated.
TRANSFUSION MEDICINE
Q. Discuss blood transfusion, blood component transfusion and
indications for transfusion therapy.
Transfusion medicine comprises of blood and blood component/products
transfusion. Blood cannot be synthesized artificially. So the source of blood
is from a healthy human donor.
Whole Blood
One unit of blood collected from a donor contains 450 mL ± 10% of blood
and citrate anticoagulant that also contains phosphate and dextrose.
Whole blood provides both oxygen-carrying capacity and volume
expansion. However, it is rarely used because within a few hours or days,
some coagulation factors (especially factors V and VIII) and platelets
decrease in quantity or lose viability.
Red Cell Concentrates (Packed Red Cells)Packed red cells are obtained by centrifugation/sedimentation of the whole
blood. All the plasma is removed and is replaced by about 100 mL of an
optimal additive solution, such as SAG-M, which contains sodium
chloride, adenine, glucose and mannitol.In the packed red cell unit, the hematocrit is between 55–65%. Since, the
volume is about 330 mL; there is less risk of volume overload.
One unit of packed red blood cells raises hemoglobin concentration by 1
g/dL.
General indications for RBC transfusion are mentioned in Box 8.27.
Platelet Concentrate (PC)

Platelet concentrate may be obtained from a single donor or pooled
plasma. Platelets can also be obtained from a single donor by platelet
apheresis SDP-single donor platelets.
Platelets have ABO antigens on their surface but do not express Rh
antigen. Hence, ABO matching required. But it is advisable to transfuse
Rh negative persons with platelets only from Rh negative persons. One PC
should increase the platelet count by 5,000–10,000/µL. Six units of pooled
platelets or one apheresis unit should increase the platelet count by
approximately 30,000/μL.Indications for platelet concentrate transfusion are mentioned in Box 8.28.
Box 8.27: General indications for RBC transfusion.
Replace acute blood loss due to hemorrhage or during surgery to relieve clinical features caused by
insufficient oxygen delivery
Symptomatic anemia in an euvolemic patient
–   β-thalassemia major
–   Sickle cell anemia
–   Aplastic anemia
–   Severe anemia of any cause
Contraindication to platelet concentrate transfusion
–   Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP)
–   Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT).
–   Relative contraindication: Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) or post-transfusion
purpura (PTP) because the survival of transfused platelets is very brief.
Box 8.28: Indications for platelet concentrate transfusion.
Bleeding due to:Severe thrombocytopenia (when platelet count is less than 20,000/cu mm).
–   Immune mediated: In patients with autoimmune thrombocytopenia, it should be reserved for
patients with life-threatening bleeding.
–   Secondary to bone marrow failure
♦   Chemotherapy induced
♦   Due to leukemia
♦   DilutionalAbnormal platelet function
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
Surgical or invasive procedures in thrombocytopenic patients
Granulocyte Concentrates

Indications: Severe neutropenia with definite evidence of bacterial
infection
It is not frequently employed, because it is preferable to administer the
growth factors for myelopoiesis like G-CSF/GM-CSF. But it is indicated
when granulocyte count is less than 500/cu mm (agranulocytosis), and to
combat infections (in neonatal sepsis and chronic granulomatous disease).
Fresh Frozen Plasma (FFP)The volume is about 200 mL and contains all the coagulation factors
(including von Willebrand factor). Present in fresh plasma. The volume
transfused depends on the clinical situation and patient size, and should be
guided by laboratory assays of coagulation function. The general guide is
10–15 mL/kg per dose.ABO matching is essential before infusion of FFP. Rh compatibility is not
required
Indications:  For replacement of coagulation factors in acquired coagulation factor deficiencies
–   Patients on anticoagulant drug therapy (Coumarin)
–   Antithrombin deficiency
–   Coagulopathy of liver diseases
–   Vitamin K deficiency
–   Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia including TTP, hemolytic uremic syndrome and HELLP
syndrome
–   DIC.
CryoprecipitateContains concentrated precipitate of Factor VIII, XIII, von Willebrand
factor (vWF) and fibrinogen.
Does not require cross-matching before transfusion.
Indications:
–   DIC and other conditions where the fibrinogen level is very low
(hypofibrinogenemia).
–   It was used for hemophilia, factor XIII deficiency, von Willebrand
disease. However, it is no longer used for these disorders because of
the greater risk of virus transmission compared with virus-inactivated
coagulation factor concentrates.Various coagulations factors and their amount in one unit of
cryoprecipitate are mentioned in Table 8.77.

Table 8.77: Various coagulations factors and their amount in one unit of
cryoprecipitate.
Coagulation factor Quantity per unit
Fibrinogen 150–250 mg
Factor VIII 80–150 units
Von Willebrand factor 100–150 units
Factor XIII 50–75 units
Factor VIII and IX Concentrates
These are freeze-dried preparations of specific coagulation factors
prepared from large pools of plasma from many donors.
Indications:
–   For patients with hemophilia and von Willebrand’s disease, where
recombinant coagulation factor concentrates are unavailable.
Saline-washed Red Blood Cells
Saline washing of red cells is an effective means of removing leukocytes and
plasma (up to 99%). This product is largely restricted to patients with
antibodies to IgA or IgE, and those requiring red cells with minimal plasma
as in thalassemia and paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria.
Frozen Red Blood Cells
Red blood cells can be freezed and stored up to 3 years by addition of
glycerol as an endocellular cryoprotective agent. This procedure is used for
storage of rare blood groups. Frozen red cells may be indicated for patients
with history of severe allergic reactions to plasma or leukocyte factors, e.g.
patients sensitized to IgA.
Irradiated Blood Products
Cellular blood products (red cells, platelets, granulocytes) can be irradiated to
a dose of 1500 rads before transfusion in order to minimize the risk of
transfusion-acquired graft-versus-host disease in immunocompromised
individuals.
Immunoglobulins
Rh Immune Globulin

Indications
Known or suspected inoculation of Rh– mother with unknown or Rh+
fetal red cells, e.g. abortion, threatened abortion, ectopic pregnancy,
amniocentesis, abdominal trauma in 2nd or 3rd trimester, postpartum if
new born is Rh+).Following transfusion of Rh+ cellular blood products (e.g. platelets) to an
Rh– female of child bearing age or younger.
Acute ITP resistant to steroids.
Safe Transfusion Procedures
Q. Write short note on precautions to be observed in blood transfusion.
Pretransfusion Testing
Before transfusion of any blood or its components, it is necessary to know
whether they are compatible with the recipient’s blood.
Donor blood: The tests routinely carried out on donor’s blood include
ABO and Rh grouping, tests for HBsAg, anti-HCV, anti-HIV-1 and HIV-2
and serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT), malaria and syphilis.Recipient blood: The recipient’s ABO and Rh grouping is also carried
out.
Compatibility Testing
These are set of procedures which include: Review of patient’s past blood
bank history and records (if done earlier), ABO and Rh typing of the
recipient and donor, antibody screening test of recipient’s and donor’s serum
followed by cross-matching. It is sometimes referred to as cross-matching.
However, cross-match is only a part of compatibility test.
Cross-matching: Cross-matching is very important before any blood
transfusion. Cross-matching should be carried out to ensure that there are no
antibodies in patient’s serum that will react with the donor’s cells when
transfused. Full cross-matching requires about 45 minutes if no red cell
antibodies are present, but may need hours if a patient has multiple
antibodies.Importance of cross-matching:
–   It is the final check of ABO compatibility between donor and recipient.

–   Detects the presence of any clinically significant, unexpected
antibodies in the recipient’s serum that may react with donor’s cells,
thereby preventing any transfusion reaction.
Types: Cross-matching procedure may involve major and minor cross-
matching. Major cross-matching consists of mixing donor’s red cells with
recipient’s (patient’s) serum; whereas minor cross-matching consists of
mixing patient’s red cells with donor’s serum.
Bedside Procedures for Safe Transfusion
An error of patients receiving the wrong blood is important avoidable
cause of mortality and morbidity in transfusion medicine.
Most incompatible transfusions are due to failure to adhere to standard
procedures for taking correctly labeled blood samples and ensuring that
the correct pack of blood component is transfused into the intended
recipient.It is always necessary to monitor the recipient during and after transfusion
so that any complications can be dealt with accordingly.
COMPLICATIONS OF BLOOD TRANSFUSION
(TABLE 8.78)
Q. Write short essay/note on the complications of blood transfusion.
Immunological Complications/Reactions
Acute Hemolytic Transfusion Reaction
Most serious complication of blood transfusion.
Cause: Occurs due to transfusion of incompatible donor red cells resulting
in destruction of donor cells. Usually due to ABO incompatibility.
Clinical features
The initial symptoms may occur within few minutes after starting the
transfusion . Patient typically develops fever with chills, pain in the
lumbar region, dyspnea, pruritus, burning sensation at the site of
transfusion and centrally along the vein, and chest pain.
In an unconscious patient, more severe features like hypotension, shock,

intravascular hemolysis which results in hemoglobinuria and oliguria with
acute renal failure and excessive bleeding due to DIC may develop.
Table 8.78: Complications of blood transfusion.
A. Immunological complications
a. Immediate reactions
1. Acute hemolytic transfusion reactions
2. Febrile non-hemolytic reaction
3. Allergic reaction-urticaria
4. Anaphylactic reactions
5. Transfusion-related acute lung injury
(TRALI)
b. Delayed reactions
1. Alloimmunization
2. Delayed hemolytic transfusion reactions
(mostly asymptomatic)
3. Transfusion associated graft versus host
disease
4. Post-transfusion purpuraB. Non-immunological complications
a. Immediate
1. Circulatory overload
2. Air embolism
b. Late
1. Iron overload: Transfusion hemosiderosis
2. Thrombophlebitis
3. Infections:Hepatitis (HBV, HCV and HDV)
HIV (AIDS)
Malaria
Cytomegalovirus
Syphilis
Diagnosis
In majority of cases, this results from clerical errors like wrong labeling of
the cross-match sample, improper checking or transfusion to the wrong
recipient, confirmed by finding evidence of hemolysis (e.g. hemoglobinuria),
and incompatibility between donor and recipient.
ManagementStop the transfusion immediately if there is any suspicion of serious transfusion reaction.
Change the blood transfusion set and maintain the venous access using normal saline.
Perform physical examination such as blood pressure, urine output and evidence of bleeding.
Emergency treatment may be needed to maintain the blood pressure and renal function.
Withdraw new blood samples from the opposite arm of the patient and send it to the blood
transfusion laboratory along with the donor units to exclude a hemolytic transfusion reaction.
Centrifuge one more blood sample from the recipient of transfusion and look for any free
hemoglobin in the supernatant.
Perform coagulation screening tests including partial thromboplastin time, platelet count,
fibrinogen levels and fibrin-degradation products to exclude DIC. Laboratory evaluation for
hemolysis includes the measurement of serum haptoglobin, lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and
indirect bilirubin levels.If hypotension develops, administer intravenous fluids and if required, vasopressors.
Administer diuretic furosemide to maintain urine output.

Febrile Non-Hemolytic Transfusion Reactions (FNHTR)
Common complication of blood transfusion.
Cause: Usually develop due to presence of leukocyte antibodies in patients
who have previously been transfused or pregnant. Can also occur due to
release of cytokines from donor leukocytes in platelet concentrates.
Time of occurrence: Usually occur towards the end of infusion or within
hours of completing the transfusion.
Typical signs: Flushing and tachycardia, fever (> 38 °C), chills and rigors.
Allergic Reactions—Urticaria
Common but rarely severe.
Cause: Urticarial reactions are mostly results from plasma-protein
incompatibility due to the presence of antibodies in the recipient’s blood
to infused plasma proteins or infusion of allergens that react with IgE
antibodies in the patient.
Treatment: Stop or slow the transfusion and administer 10 mg of chlorphenaramine
(chlorpheniramine) intravenously.
Anaphylactic Reactions
These are severe reactions which develops after transfusion of only a few
milliliters of the blood component.
Severe reactions are seen in patients who have antibodies against IgA and
are often deficient in IgA. The antibodies react with IgA present in the
donor blood.Symptoms and signs: Difficulty in breathing, coughing, nausea and
vomiting, hypotension, bronchospasm, loss of consciousness, respiratory
arrest, and shock.Treatment: Stop transfusion and maintain vascular access. Immediately
administer 0.5 mg epinephrine (adrenaline) IM, and 10 mg
chlorpheniramine, IV glucocorticoids and endotracheal intubation may be
required in severe cases.
Transfusion Related Acute Lung Injury (TRALI)Cause: TRALI usually develops from the transfusion of donor plasma that
contains high-titer anti-HLA antibodies that bind recipient leukocytes.

This produces aggregation of leukocytes in the pulmonary vasculature and
release mediators that increase capillary permeability. Such antibodies are
most frequently found in females after pregnancy and are not found in
plasma of males unless they have been transfused.
Patient develops an acute respiratory distress, either during or within 6
hours of transfusing the patient. It is characterized by fever, cough,
shortness of breath and typical bilateral interstitial infiltrates on chest X-
ray. The reaction occurs during or soon after transfusion and may be life-
threatening.
Treatment: Supportive and patients usually recover without any sequelae.
Delayed Hemolytic Transfusion Reactions (DHTRs)
These are not completely preventable.
Cause:
–   May occur in patients previously sensitized to RBC alloantigens (such
as Rh, Kidd, Kell, Duffy) by previous transfusions or pregnancies.
–   The antibody level is too low to be detected by pretransfusion
compatibility testing.
–   When the patient is transfused with antigen-positive blood, there is
early production of alloantibody (usually by IgG antibodies) that binds
donor RBCs, resulting in destruction of the transfused donor cells.
Occurs 3–21 days after transfusion with the incompatible blood.
Direct Coombs’ test (DAT): Positive, if carried out during hemolysis.
Later, patient may show only positive indirect Coombs’ test.
Treatment: Usually no specific therapy is required.
Transfusion–associated Graft-versus-Host Disease (TA-GVHD)
Rare but potentially fatal complication.
Develops 8–10 days, and death occurs at 3–4 weeks after transfusion.
Mechanism: Donor blood products contain mature T lymphocytes that
recognize host HLA antigens as foreign and mount an immune response
and attack upon recipient’s tissues. It is observed more commonly in
immunocompromised recipients.Clinical features include fever, generalized characteristic skin rash,

jaundice (with abnormalities of liver function), diarrhea and features of
pancytopenia (due to marrow failure).
Prevention: TA-GVHD can be prevented by transfusing the irradiated
blood/components in patients at risk.
It is highly resistant to treatment with immunosuppressive therapies,
including glucocorticoids, cyclosporine, antithymocyte globulin, etc.
Post-transfusion Purpura
It is an immune-mediated thrombocytopenia that usually occurs
predominantly in parous women.
Antibodies against human platelet antigens (HPAs) are found in the
patient’s serum.
It occurs 7–10 days after platelet transfusion.
Thrombocytopenia is usually severe and may cause bleeding.
Platelet transfusions are usually ineffective and can worsen the
thrombocytopenia and hence should be avoided.
Treatment: Treatment with high-dose (0.4 g/kg/day for 5 days). Intravenous immunoglobulin
may neutralize the effector antibodies, or plasmapheresis can be used to remove the antibodies.
Alloimmunization
Alloimmunization usually does not cause clinical problems with the first
transfusion but these may occur with subsequent transfusions. Delayed
consequences of alloimmunization, include HDN (hemolytic disease of
the newborn) and rejection of tissue transplants.Types:
–   Alloantibodies to RBC antigens
♦   Detected during pretransfusion testing and may delay finding
antigen-negative cross-match-compatible products for transfusion.
♦   Alloimmunization may develop during pregnancy to fetal RBC
antigens (i.e. D, c, E, Kell, or Duffy) inherited from the father and
not shared by the mother.
–   Alloimmunization to antigens on leukocytes and platelets: It can lead
to refractoriness to platelet transfusions.
Non-immune Complications/Reactions

Q. Write short note on infections transmitted by blood transfusion.
Circulatory overload: Significant in the elderly, pregnant women, those
with reduced cardiac function (e.g. cardiac failure) or renal failure
resulting in acute pulmonary edema.
Air embolism: It used to develop in olden days when transfusion was
given from the glass bottle.
Iron overload (transfusion siderosis)
–   This is seen in patients who receive multiple transfusions over a period
of few years (e.g. thalassemia). The excess iron gets deposited in
reticuloendothelial cells of spleen, bone marrow, liver, heart and
endocrine glands.
–   Iron overload can be prevented or reduced by giving iron chelating
agentsThrombophlebitis: Inflammation of vein may develop in patients with
indwelling catheters.
Infectious complications: Transfusion of infected blood may transmit
few diseases like AIDS, hepatitis (HBV, HCV and HDV), HTLV-I and II,
malaria and cytomegalovirus infection. This is prevented by screening the
donors for these common and ominous infections.
Massive transfusion  is defined as transfusion of more than 10 units of red
cells or replacement of 1 blood volume in 24 hours. The use of large
quantities of stored blood in massive transfusions may lead to a number of
complications. Among these are dilutional coagulopathy, circulatory
overload, hyperkalemia, hypoglycemia, hypothermia, and rarely, citrate-
induced hypocalcemia.
Blood Groups and DiseasesThe first established disease relationship was between carcinoma of the stomach and group A.
Duodenal ulcer is 1.4 times more common in group O patients.
It is also reported that group A individuals have greater levels of factor VIII than group O, and
hence greater complications of bleeding are seen in group O than A.
A relationship between the Duffy (Fy) blood group and malaria is well established. It is seen in
West Africa where the frequency of Fy a-b- is about 90%; these individuals are resistant to
Plasmodium vivax. Experimentally, it has been shown that antigens Fya and Fyb act as receptors
for the parasite to enter the cell.The Kell (K) group is associated with chronic granulomatous diseases and Rh null is implicated in
autoimmune hemolytic anemia.

STEM CELLS
Q. Define and classify stem cells. Discuss their clinical applications.
Definition
Stem cells are characterized by their ability of self-renewal and capacity to
generate differentiated cell lineages.
Properties
Self-renewal capacity
Asymmetric replication: This is characterized by division of stem cell into:
–   One daughter cell which gives rise to differentiated mature cells and
regenerating tissues
–   Other remains undifferentiated stem cell which retain the self-renewal
capacity.
Types
Embryonic stem cells: During development of embryo, the blastocysts
contain undifferentiated pluripotent stem cells which are called as
embryonic stem cells or ES cells. These cells can form cells of all three
germ cell layers.
–   Normal function: To give rise to all cells of the body.Adult (somatic) stem cells: Adult stem cells are less undifferentiated than
ES cells found in adults. They are found among differentiated cells within
a tissue. They are multipotent and have more limited capacity to generate
different cell types than ES cells.
–   Normal function: Tissue homeostasis.
–   Use: Adult stem cells include hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) in bone
marrow, peripheral blood or cord blood. They are currently the only
type of stem cells commonly used to treat human diseases.
–   Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPS cells): This is achieved by
transferring the nucleus of adult cells to an enucleated oocyte.
♦   Use: For therapeutic cloning in the treatment of human diseases.
Clinical Application
Some diseases in which marrow transplantation has been utilized are
presented in Table 8.79.

Table 8.79: Diseases treated with marrow transplantation.
Genetic diseases (allogenic BMT)
Red cell disorders
–   Thalassemia major
–   Sickle cell disease
Immunodeficiencies
–   Severe combined immunodeficiency
–   X-linked agammaglobulinemia
Granulocyte disorders
–   Chediak-Higashi syndrome
–   Chronic granulomatous disease
–   Kostmann syndromeEnzyme deficiencies
–   Gaucher’s disease
–   Mucopolysaccharidoses
–   Leukodystrophies
Platelet disorders
–   Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
–   Glanzmann’s thrombasthenia
Other
–   Osteopetrosis
Marrow failure syndromes
Allogenic or syngenic BMT
Severe aplastic anemia
Fanconi’s syndrome
Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
Malignant diseases
Autologous, syngenic or allogenic BMT
Acute leukemias
Chronic leukemias
Myelodysplastic syndromes
Hodgkin’s disease
Non-Hodgkin lymphomas
Other solid tumors
Therapeutic
Hematological disorders: Leukemias, multiple myeloma and lymphoma
Disorders with defective genes, e.g. severe combined immune deficiency.

Other possible uses:
–   Ischemic heart disease: Stem cells are injected either into the coronary
arteries or directly into the myocardium. They can differentiate into
myocardial cells or new blood vessels.
–   Spinal cord lesions
–   Non-union of fractured bones
–   Parkinson disease
–   Huntington disease
–   Muscular dystrophy
–   Type 1 diabetes mellitus
–   Motor neuron disease
–   Alzheimer’s disease.
Other ApplicationsUseful in understanding the pathology of disease and origin of cancers.
Monitor the development of genetic disorders.
Test the efficacy of drugs.
HEMATOPOIETIC STEM CELL
TRANSPLANTATION
Q. Write short essay/note on hematopoietic stem cells (HSC).
Q. Write a short note on peripheral blood stem cell transplantation.
Q. Write short essay/note on bone marrow transplantation and its
indications.
Bone marrow transplantation  was the original term used to describe the
collection and transplantation of hematopoietic stem cells.
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation  is a preferred term, because the
peripheral blood and umbilical cord blood are also used as sources of stem
cells.
Definition: Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation is defined as the
process of collecting and infusing hematopoietic stem cells obtained from

bone marrow (bone marrow transplantation) or peripheral blood
(peripheral blood stem cell transplantation).
Purpose of HSC transplantation: To repopulate or replace totally or
partly recipient’s hematopoietic system. HSC are self-renewing cells
which can repopulate all the cell lineages in the blood.
Major sources of hematopoietic stem cells:
–   Bone marrow: Obtained directly from bone marrow by multiple
aspirations from the pelvic bones.
–   Peripheral blood (peripheral blood stem cells).
–   Umbilical cord blood.
Indications for Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation
(Table 8.80)
Q. Write short essay/note on indications for bone marrow/stem cell
transplantation.
Categories/Types of Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation
Autologous (‘from self’): Stem cells obtained from the recipient (same
person). The patient’s own HSCs are removed and stored in the vapor
phase of liquid nitrogen until required. The source of stem cells may be
bone marrow or from the blood. It does not require immunosuppression.
However, there is no graft-versus-tumor effect and therefore, there is
increased risk of disease relapse or progression compared to allogenic
HSC transplantation.Allogeneic (‘from different genes’): HSCs are obtained from a donor-
either related (usually an HLA-identical sibling) or from a closely HLA-
matched volunteer unrelated donor (VUD).Syngeneic (‘from same genes’): HSCs are obtained from an identical
twin.
Main factor for a successful allogenic transplantation is finding of a HLA-
matched donor, because it reduces the risk of graft rejection and graft
versus host disease (GVHD).
Peripheral Blood Stem Cell Transplantation
Definition: It is defined as transplantation of stem cells derived from the
peripheral blood of a donor to a recipient (allogenic) or from the patient’s

own blood (autologous).
Steps:
Hematopoietic stem cells are present in the peripheral blood but in very
low concentration (<0.1% of all nucleated cells). To increase their
numbers, hematopoietic growth factor (G-CSF or GM-CSF) is
administered to the donor (for allogenic stem cell transplant) or to the
patient during recovery from intensive chemotherapy (for autologous
transplant).Stem cells are collected from the blood by apheresis and are infused in the
recipient.
Stem cells engraft in the recipient and is characterized by the recovery of
neutrophil count to >500 mm3 for 3 consecutive days.
Hematopoietic recovery is more rapid in peripheral hematopoietic stem
cell transplantation when compared to bone marrow hematopoietic stem
cell transplant.
Umbilical cord blood: It is a good source of HSC with no risk to either
infant or mother. Possible contamination of cord blood with CMV and
Epstein-Barr virus is also low due to poor transmission from placenta.
However, the major disadvantage is that the number of HSCs that can be
collected from cord blood is small and an adult might require multiple cord
blood donors.
Origin and source of hematopoietic stem cells used for transplantation are
presented in Table 8.81.
Comparison among bone marrow, peripheral blood and cord blood stem
cells are presented in Table 8.82.
Table 8.80: Indication for hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.
Red blood cell disordersSevere aplastic anemia
Thalassemia major
Fanconi anemia
Sickle cell disease
Pure red cell aplasia
WBC disorders
Leukemia
–   Acute lymphoblastic leukemia—relapse after initial chemotherapy induced remission

–   Chronic myeloid leukemia, acute myeloid leukemia
Myelodysplastic syndromes, myelofibrosis
Lymphomas: Hodgkin lymphoma, non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Multiple myeloma
Solid tumors, e.g. germ cell tumors, neuroblastoma
Immunological disorders
Severe autoimmune disorders: Scleroderma, lupus erythematosus
Immune deficiency syndromes
Table 8.81: Origin and source of hematopoietic stem cells used for
transplantation.
Origin of hematopoietic stem cells
–   Autologous
–   Syngeneic
–   Allogeneic
–   Genotypically HLA-identical siblings
–   Phenotypically HLA-identical or HLA-mismatched family members
–   Unrelated volunteer donorsSource of hematopoietic stem cells
–   Bone marrow
–   Peripheral blood
–   Combination of blood and marrow
–   Umbilical cord blood
Table 8.82: Comparison among bone marrow, peripheral blood and cord
blood stem cells.
Characteristic Bone marrow Peripheral blood Cord blood
Stem cell content Adequate Good Low
Risk of tumor cell
contaminationHigh Not applicable Not applicable
HLA matching Close matching Close matching Less restrictive
Engraftment Medium Fastest Slowest
Risk of acute graft-
versus-host disease
(GVHD)High High Lowest
Risk of chronic GVHD Medium Highest Lowest
Conditioning Regimens

Necessary before HSC transplantation.
Types: Myeloablative or non-myeloablative  (or reduced intensity).
–   Myeloablative regimens: Eliminates malignant cells in the marrow so
that transfused HSC can populate the bone marrow and develop.
–   Non-myeloablative regimens: To induce immunosuppression in
recipient so that engraftment of donor cells can take place. It is less
toxic.
Complications of conditioning regimens:
–   Usually develop within 30 days and includes infections, nausea,
vomiting, alopecia, mucositis and interstitial pneumonia.
–   Veno-occlusive disease of liver characterized by jaundice, ascites and
tender hepatomegaly.
–   Late complications: Infertility, ovarian failure and secondary
malignancies (AML and solid organ malignancies).
Autologous Stem Cell Transplant
Marrow or peripheral stem cells are obtained from the patient before the
high-dose therapy, frozen (cryopreserved) and then reinfused after the high-
dose therapy to reconstitute marrow function.
Different steps of autologous stem cell transplantation (Fig. 8.44)
Harvesting: During harvesting, bone marrow and/or peripheral HSCs
(identified as CD34+ by immunophenotyping) are collected.
Processing of HSCs: The collected bone marrow or peripheral blood stem
cells are suspended in dimethyl sulfoxide (prevents ice crystallization in
the cells) and frozen in liquid nitrogen. The HSCs can survive in frozen
state for at least 5 years.Conditioning: Before the autologous transplant, the patient is given a
high-dose chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy, sometimes total-body
irradiation (TBI). This procedure is called conditioning, the purpose of
which is to eradicate the recipient’s hematopoietic and immune system
and also malignant tumor cells if any. Conditioning also makes physical
space available for HSCs to engraft. In contrast to allogeneic
transplantation, autologous transplantation does not require
immunosuppression to prevent graft versus host disease (GVHD).Stem cell transplant: The collected frozen bone marrow or peripheral

HSCs are thawed and infused intravenously like a blood transfusion.
These stem cells home from the peripheral circulation to the conditioned
empty marrow space. Because of conditioning the patient is pancytopenic
and requires critical care. The high-dose chemotherapy also causes
breakdown of the normal mucosal barriers in the mouth and gut resulting
in increased susceptibility to infections and painful ulcerations.Post-transplant engraftment: During which the hematopoietic cells
produce all the three formed elements of the blood.
Fig. 8.44:  Autologous stem cell transplantation.

Fig. 8.45:  Allogeneic stem cell transplantation.
Allogenic Bone Marrow Transplantation
The HSCs are obtained from an HLA-matched or HLA-mismatched family
member (usually a sibling) or an unrelated donor.
Different steps of allogenic stem cell transplantation (Fig. 8.45)
Harvesting: During harvesting, collected bone marrow and/or peripheral
HSCs are mixed with mature WBCs, important being lymphocytes.
Mature T lymphocytes are the principal effectors of cell-mediated
immunity and both therapeutic benefit and toxicities of allogeneic HSC
transplant are due to immunologic reactions between donor T-cells and
recipient cells.Conditioning: This step is similar to autologous HSC transplant.
Immunosuppression is to allow engraftment of the transplanted HSCs. The
patient’s endogenous lymphocytes must be suppressed by
immunosuppression so as to prevent graft versus host disease (GVHD).

Stem cell transplant: The harvested HSCs are infused into the vein just
like a blood transfusion. The stem cells travel and reside in the marrow
and produce erythrocytes, granulocytes and platelets. This usually takes 3–
4 weeks. Patient requires utmost care during this period similar to
autologous transplant.Engraftment: Donor T lymphocytes help donor HSCs engraft. These T
lymphocytes are mostly CD8+ and they destroy any remaining host
immune cells which may reject the donor HSCs. Depletion of donor T
lymphocytes before allogeneic HSC transplant significantly increases the
risk of graft failure. But the greatest disadvantage due to the donor T
lymphocytes is development of GVHD.
Complications of Hematopoietic Stem Cell (HSC)
Transplantation (Table 8.83)
Autologous HSC transplants have fewer immunologic complications but
have higher rates of relapse of the disease after transplant. Allogeneic HSC
transplants have lower rates of relapse but have more immunologic
complications, including GVHD, which can be fatal.Infections: Patients are susceptible to a variety of infections (bacterial,
viral and fungal) due to lack of granulocytes, as well as lack of a
functioning immune system. Infections may occur during three different
phases after HSC transplantation.
1. First phase: Infections develop due to neutropenia and damage to
gastrointestinal mucosal barrier induced by conditioning agents used
during transplantation. Source of infection is from oral, skin and
gastrointestinal flora.
2. Second phase: It develops during GVHD where T-cell function gets
impaired. Patients may develop opportunistic viral and fungal
infections.
3. Third phase: It occurs due to chronic GVHD where both B-cell and T-
cell functions are impaired. Patients may develop bacterial as well as
opportunistic viral and fungal infections.Organ toxicity: The other complications include damage to GI tract, liver
and lungs.
Interstitial pneumonitis: This is seen in 30–40% of patients and may be
fatal in some. Toxicity of radiation and chemotherapy, GVHD and viral

and pneumocystis infections are responsible.
Veno-occlusive disease: VOD results from injury to hepatocytes and
endothelium in zone 3 of the liver acinus and obstruction of hepatic
sinusoids and venules. The clinical manifestations include jaundice,
ascites and painful hepatomegaly. Tissue plasminogen activator has been
used to treat VOD successfully. Severe VOD is often fatal.Graft versus host disease: GVHD is the major complication that follows
allogeneic HSC transplant. This is caused by cytotoxic activity of infused
donor T lymphocytes reacting against the recipient’s tissues/organs (which
are considered as foreign to donor T cells).
Table 8.83: Complications of hematopoietic cell transplantation.
Vascular access complications Hepatic complications
Graft failureSinusoidal obstructive syndrome
Blood group incompatibilities and
hemolytic complicationsHepatitis: Infectious versus noninfectious
Acute GVHD Cardiac toxicity: Structural (e.g. valvular
abnormalities or coronary artery disease) or
functional (e.g. cardiomyopathies)
Chronic GVHD Lung injury
Infectious complications Interstitial pneumonitis: Infectious versus
noninfectious
Bacterial infections Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage
Fungal infections Engraftment syndrome
Cytomegalovirus infection Bronchiolitis obliterans
Herpes simplex virus infections Kidney and bladder complications
—Hemorrhagic cystitis, nephrotoxicity
Varicella-zoster virus infections Endocrine complications
Epstein-Barr virus infections Drug-drug interactions, gonadal
dysfunction, thyroid dysfunction.
Adenovirus, respiratory viruses, HHV-6, -7,
-8, and other virusesGrowth and development: Growth retardation
Gastrointestinal complications Late onset nonmalignant complications
Mucosal ulceration/bleeding Osteoporosis/osteopenia, avascular necrosis,
dental problems, cataracts, chronic fatigue,
psychosocial effects, and rehabilitation
Nutritional support Secondary malignancies:  Lymphoma, solid

tumors of the tongue, salivary glands, brain,
thyroid, bone, malignant melanoma, squamous
cell carcinoma and basal cell carcinoma
Neurologic complications
Three conditions are necessary for the development of GVHD:
–   An immunocompetent graft (i.e. one containing T-cells)
–   HLA mismatch (minor or major) between donor and recipient
–   An immunosuppressed recipient who cannot mount an immune response to the graft.
♦   Forms: GVHD can occur in two forms
a.     Acute GVHD: If GVHD occurs before 100 days, it is termed as
acute GVHD. It often affects three primary target organs
simultaneously, namely skin, gastrointestinal (GI) tract and liver. It
causes exfoliative dermatitis, diarrhea, hepatitis and cholestasis. It
develops due to production of cytokines by Th1 cells. HLA
mismatch is one of the important risk factor for its development.
Treatment includes methotrexate, cyclosporine, antithymocyte
globulin, corticosteroids and monoclonal antibodies against T-cells.
b.     Chronic GVHD: Occurs after day 100 following transplantation
and can affect the skin, GI tract, liver, eyes, lungs and joints. GVHD
is difficult to treat and in severe cases it is usually fatal. It develops
due to cytokine production by Th2 cells. Treatment includes
cyclosporine and corticosteroids.
DRUGS USED IN HEMATOLOGICAL
DISEASES
Antiplatelet Drugs (Table 8.84)Q. Write short essay/note on antiplatelet drugs.
Cyclooxygenase Inhibitors
Aspirin is cheap, effective and most widely used antiplatelet agent.
Mechanism of action: Aspirin inhibits platelet enzyme cyclooxygenase
(COX-1 and COX-2) and prevents the synthesis of thromboxane A2. This
results in impairment of platelet secretion and aggregation.
Duration of action: Effects of aspirin on platelet function develop within

an hour and lasts for the whole life span of platelets (~7 days).
Indications: Arthritis, secondary prevention of cardiovascular events
(acute coronary syndromes, stable angina) in patients with coronary artery,
cerebrovascular (transient ischemic attack) or peripheral vascular disease
(intermittent claudication).Dose: Usual dose is 75–325 mg once daily.
Side effects: Dyspepsia to erosive gastritis or peptic ulcers with bleeding
and perforation.
Table 8.84: Antiplatelet agents by mechanism of action and clinical use.
Cyclooxygenase inhibitors
Aspirin Coronary and cerebrovascular disease
Agents that increase cAMP
Dipyridamole Coronary, cerebrovascular, peripheral arterial
disease
Pentoxifylline Peripheral arterial disease
Cilostazol Peripheral arterial disease
ADP receptor blockers
Ticlopidine Cerebrovascular disease
Clopidogrel Coronary, cerebrovascular disease, PCI
Prasugrel Coronary, cerebrovascular disease, PCI
ADP mimetic
Cangrelor Coronary, cerebrovascular disease
Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa inhibitors
Abciximab ACS, PCI
Eptifibatide ACS, PCI
Tirofiban ACS, PCI
(ACS: acute coronary syndrome; cAMP: cyclic adenosine monophosphate;
PCI: Percutaneous coronary intervention)Adenosine Diphosphate (ADP) Receptor Antagonists on Platelets
(Thienopyridines)
Thienopyridines are drugs that selectively inhibit ADP-induced platelet
aggregation by irreversibly blocking P2Y12.

Thienopyridines include ticlopidine, clopidogrel and prasugrel.
Indications: Reduces the risk of cardiovascular death, MI and stroke in
patients with atherosclerotic disease.
Dose:
–   Ticlopidine: 250 mg twice daily
–   Clopidogrel: 75 mg once daily. Loading dose of 300 mg of clopidogrel
is given when rapid ADP receptor blockade is needed such as patients
undergoing coronary stenting.
–   Prasugrel: A loading dose of 60 mg, prasugrel produces much more
rapid, potent and consistent inhibition of platelet function than
clopidogrel loading dose. It is followed by a maintenance dose of 10
mg once daily.Side effects:
–   Ticlopidine: Gastrointestinal and hematologic (neutropenia,
thrombocytopenia and thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura). These
side effects usually occur within the first few months of starting
treatment.
–   Clopidogrel and prasugrel: Gastrointestinal and hematologic side
effects are rare.
Adenosine Reuptake Inhibitors
Dipyridamole  is a relatively weak antiplatelet agent.
Mechanism of action:
–   Inhibits phosphodiesterase and blocks the breakdown of cyclic AMP.
Dose: 25–75 mg three to four times a day. Dipyridamole is more
commonly used along with aspirin.
Indications: Coronary artery disease, ischemic stroke or transient ischemic
attack. Rarely used at present because of dose inconvenience and side
effects.Side effects:
–   Due to vasodilatory effect, it can lower the blood pressure and must
be used with caution in patients with coronary artery disease.
–   Others: Gastrointestinal complaints, headache, dizziness and
hypotension.

Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa Receptor Antagonists (Inhibitors)
It includes three agents: Abciximab, eptifibatide and tirofiban.
Uses: Parenteral GPIIb/IIIa receptor antagonists are used in acute coronary
syndromes, unstable angina and non ST-elevatin MI percutaneous
coronary interventions.
Side effects: Bleeding tendencies and thrombocytopenia. Eptifibatide may
produce hypotension.
Anticoagulants
Q. Classify anticoagulants. Write short essay/note on the commonly
used anticoagulants.
Q. Write short note on:
Indication for anticoagulants
Contraindication for anticoagulants.
Classification of Anticoagulants (Table 8.85)
Table 8.85: Classification of anticoagulants.
Parenteral (rapidly acting) Oral (slow acting)
Heparin (unfractionated and low-molecular
weight heparins)
Hirudins
Heparinoids
Indirect factor Xa inhibitors (fondaparinux and
idraparinux).Coumarin derivatives: Warfarin sodium,
dicoumarol. These are most commonly used.
Bishydroxycoumarin dicoumoral,
acenocoumarol (nicoumalone),
ethylbiscoumacetate.
Indandione derivatives: Phenindione,
diphenindione (not used clinically).
Direct thrombin inhibitors: Ximelagatran
Indications for Anticoagulant Therapy (Table 8.86)
Q. Write short note on indications for long-term anticoagulation.
Table 8.86: Indications for anticoagulant therapy.
Purpose Clinical situations
Urgent and for long-term anticoagulation: It is
initiated with heparin and taken over by oralThrombosis and thromboembolism:
Atrial fibrillation and cardiac disorders with

anticoagulants thromboembolism
Deep venous thrombosis
Stroke in evolution and resistant transient
ischemic attacks
Pulmonary thromboembolism
Others:
Unstable angina and non-ST-elevation
myocardial infarction
Prosthetic valves
Peripheral vascular disease
Anticoagulants for brief periods: Heparin alone is
usedCardiac bypass surgery:
Hemodialysis
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
Contraindications for anticoagulation therapy are listed in Box 8.29.
Box 8.29: Contraindications for anticoagulant therapy.
Bleeding disorders, heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
Severe hypertension, threatened abortion, hemorrhoids, peptic ulcers
Subacute bacterial endocarditis, tuberculosis
Ocular and neurosurgery, lumbar puncture
Chronic alcoholics, cirrhosis, renal failure
Heparin
Unfractionated heparin
Q. Write short note on (unfractionated) heparin.
Mechanism of action: Heparin acts as anticoagulant by activating
antithrombin (previously known as antithrombin III) thereby potentiating
its action. The activated antithrombin inhibits clotting enzymes,
particularly thrombin and factor Xa.Mode of administration: Heparin is given parenterally. It is usually
administered SC or by continuous IV infusion.
Dose: Initial loading dose of 5,000–10,000 units intravenously, followed
by maintenance by any one of the following:
–   Continuous intravenous.
–   Intermittent intravenous/subcutaneous.
Methods of anticoagulation:

–   Total anticoagulation: Continuous intravenous maintenance using an
infusion pump at a rate of 1000 units/hour.
–   Low-dose heparinization (e.g. prophylaxis of DVT): 5000 units 12
hourly or 8 hourly subcutaneously.
–   For prophylaxis: Fixed doses of 5000 units SC two or three times daily.
Duration of therapy: Variable, but usually ranges from 7 to 10 days.
Monitoring: Heparin therapy is monitored using activated partial
thromboplastin time (aPTT), which is maintained at 1.5 to 2 times the
control value.
Antidote of heparin: Protamine sulfate
Complications of heparin therapy: Includes bleeding, heparin induced
thrombocytopenia (HIT), osteoporosis and osteomalacia (in long-standing
therapy). HIT is of two types:
Heparin induced thrombocytopenia
HIT type I: Benign form develops immediately and often resolves after
heparin is discontinued and is probably due to direct platelet-aggregation
induced by heparin.HIT type II: The heparin binds to platelet factor 4 (PF4) released from
platelets and forms a complex (heparin/PF4 complex) in the circulation.
The antibodies formed against these complexes activate platelets,
promoting thrombosis even in the presence of marked thrombocytopenia.
It develops 5 to 10 days after starting heparin therapy. Can occur with all
types of heparin.
Treatment of HIT Type IIImmediately stops all heparin administration.
Start non-heparin anticoagulants, e.g. lepirudin—a recombinant hirudin, argatroban, danaparoid,
fondaparinux and bivalirudin.
Do not administer warfarin as it can produce gangrene of limb or necrosis of skin. Vitamin K is
administered if HIT diagnosed after warfarin has already been started.
Do not administer platelet transfusion even though there is severe thrombocytopenia
Low-molecular weight heparins (LMWH)
LMWH are biologically active forms of conventional heparin. The
molecular weights ranging from 3000 to 8000 Daltons.
Mode of action: They act as anticoagulant primarily by inhibiting

activated factor X (Xa) rather than activated factor II (IIa).
Advantages:
–   Can be administered subcutaneously once or twice/day.
–   Pharmacokinetics is predictable and aPTT monitoring is not needed.
–   Less immunogenic and less likely to produce thrombocytopenia.
–   Many patients with DVT (deep vein thrombosis) can be treated on an
outpatient basis.Disadvantage: Higher cost.
Commonly available LMWH: Enoxaparin, dalteparin and tinzaparin.
Warfarin
Q. Write short essay/note on oral anticoagulants.
Water-soluble vitamin K antagonist.
Mode of action: Vitamin K is necessary for the synthesis of coagulation
factors such as prothrombin (factor II) and factors VII, IX and X and also
protein C and protein S. Warfarin type anticoagulants prevents the
conversion of vitamin K to its active hydroquinone form and interferes
with the synthesis of the above vitamin K-dependent coagulation factors.Monitoring: Warfarin therapy is monitored using the prothrombin time.
Dose:
–   Starting dose: Warfarin is started at a dose of 5 mg oral on the first day.
Subsequent daily doses are adjusted according to PT (INR) which is
maintained at 1.5–3 times the control value.
–   Maintenance dose: Varies from 2.5 to 7.5 mg/day.
Duration of therapy: Variable and may range from 3 months to lifelong.
Side effects: These include bleeding and rarely skin necrosis.
Antidotes of warfarin: Injections of vitamin K1, 5 mg intravenously or
fresh frozen plasma or prothrombin complex concentrate.
Contraindications:
–   Severe uncontrolled hypertension
–   Severe renal or liver failure
–   Pre-existing hemostatic disorders
–   Pregnancy: It crosses the placenta and can cause fetal abnormalities.

Therefore should not be used during pregnancy.
Reversing warfarin therapy (Table 8.87)
Direct thrombin inhibitors
1. Parenteral: Hirudin
Source: Derived from a medicinal leach.
Recombinant form of hirudin, e.g. lepirudin, bivalirudin and desirudin.
Mode of action: Acts directly on thrombin.
Monitoring: By measuring aPTT.
Table 8.87: Reversing warfarin therapy.
Indication Action
INR <6 Lower the dose, consider withholding one or more doses
Recheck in 3 to 7 days
INR 6–10 Lower the dose and withhold 1 to 3 doses
Consider administering vitamin K, 1–2 mg orally
Recheck INR in 24–48 hours
INR >10 Withhold doses until INR in desired range and cause of elevation
ascertained
Give vitamin K, 2–4 mg orally
Recheck INR in 24 hours
Serious bleeding and
major overdoseConsider fresh-frozen plasma or prothrombin complex
concentrate and give 5–10 mg vitamin K intravenously
Clinical indications and use of direct thrombin inhibitors is presented in
Table 8.88.2. Oral
These include ximelagatran and dabigatran etexilate
Dabigatran  being used for prophylaxis after hip and knee replacement.
The major side effect of dabigatran is hemorrhage.
Idarucizumab: Humanized monoclonal antibody fragment (Fab)
indicated in patients treated with dabigatran when reversal of the
anticoagulant effects are needed for emergency surgery or urgent
procedures, or in the event of life-threatening or uncontrolled bleeding.Rivaroxaban  is an orally administered drug, factor Xa inhibitor
available orally administered direct factor Xa inhibitor that produces its
anticoagulant effect through reversible binding with the factor Xa
molecule. Rivaroxaban can inhibit both free and thrombus-associated

factor Xa.
Table 8.88: Clinical indications and use of direct
thrombin inhibitors.
Agent Clinical Indication Monitoring
Lepirudin HIT aPTT
Bivalirudin Angioplasty,
PCI with HITACT
Argatroban HIT aPTT
HIT with PCI ACT (activated clotting
time)
Indirect factor Xa inhibitors
These include fondaparinux and idraparinux.
Mode of action: Increases the rate of inactivation of factor Xa by
antithrombin, thereby blocking production of thrombin.
Use: HIT-type II.
Fibrinolytic or Thrombolytic Agents
Q. Write short essay/note on fibrinolytic agents.
Q. Write short essay/note on thrombolytics.
Goal of therapy: To produce rapid dissolution of thrombus and restore the
blood flow.
Most fibrinolytic or thrombolytic agents are recombinant forms having
plasminogen activator activity.
Mechanism of Action: They convert the proenzyme, plasminogen to active
enzyme plasmin. Plasmin then degrades the fibrin of thrombi and
produces soluble fibrin degradation products.Currently approved fibrinolytic agents are:
–   Streptokinase (STK):
♦   Source: It is obtained from β-hemolytic streptococci. It is not an
enzyme and does not directly convert plasminogen to plasmin.
Instead it forms a complex with plasminogen, it converts
other/additional molecules of plasminogen into plasmin. Since it is
obtained from bacteria, it can produce allergic reactions in about 5%

of patients.
♦   Uses: In acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction and pulmonary
embolism.
–   Urokinase (UK): It is used in patients who received STK in the past 6
months and require a thrombolytic agent for MI or pulmonary
embolism. It does not produce allergic reaction.
–   Acylated plasminogen streptokinase activator complex (APSAC)
(anistreplase).
–   Recombinant tissue-type plasminogen activator (rtPA): Also known as
alteplase or activase is useful in acute thrombotic strokes (within 3
hours of onset) besides acute MI and pulmonary embolism.
–   Prourokinase (pro-UK) like rtPA.
–   Others: Tenecteplase, desmoteplase and reteplase.
Indication for use of fibrinolytic agents are listed in Box 8.30.
Box 8.30:  Indication for use of fibrinolytic or thrombolytic agents.
1. Acute myocardial infarction.
2. Massive pulmonary embolism with hypotension.
3. Acute ischemic stroke (thrombotic or embolic).
4. Acute peripheral artery occlusion.
Erythropoietin
Q. Write short essay/note on erythropoietin (EPO), recombinant human
erythropoietin (rHuEPO) and darbepoietin alpha.
Q. List the ectopic sources of erythropoietin.
Site of production: This hormone is predominantly produced by the
juxtatubular interstitial cells of the renal cortex and to a lesser extent in the
liver.
Stimulus:
–   Hypoxia is the most potent stimulus for EPO production. In the
presence of tissue (renal) hypoxia, kidneys respond by increased
production of EPO.
–   Anemia: Erythropoietin levels are inversely related to hemoglobin
concentrations in the blood. Anemia is another important stimulant.

Mode of action:
–   EPO stimulates erythropoiesis by acting on the marrow erythroid
progenitors to enhance their survival, proliferation and differentiation.
–   EPO may also protect neuronal cells from noxious stimuli.
Ectopic sources of EPO are presented in Table 8.89.
Table 8.89: Ectopic sources of EPO.
Polycystic kidneys Cerebellar
hemangioblastomaUterine leiomyoma
Renal cell carcinoma Hepatocellular carcinoma Pheochromocytoma
Recombinant Human Erythropoietin (rHuEPO)
It has same biological effects of endogenous erythropoietin and is
available as erythropoietin–α and erythropoietin-β.
Indications: In the treatment of:
–   Anemia associated with chronic renal failure.
–   Anemia of chronic inflammation.
–   Anemia (hemoglobin <10 g/dL) in cancer patients given
chemotherapy.
–   Zidovudine-induced anemia in HIV patients.
–   Anemic patients undergoing non-vascular surgery to reduce the need
for allogeneic blood transfusions.Side effects: Hypertension, bleeding, headache, arthralgia, nausea, edema,
diarrhea, increased risk of thrombosis, pure red cell aplasia and
progression of cancers.
Darbepoietin Alpha
Produced by recombinant DNA technology in Chinese hamster ovary
cells.
Half-life about 3 times rHuEPO and hence needs to be given less
frequently.
Side-effects similar to rHuEPO.
Not approved for the treatment of zidovudine-induced anemia and for
blood loss during perioperative period.

Hemopoietic Growth Factors (HGFs)
Q. Write short note on hematopoietic growth factors.
Erythropoietin (EPO)
Refer above discussion.
Granulocyte Colony Stimulating Factor (G-CSF)
Indications:
–   Primary prophylaxis
♦   To reduce chances of febrile neutropenia following chemotherapy:
When the risk of febrile neutropenia is high (>20%) as determined
by age, disease characteristics and myelotoxicity of drugs used.
♦   Accelerate hemopoietic recovery after chemotherapy and
autologous hemopoietic cell transplantation.
–   Secondary prophylaxis: In patients with solid tumors with a previous
history of the febrile neutropenia who require high-dose chemotherapy
and any dose reduction may compromise treatment outcome.
–   Patients with neutropenia and fever: It may be administered to those
patients with high risk of infection-related complications, prolonged
(>10 days) and severe neutropenia (<100/µL), hypotension, multiorgan
dysfunction or invasive fungal infections. It is not recommend in
afebrile patients with neutropenia.
–   Mobilizing stem cells from bone marrow: For stem cell
transplantation. Both G-CSF and GM-CSF have been used.Disadvantage: Patients undergoing chemotherapy for breast carcinoma, if
treated with G-CSF may develop acute myeloid leukemia or
myelodysplastic syndrome. However, the benefit outweighs the possible
risks.Dosage: 15 μg/kg daily by subcutaneous injection. Its pegylated form has
a longer duration of action and requires to be given once a day.
Adverse effects:  Fever, bone and joint pains.
Granulocyte-Macrophage Colony-Stimulating Factor (GM-CSF)
Action: Increase in neutrophil, eosinophil, macrophage and sometimes
lymphocyte counts.

Dosage: Daily subcutaneous injection of 250 µg/m2.
Both G-CSF and GM-CSF have similar efficacy and indications (refer G-
CSF above).
Thrombopoietin (TPO)
Site of production: Liver and kidney and marrow stromal cells.
Action:
–   Stimulates the survival, proliferation, and differentiation of
megakaryocytes and their precursors.
–   Primes mature platelets to aggregate in response to subthreshold levels
of thrombin, collagen and adenosine diphosphate (ADP).
–   In cancer patients receiving chemotherapy, it has been shown to reduce
the duration of postchemotherapy thrombocytopenia.
–   Thrombopoietin is undergoing clinical trials in patients with immune
thrombocytopenic purpura.
Disadvantage: Most patients produce antibodies against TPO and
therefore, it is not recommended in treatment of any condition.
Vitamin K
Q. Write short note on vitamin K.
Vitamin K is a fat-soluble vitamin and requires bile for its absorption.
Vitamin K is required by liver for the production of factors II, VII, IX and
X, protein C and protein S.
Causes of Vitamin K Deficiency
Inadequate stores: As in hemorrhagic disease of the newborn (vitamin K
levels are low and are due to lack of gut bacteria and low concentrations of
the vitamin in breast milk) and severe malnutrition (especially when
combined with antibiotic treatment).Defective absorption: Diseases that interfere with fat absorption, e.g.
obstructive jaundice owing to the lack of intraluminal bile salts, pancreatic
disease or small bowel disease.Oral anticoagulant drugs which are vitamin K antagonists (warfarin
therapy).
Clinical manifestation: Deficiency manifests as bleeding/hemorrhagic state.

Treatment:  Shows a dramatic response to parenteral vitamin K therapy. Vitamin K may not be
effective in the presence of liver cell disease.
Dose: Daily 10 mg of injections of vitamin K.
Bone Marrow Examination
Q. Write short note on indications for and complications of bone
marrow aspiration.
Bone marrow examination is essentially done to confirm or rule out a
hematologic disorder. It also helps in evaluation of non-hematological
disorders (e.g. metastasis).
Bone marrow may be obtained by:
Aspiration: Bone marrow aspiration is a simple, easy and safe procedure
Trephine biopsy is indicated in conditions where the aspiration either
fails to yield marrow or to confirm some of the diseases (where biopsy
findings are diagnostic).
Sites for bone marrow aspiration are listed in Box 8.31. Indications for bone
marrow aspiration (Table 8.90).
Table 8.90: Indications for bone marrow aspiration.
A. Diagnostic
Primary hematolymphoid disorders
–   Red cell disorders: Nutritional anemia (e.g. megaloblastic anemia), pure red cell aplasia
–   White cell disorders:  Subleukemic/aleukemic leukemia, diagnosis and classification of acute
leukemias
–   Megakaryocytic disorders:  ITP and other thrombocytopenias
–   Myeloproliferative neoplasms:  Polycythemia vera, chronic myeloid leukemia, idiopathic
thrombocythemia
–   Myelodysplastic syndromes
–   Plasma cell neoplasms:  Multiple myeloma, Waldenström macroglobulinemia
Systemic diseases: Storage disorders (e.g. Gaucher's, Niemann- Pick's disease)
Staging of lymphoid malignancies and solid tumors:  Lymphoma, metastatic deposits (e.g.
carcinoma prostate, breast, lung, kidney)
Detection of infection and/or source of PUO
–   Parasitic disorders: Kala-azar
–   Fungal disorders:  Histoplasma
–   Mycobacterial infection
Iron store

Miscellaneous disorders:  Pancytopenia or unexplained cytopenias
B. Post-treatment follow-up:  To know the response to therapy and follow up in cases of leukemia,
aplastic anemia and agranulocytosis
C. Therapeutic: Bone marrow transplant
Box 8.31:  Sites for bone marrow aspiration.
Usual sites for bone marrow aspiration are:
Sternum
Posterior superior iliac spine
Iliac crest
Anterior superior iliac spine
Spinous process of lumbar vertebra.
In infants, upper end of the tibia is the ideal site for marrow aspirate.
Box 8.32:  Complications of bone marrow aspiration and biopsy.
Local infection
Hemorrhage
Cardiac tamponade or mediastinitis
Contraindications for bone marrow aspiration: Hemophilia and
congenital hemorrhagic disorders.
Complications of bone marrow aspiration and biopsy are listed in Box 8.32.
SPLEEN
The spleen is a hematopoietic organ capable of supporting elements of the
erythroid, myeloid, megakaryocytic, lymphoid, and monocyte-macrophage
(i.e. reticuloendothelial).
Splenomegaly
Q. Write short essay/note on splenomegaly.
Definition: The ‘gold-standard’ definition of splenomegaly is splenic weight:
the normal adult spleen weighs about 50–250 g. The weight can only be
established at splenectomy or post mortem examination. The clinical finding
of a palpable spleen was considered as splenic enlargement, but up to 16% of
palpable spleens have been found to be of normal size on radiological
assessment.
On ultrasound examination, ‘‘craniocaudal length” is commonly used to

measure splenic size. This correlates with splenic volume. However, the
upper limit of normal size varies from 11 to 14 cm.
Mechanisms of Splenomegaly
Many of the mechanisms represent exaggerated forms of normal function of
spleen (Table 8.91 and Box 8.33).
Table 8.91: Mechanisms of splenomegaly.
Mechanism Examples
Immune response work hypertrophy Subacute bacterial endocarditis, infectious
mononucleosis
RBC destruction work hypertrophy Hereditary spherocytosis, thalassemia major
Congestive Splenic vein thrombosis, portal hypertension
Myeloproliferative Chronic myeloid metaplasia
Infiltrative Sarcoidosis, some neoplasms
Neoplastic Chronic lymphocytic leukemia, lymphomas
Miscellaneous Trauma, cysts
Box 8.33:  Functions of spleen.
Clearance of microorganisms and particulate antigens from the blood
Synthesis of immunoglobulin and properdin factors
Destruction of senescent or abnormal RBCs
Embryonic hematopoiesis, which can be reactivated as extramedullary hematopoiesis in certain
diseases (e.g. primary myelofibrosis)
Diseases Associated with Splenomegaly (Table 8.92)
Table 8.92: Diseases associated with splenomegaly.
Infection
Acute:  Infectious mononucleosis, viral hepatitis, septicemia, typhoid, cytomegalovirus,
toxoplasmosis
Subacute/chronic:  Miliary tuberculosis, subacute bacterial endocarditis, brucellosis, syphilis,
HIV
Tropical/parasitic:  Malaria, leishmaniasis/kala-azar, schistosomiasis
Hematological disorders
Myeloproliferative disorders:  Myelofibrosis, chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), polycythemia
vera, essential thrombocytosis

Lymphoma: Non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), Hodgkin lymphoma
Leukemia:  Acute leukemia, chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), hairy cell leukemia,
prolymphocytic leukemia
RBC disorders
–   Congenital:  Hereditary spherocytosis, thalassemia, HbSC disease
–   Others:  Autoimmune hemolysis, megaloblastic anemia
Congestive:  Cirrhosis, splenic/portal/hepatic vein thrombosis or obstruction, congestive cardiac
failure
Inflammatory diseases
Collagen diseases:  Systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis (Felty’s)
Granulomatous:  Sarcoidosis
Neoplastic:  Hemangioma, metastasis (lung/breast carcinoma, melanoma)
Infiltrative: Gaucher’s disease, amyloidosis
Miscellaneous:  Cysts
Causes of Asymptomatic Splenomegaly (Table 8.93)
Table 8.93: Causes of asymptomatic splenomegaly.
Liver disease with portal hypertension
Splenic vein thrombosis
Agnogenic myeloid metaplasia
Gaucher’s disease
Splenic cystsSarcoidosis
Amyloidosis
Mild hereditary spherocytosis
Early stages of polycythemia vera
Causes of Massively Enlarged Spleen (Table 8.94 and Fig. 8.46)

Fig. 8.46: Massively enlarged spleen.
Q. Write short essay/note on causes of massive splenomegaly.
A spleen is considered as massively enlarged when its lower pole is within
the pelvis or which has crossed the midline into the right lower or right upper
abdominal quadrants.
Table 8.94: Causes of massively enlarged spleen.
Chronic myeloid leukemia
Myelofibrosis (primary or secondary to polycythemia vera or essential thrombocytosis)
Hyper-reactive malarial splenomegaly syndrome (tropical splenomegaly syndrome)
Gaucher's disease
Lymphoma (mantle cell lymphoma, marginal B cell lymphoma), hairy cell leukemia
Kala-azar (visceral leishmaniasis)
Beta thalassemia major
AIDS with Mycobacterium avium complex
Splenic cysts
Indications for Splenectomy (Table 8.95)

Table 8.95: Indications for splenectomy.
Hematological:  Isolated thrombocytopenia, immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP), hemolytic
anemia, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, warm type (AIHA), hereditary spherocytosis, thalassemia
major or intermedia, neutropenia, primary myelofibrosis
Hairy cell leukemia, splenic marginal zone lymphoma, chronic lymphocytic leukemia
Painfully enlarged spleen
Traumatic or atraumatic splenic rupture, blunt abdominal trauma with splenic contusion or rupture
Splenic artery aneurysm
Hypersplenism
Primary treatment of an isolated splenic vascular or parenchymal lesion
Splenic abscess, acute splenic torsion with infarction due (e.g. ‘wandering spleen syndrome’)
splenic infarction
Splenic vein thrombosis with bleeding esophageal varices
Splenorenal shunting for portal hypertension
Box 8.34:  Classical features of hypersplenism.
Splenomegaly
Any combination of anemia, leukopenia and/or thrombocytopenia
Compensatory bone marrow hyperplasia
Improvement after splenectomy
Hypersplenism
Splenomegaly is often accompanied by hypersplenism. This is a complication
of splenomegaly and not a diagnosis. The specific cause of the splenomegaly
must be determined. Classical features of hypersplenism are listed in Box
8.34.
Causes of Splenic Rupture (Table 8.96)
Table 8.96: Causes of splenic rupture.
Traumatic splenic rupture: Blunt abdominal trauma
Atraumatic splenic ruptureNeoplasm: For example, leukemia, lymphoma
Infection: For example, infectious mononucleosis, CMV, HIV, endocarditis, malaria
Inflammatory disease/noninfectious disorders, e.g. acute and chronic pancreatitis, primary
amyloidosis
Drug and treatment related: For example, anticoagulation, G-CSF, thrombolytic therapy, dialysis
Mechanical causes: For example, pregnancy-related, congestive splenomegaly
Idiopathic (normal spleen)

DISORDERS OF HEME SYNTHESIS: THE
PORPHYRIAS
The porphyrias are caused by deficiencies of enzymes involved in heme
synthesis, which lead to blockade of the porphyrin pathway and
subsequent accumulation of porphyrins and their precursors.
Cause: Most of the porphyria is due to partial enzyme deficiencies. These
enzyme deficiencies may be inherited as autosomal dominant, autosomal
recessive, or X-linked traits, with the exception of porphyria cutanea tarda
(PCT), which usually is sporadic.
Classification
Due to deficiency of an enzyme involved in the synthesis of heme, there is
build-up of porphyrins and metabolites in various tissues. It is classified
depending on site of overproduction and accumulation of porphyrin but
overlapping features are common. It may be classified as follows:Depending on the major primary site of excess production and
accumulation of their respective porphyrin precursors or porphyrins: (1)
hepatic (in the liver) or (2) erythropoietic (in the red cell).Based on the clinical manifestations as acute or cutaneous.
Structure of porphyrins: It consists of four pyrrole rings. Two molecules of
δALA condense to form a pyrrole ring. Depending on the structure of the side
chain, porphyrins can be divided into uroporphyrins, coproporphyrins or
protoporphyrins.
Intermediates accumulated and deficient enzyme in various porphyrias are
depicted in Figure 8.47.
The three most common porphyrias are porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT),
acute intermittent porphyria (AIP), and erythropoietic protoporphyria (EPP).

Fig. 8.47:  Intermediates accumulated and deficient enzyme in various porphyrias.
Clinical Features
Two broad patterns of symptoms occur in the various types of porphyria
(Table 8.97): (1) cutaneous photosensitivity, and (2) acute neurovisceral
syndrome.
1. Cutaneous Photosensitivity
These are due to excess production and accumulation of porphyrins in the
skin and occur predominantly on areas of the skin that are exposed to
sunlight.
Two main patterns of skin damage are seen in the porphyrias:
–   Due to accumulation of water soluble uro- and coproporphyrins leads
to blistering.
–   Due to accumulation of the lipophilic protoporphyrins leads to burning
sensations in the exposed skin.
They produce pain, erythema, bullae, skin erosions, hirsutism and
hyperpigmentation. Skin also becomes sensitive to damage from minimal
trauma.
Table 8.97: Major porphyrias and their laboratory findings.

Porphyria Deficient enzyme Principal
symptomsElevated porphyrins and precursors
RBCs Urine Stool
Hepatic porphyrias 
5-ALA
dehydratase-
deficient
porphyria
(ADP)ALA-dehydratase Neurovisceral Zn-
ProtoporphyrinALA,
Coproporphyrin
III
Acute
intermittent
porphyria
(AIP)HMB (Hydroxy
methyl bilane)-
synthaseNeurovisceral ALA, PBG,
Uroporphyrin
Porphyria
cutanea tarda
(PCT)Urodecarboxylase Cutaneous
photosensitivityUroporphyrin,
7-carboxylate
porphyrinIsocoproporphyrin
Hereditary
coproporphyria
(HCP)Copro-oxidase Neurovisceral
and cutaneous
photosensitivityALA, PBG,
Coproporphyrin
IIICoproporphyrin
III
Variegate
porphyria (VP)Proto-oxidase Neurovisceral
and cutaneous
photosensitivityCoproporphyrin
III Protop orphyrin
Erythropoietic porphyrias 
Congenital
erythropoietic
porphyria
(CEP)Uro-synthase Cutaneous
photosensitivityUroporphyrin I
Coproporphyrin
IUroporphyrin
Ib
Coproporphyrin
Ib  Coproporphyrin I
Erythropoietic
protoporphyria
(EPP)Ferrochelatase Cutaneous
photosensitivity
X-linked
protoporphyria
(XLP)ALA-synthase 2 Cutaneous
photosensitivityProtoporphyrin — Protoporphyrin
2. Acute Neurovisceral Syndrome
This presents with acute abdominal pain and features of autonomic
dysfunction (e.g. tachycardia, hypertension and constipation). Acute motor
polyneuropathy may cause qaudriparesis mimicking GB syndrome.
Neuropsychiatric manifestations include insomnia, anxiety, restlessness,
agitation, hallucinations, hysteria, disorientation, delirium, apathy,
depression and phobias.
Triggering factors: Porphyria can relapse and remit or follow a prolonged
and unremitting course. Sometimes, it may be triggered by alcohol, fasting,

or drugs such as anticonvulsants, sulphonamides, estrogen and progesterone.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis and classification depends on the pattern of the porphyrins and
porphyrin precursors found in blood, urine and stool (Table 8.97). Urine
gets colored on exposure to sunlight (Fig. 8.48).
Measurement of the deficient enzymes.
Genetic testing
Fig. 8.48: High colored urine on exposure to sunlight in porphyria.
Management
Neurovisceral
Acute:  The management of acute episodes is largely supportive.
Analgesics to be given and avoid drugs that may aggravate an attack.
Specific management:
–   Intravenous glucose  inhibits ALA synthase activity leading to reduced ALA synthesis. In
some cases, it can terminate acute attacks.
–   Intravenous haem (in various forms such as human haematin or haem arginate) infusion
reduces ALA and PBG excretion by having a negative effect on ALA synthase N activity. It

relieves pain and accelerate recovery and decreases the duration of an attack and is useful in a
severe attack.
–   Maintain calorie and fluid intake.
–   Cyclical acute attacks in females may respond to suppression of the menstrual cycle using
gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogs.
Cutaneous Photosensitivity Episodes
Acute attack
Treated symptomatically.
Venesection (reduces urinary porphyria) can be used for PCT (porphyria cutanea tarda) in both
acute and remission phases. A prolonged course of low-dose chloroquine is effective as it helps in
excretion by forming a water-soluble complex with uroporphyrins.
Liver transplantation may be useful for severe cases.
Prevention
Avoid sunlight (sun exposure) and skin trauma.
Use of barrier sun creams containing zinc or titanium oxide and protective
clothing.
Oral β-carotene prevents formation of free radicals and provides effective
protection against solar sensitivity.
Afamelanotide, a synthetic analogue of alpha-melanocyte-stimulating
hormone (α- MSH) is useful in erythropoietic protoporphyria.
Pseudoporphyria
In certain settings, patient develops blistering and skin fragility identical to
PCT with the histological features but with normal urine and serum
porphyrins. Hypertrichosis, dyspigmentation and cutaneous sclerosis do
not occur. This condition is called pseudoporphyria.Most commonly due to medications especially NSAIDs, usually naproxen
other NSAIDs and tetracycline can cause similar picture.
Some patients on hemodialysis develop a similar PCT-like picture.

Rheumatology and Connective
Tissue Disorders

CHAPTER
9
INTRODUCTION
Initial clinical characterization of arthritis are mentioned in Box 9.1.
Differences between inflammatory versus noninflammatory arthritis is
presented in Table 9.1.
Rheumatoid Factor (RF)
Q. Write short essay/note on rheumatoid factor.
Rheumatoid factor is an autoantibody (IgM, IgG and IgA) directed against
the Fc (fragment crystalization) fragment of human immunoglobulin G (IgG).
Box 9.1: Initial clinical characterization of arthritis.
Duration:
–   Acute (presenting within hours to days)
–   Chronic (persisting for weeks or longer)
Number of joints involved:
–   Monoarticular
–   Oligoarticular/pauciarticular (2–4 joints)
–   Polyarticular (5 joints or more)If more than one joint is involved:  Symmetric or asymmetric; additive or migratory
Accurate delineation of the involved joints
Type:  Inflammatory or noninflammatory
Constitutional symptoms
Extra-articular disease
Comorbid conditions
Significance
RF has poor specificity and is positive in 70 to 80% of patients with
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). It is appropriate and helpful only in patients
suspected of having RA. It is not helpful in cases of low clinical suspicion.

Table 9.1: Inflammatory versus noninflammatory arthritis.
Features Inflammatory
(Rheumatoid arthritis)Non-inflammatory (Osteoarthritis)
Age of onset Usually 20 to 40 years
but may begin at any
ageMost commonly over 50 years of
age
Speed of onset Rapid over weeks to
monthsSlow; over years
Systemic symptoms Fatigue, low-grade
fever, anorexia. Extra-
articular manifestations:
rheumatoid nodules,
Sjögrens syndrome,
Felty syndromeNo systemic symptoms
Joint affection Symmetrical Asymmetrical
Joint symptoms Painful, swollen stiff
joints and muscle achesJoints painful without swelling
Joints involved Primarily affects small
joints
[metacarpophalangeal
(MCP) and proximal
interphalangeal (PIP)]Affects large weight bearing joints
(hip, knee or the spine). Affects
proximal interphalangeal (PIP)
and distal interphalangeal (DIP)
joints Stiffness Morning stiffness for >1
hour. Stiffness occurs
after periods of
rest/inactivity (the so-
called ‘gel
phenomenon’)Morning stiffness for <30
minutes. Stiffness is generally
mild and occurs after periods of
activity
Relation of movement
with painMovement or mild to
moderate activity
decreases painMovement increases the pain
(worsens with activity) and
improves with rest
Examination of joint Swollen, red, warm,
tender and painfulSwollen, cool and hard on
palpation. When severely
inflamed (as in acute gout or
septic arthritis), can have
erythema of the overlying skin Radiological findings Bony erosion, soft tissue
swelling, angular
deformities, periarticular
osteopeniaLoss of joint space and articular
cartilage, routine wear and tear,
osteophytes
Laboratory findings
Rheumatoid factor (RF), Positive Negative

antinuclear antibody
Erythrocyte
sedimentation rate
(ESR) and C-reactive
protein (CRP)Both are often raised Usually normal but transient
elevation of ESR may occur due
to synovitis
White blood cell (WBC)
count in the synovial
fluidWBC count is
>2000/mm3 in septic
arthritis and not in
rheumatoid arthritis–   <2000/mm3
High RF  titers are observed with more severe disease and extra-
articular disease. The titers generally correlate with severity of disease.
However, RF titers are not useful in assessing disease progression.
It can also be positive in many other conditions (Table 9.2).
10–30% of patients with long-standing RA are seronegative.
Table 9.2: Conditions associated with a positive rheumatoid factor.
Autoimmune rheumatic diseases (percentage) Other conditions
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) with nodules and
extra-articular manifestations (100)
Rheumatoid arthritis (overall 70)
Sjögren’s syndrome (75–95)
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) (15–35)
Systemic sclerosis (20–30)
Mixed essential cryoglobulinemia (90)
Polymyositis/dermatomyositis (5–10)
Polyarteritis nodosa (PAN)
ANCA associated vasculitis
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Mixed connective tissue disease (50–60)Chronic infections:  Infective endocarditis,
tuberculosis, leprosy, syphilis
Viral infections:  Hepatitis, infectious
mononucleosis
Hyperglobulinemia:  Chronic liver disease,
sarcoidosis
Interstitial lung disease, silicosis, asbestosis
Primary biliary cirrhosis
Normal population
–   Age > 65 years
–   Relatives of people with RA
B-cell neoplasms
Anticyclic Citrullinated Peptide Antibodies (Anti-CCPs,
ACPA)
Q. Write short note on anticitrullinated peptide antibody (Anti-CCP).
Citrullinated Peptide Antigens
These include fibrinogen, type II collagen, alpha enolase and vimentin.
CCPs are derived from proteins in which arginine residues are converted

to citrulline residues by an enzyme peptidyl arginine (which is abundant in
inflamed synovium and in a variety of mucosal structures) during a variety
of biological processes.
Anticyclic Citrullinated Peptide Antibodies (ACPA)
These antibodies are useful for diagnosis of RF  and may be involved in
tissue injury. Many patients (about 70%) of RF have antibodies against
cyclic citrullinated peptides (CCPs).
These antibodies have much high specificity (93–98%) but less sensitive
(60%) for diagnosis of RA.
Anti-CCPs may be detected even in asymptomatic patients several years
before the development of RA and are associated with severe disease.
Thus, anti-CCP positive patients may require an aggressive treatment.
Antibodies against CCPs (anti-CCPs) form immune complexes and
deposit in various tissues mainly being the joints.
Antibodies to mutated citrullinated vimentin (anti-MCV) is associated
with more severe disease than anti-CCP antibodies.
Autoantibodies in Various Connective Tissue Diseases (CTD)
(Table 9.3)
Q. Write short essay on Various antibodies seen in patients with
connective tissue diseases.
Table 9.3: Autoantibodies in various connective tissue diseases.
Autoantibodies Importance
Rheumatoid factor Refer Table 9.2
Anticyclic citrullinated peptide Refer above
Antinuclear antibodies (ANA) Refer Table 9.4
Anti-double-stranded DNA (anti-
dsDNA)Highly specific for SLE, positive in about 60% cases,
positivity correlates with lupus nephritis
Low titers are seen in Sjögren’s syndrome, RA
(rheumatoid arthritis)
Levels often correlate with disease activity
Usually absent in drug-induced SLE
Antihistone Sensitive for drug-induced lupus but not specific
Useful in patients with a positive ANA
Specific for SLE but positive in only 20–30% of cases

Anti-Smith (anti-Sm) Positive in 20–30% cases of SLE. Hi ghly specific for
SLE
Anti-U1 ribonucleoproteins (RNP) High titers in syndromes with features of polymyositits,
lupus, scleroderma and mixed CTD (connective tissue
disease)
Anti-Ro (anti-SS-A) Positive in Sjögren’s syndrome with extraglandular
features
Positive in 40% cases of SLE and is associated with
photosensitive rash and pulmonary disease. May be
positive in ANA-negative lupus. Indicates higher risk of
lupus nephritisMay be positive in neonatal lupus or congenital heart
block due to maternal antibodies
Anti-La (anti –SS-B) Present in 10–15% cases of SLE and indicates low-risk
of nephritis
Associated with Sjögren’s syndrome
Antiphospholipid Diagnostic of APLAS. Present in nearly 50% cases of
SLE
Three types: Lupus anticoagulant (LA), anticardiolipin
(aCL) and anti-β2-glycoprotein-I (anti-β2-GPI) antibody
Anticentromere Systemic sclerosis (20–35% cases).
CREST syndrome (calcinosis, Raynaud’s phenomenon,
esophageal dysfunction, sclerodactyly and
telangiectasia)
Primary biliary cirrhosis
Antitopoisomerase I (anti-scl-70) Highly specific for systemic sclerosis, found in 20–40%
cases of systemic sclerosis and associated with diffuse
cutaneous, pulmonary and cardiac involvements
Anti-jo1Present in 30% cases with polymyositis or
dermatomyositis.
Associated with Raynaud’s phenomenon
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies
(ANCA)Refer below
Antinuclear Antibodies
Q. Write short essay/note on antinuclear antibodies.
Antinuclear antibodies (ANA) are directed against one or more
components of the cell nucleus. The component of the nucleus includes
DNA, RNA, proteins as well as complexes of proteins with nucleic acid.

Significance
High titers of ANA (>1:160) are of more diagnostic significance than
low titers.
Circulating levels of ANA do not correlate with severity or activity  of
the disease.
Though these antibodies occur in many inflammatory rheumatic
conditions but they can be found in low titers in normal individuals and in
non-rheumatic diseases.
ANA is positive in several conditions (Table 9.4).
ANA is used as a screening test for systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE) and systemic sclerosis (SSc). ANA has high sensitivity for SLE
(100%) but low specificity (10–40%). A negative ANA almost rules out
SLE but a positive result does not confirm it. It should not be used to
monitor the course of SLE or other diseases.
Table 9.4: Conditions associated with a positive ANA test.
Diseases where ANA is useful in diagnosis Diseases where ANA is not useful in diagnosisSystemic lupus erythematosus (95–100%)
Systemic sclerosis (60–80%)
Sjögren’s syndrome (40–80%)
Drug-induced lupus (>95%)
Mixed connective tissue disease (100%)
Polymyositis/dermatomyositis (30–80%)
Autoimmune hepatitis (100%)Rheumatoid arthritis (30–50%)
Autoimmune thyroid disease (30–50%)
Malignancy varies widely
Infectious diseases varies widely
Note:  About 5% of healthy individuals have an ANA titer > 1:80.
Tests for detection: ANAs are detected by indirect immunofluorescent
staining (Table 9.5) of fresh-frozen sections of rat liver or kidney or Hep-2
cell lines (a line of human epithelial cells).
Table 9.5: Pattern of antinuclear antibody staining.
Pattern of
stainingDiagrammatic appearance Staining pattern
due toAssociated conditions
Homogeneous or
diffuse staining
of the entire
nucleus with orAntibodies to
nucleosomes
(anti-DNP),
histones (anti-Rheumatoid arthritis,
systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE)
and miscellaneous

without apparent
masking of the
nucleoli
histone) and
occasionally
double-stranded
DNA (anti-
dsDNA)disorders (anti-
ssDNA)
Rim or peripheral
staining
Antibodies to
double-stranded
DNA (anti-DNA)
and sometimes to
nuclear envelope
proteins. Not seen
on HEp-2SLE
Speckled (may
be coarse or fine)
pattern-the
presence of
uniform or
variable-sized
speckles
throughout the
nucleus. Most
common pattern
and is least
specific
Antibodies to
non-DNA nuclear
constituents such
as Sm antigen
(anti-Sm),
ribonucleoprotein
(anti-RNP), and
SS-A (anti-SS-A)
and SS-B reactive
antigens (anti-SS-
B)SLE, systemic
sclerosis (SS),
polymyositis
(PM)/dermatomyositis
(DM)
Nucleolar
pattern-presence
of a few discrete
spots within the
nucleus-stains
nucleoli within
the nucleus,
sharply separated
from the
unstained
nucleoplasm
Antibodies to
RNA (anti-
nucleolar)Most often seen in
systemic sclerosis
Centromeric
pattern-discrete
uniform speckles
throughout the
nucleus. The
number of
speckles
Antibodies
specific for
centromeres (anti-
centromere)Systemic sclerosis,
Sjögren syndrome,
and other diseases

corresponds to a
multiple of the
normal
chromosome
number
(ds: double stranded; ss: single stranded)
Extractable Nuclear Antibodies
Q. Write short essay/note on extractable nuclear antibodies.
These are antibodies to extractable nuclear antigens (ENA) and are
directed against small ribonuclear proteins (RNA).
Types of antibodies and associated conditions are listed in Table 9.6.
Their sensitivity and specificity are poor. Though used for diagnostic
confirmation, they do not exclude a specific CTD.
They do not correlate with disease activity and may be found in patients
without active disease.
Table 9.6: Types of antibodies and associated conditions.
Type of extractable nuclear antibody Associated conditions
Anti-Sm Only in SLE and represent a serologic marker
in disease classification. They are associated
with renal involvement
Antiuracil-rich 1 ribonucleoprotein (U1RNP) SLE and in mixed connective tissue disease
Anti-SS-A/Ro and anti-SS-B/La SLE and in Sjögren’s syndrome
Anti-tRNA synthetases Polymyositis/dermatomyositis
Antitopoisomerase-1 antibodies (Scl-70) Diffuse systemic sclerosis
Anticentromere antibodies Limited systemic sclerosis
Antineutrophil Cytoplasmic Antibodies
Q. Write short essay/note on antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies
(ANCA), their significance/ANCA associated disorders.
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCAs) are heterogeneous group of
IgG autoantibodies directed against certain proteins (mainly enzymes) in

the cytoplasmic granules of neutrophils and  lysosomes of monocytes.
Patterns: On the basis of the target antigens and pattern of
immunofluorescence staining, two common patterns of ANCA have been
distinguished.
1. Anti-proteinase-3 (PR3-ANCA): It is also called cytoplasmic or cANCA.
PR3 is a constituent of neutrophil azurophilic granule. It shares homology
with many microbial peptides and antibodies against microbial peptides.
Antibodies against proteinase-3 (PR3) form PR3-ANCAs. They produce
cytoplasmic fluorescence (cANCA). They are associated with Wegener’s
granulomatosis.2. Anti-myeloperoxidase (MPO-ANCA): It is also called perinuclear or
pANCA. MPO is a lysosomal enzyme normally involved in producing
oxygen-free radicals. Antibodies to myeloperoxidase (MPO) forms MPO-
ANCAs which produces perinuclear fluorescence (pANCA). It can be
induced by drugs (e.g. propylthiouracil). They are associated with
microscopic polyangiitis and Churg-Strauss syndrome.
SignificanceANCA are strongly associated with small-vessel vasculitis and are
useful in the diagnosis and monitoring of systemic vasculitis. For their
significance in vasculitis, ANCA should be assayed both with indirect
immunofluroscence (screening test) and direct ELISA for proteinase-3 or
myeloperoxidase.ANCA are not specific for vasculitis. They may be positive in
autoimmune liver disease, malignancy, infection (bacterial and human
immunodeficiency virus, HIV), inflammatory bowel disease, chronic
hepatitis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, Felty’s syndrome, rheumatoid
arthritis, SLE and pulmonary fibrosis.
Synovial Fluid in Disease States (Table 9.7)
Table 9.7: Features of synovial fluid in various disease states.
Normal Non-
inflammatoryInflammatory Pyogenic
Appearance Clear Clear Cloudy, yellow Turbid
Viscosity High High Low Variable,
infection usually

low
Mucus clot Good Good Poor Poor
Total WBC/mm3 < 200 200–5000 5000–50,000 > 50,000
Predominant cell Monocytes Monocytes Polymorphs >
60%Polymorphs >
80%Bacteria
present
Protein < 2–3 g/dL < 2–3 g/dL > 3 g/dL > 3 g/dL
Sugar Equal to blood
sugar (BS)taken
simultaneouslyEqual to blood
sugar (BS)25–50% less than
blood sugar> 50% less than
blood sugar
RHEUMATOID ARTHRITISQ. Discuss the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical manifestations, diagnosis,
investigations, complication, and management of rheumatoid
arthritis.
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is the most common form of chronic
inflammatory, potentially crippling arthritis with multisystem involvement
affecting approximately 1% of the adult population.
Etiology
Q. Write short essay/note on etiology of rheumatoid arthritis.
The cause is multifactorial and genetic, epigenetic and environmental factors
play a part in the pathogenesis of RA.
Genetic factors: Genetic susceptibility is a major factor in the
pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis.
–   HLA genes: RA is linked to specific HLA-DRB1 locus.
–   Non-HLA genes: Polymorphism in PTPN22 gene, which encodes a
tyrosine phosphatase.
Environmental arthritogenic agents: They are thought to initiate the
disease process. Smoking and several microbial agents (e.g. virus,
mycobacteria porphyromonas gingivalis, and Mycoplasma) have been
suggested but not proved.
Autoimmunity: The initial inflammatory synovitis, an autoimmune
reaction with T cells is responsible for the chronic destructive nature of
rheumatoid arthritis.

Pathogenesis
The rheumatoid synovium behaves like a locally-invasive tumor. A cascade
network of cytokines like granulocyte macrophage colony-stimulating factor
(GM-CSF), interleukin (IL)-2, IL-15, IL-13, IL-17, IL-18, interferon-gamma
(IFN-gamma), tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and transforming growth factor-
beta (TGF-beta) are involved in the disease progression. B cells, CD4+ T
cells, compliment mediated immune activation play a contributory role.
Clinical FeaturesQ. Write short essay/note on clinical features of rheumatoid arthritis.
Gender: Female to male ratio is 3:1.
Age: Most common age of onset is between 30 and 50 years, but the
disease can occur at any age. In women in late childbearing years and in
men during sixth to eighth decade.
Onset
The presenting symptoms result from inflammation of the joints, tendons,
and bursae. The onset varies:
Slow and insidious in onset: Presents with malaise, fatigue, anorexia,
weakness and generalized musculoskeletal pain.
Acute onset: Sometimes RA may be very acute in onset, with morning
stiffness, polyarthritis and pitting edema. This type occurs more
commonly in old age.Palindromic onset: Occasionally, patient present with relapsing and
remitting episodes of pain, stiffness and swelling that last for only a few
hours or days alternating with symptom-free periods.Rarely, onset may be monoarticular.
Articular Manifestations
Q. Write short essay/note on articular manifestations of rheumatoid
arthritis.
Joints involved (Fig. 9.1A): RA can affect any of the synovial
(diarthrodial) joints and involvement is usually in a symmetric
distribution . Most commonly, RA starts in the small joints, namely
metacarpophalangeal (MCP), proximal interphalangeal (PIP), and

metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joints, followed by the involvement of large
joints (wrists, knees, elbows, ankles, hips, and shoulders). Pitting edema
over the dorsum gives rise to the “boxing glove” appearance. In RA, the
hypertrophied synovium (also called pannus) invades and erodes
contiguous cartilage, ligaments and bone.
Symptoms: These include pain, swelling, and stiffness. Stiffness
dominating in the mornings (‘morning stiffness’) lasting more than 1 hour
is characteristic. Routine activities early in the morning like brushing teeth
and combing hair may be very difficult.
Q. Write short note on rheumatoid hand.
Hand and wrist (Figs. 9.1B and C): Hands are a major site of involvement
and produces significant disability.
The DIP joint is characteristically always spared  unless the patient also
has osteoarthritis (both coexist, particularly in elderly patients).
Spindling of the fingers: It is the earliest finding characterized by
swelling of the proximal, but not the distal interphalangeal joints.
Deformities: Destruction of the joints and soft tissues may lead to
chronic, irreversible deformities.

Figs. 9.1A to C:  Rheumatoid arthritis. (A) Pattern of joint involvement; (B and C) Shows bilateral
massive swelling of tendon over the dorsal surface of wrists, muscle wasting, ulnar deviation of the
metacarpophalangeal joints, and swan-neck deformity of the fingers.
–   Ulnar deviation (Figs. 9.1B and C): It results from subluxation of the
metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints, with subluxation of the proximal
phalanx to the volar side of the hand.
–   ‘Swan-neck’ deformity (Figs. 9.1B and C): It is due to
hyperextension of the proximal interphalangeal joints (PIP) with
flexion of the distal interphalangeal joints (DIP). At DIP joint there is

elongation or rupture of attachment of the extensor tendon to the base
of the distal phalanx; this results in mallet deformity of distal joint and
in addition, an extensor tendon imbalance, leading to hyperextension
deformity at PIP joint.
–   ‘Boutonniere’ or ‘button-hole’ deformity (Fig. 9.1C): This
deformity is due to flexion of the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joints
and extension of the distal interphalangeal (DIP) joints. Disruption of
the central slip of the extensor tendon and the triangular ligament
allows each of the conjoint lateral bands of the digit to slide volarly
resulting in a pathologic flexion force and an extension lag; all tendons
traversing the PIP joint in this setting elicit flexion of the joint.
–   ‘Gamekeepers thumb’: It is the result of hyperextension of the first
interphalangeal joint and flexion of the first metacarpophalangeal joint.
This leads to loss of thumb mobility and occurrence of pinch.
–   Hitchhiker’s thumb  (Z-shaped deformity) in which the thumb flexes
at the metacarpophalangeal joint and hyperextends at the
interphalangeal joint.
–   Inflammation of the carpometacarpal joint leads to volar subluxation
during contracture of the adductor hallucis.
–   ‘Z’ deformity: It is due to radial deviation of the wrist, ulnar deviation
of the digits with palmar subluxation of the first MCP joint with
hyperextension of the first interphalangeal (IP) joint.
–   Carpal tunnel syndrome: Due to synovial proliferation in and around
the wrists producing compression of the median nerve.
–   The “bow string” sign (prominence of the tendons in the extensor
compartment of the hand).
Feet and ankle: In most patients, feet (particularly the MTP joints) are
involved early.‘Broadening’ of the forefoot: Due to swelling of the metatarsophalangeal
joints.
Subluxation of the toes at the MTP joints (“cock-up” deformities):
leads to skin ulceration on the top of the toes and painful ambulation
because of loss of the cushioning pads which protect the metatarsals
heads.Hallux valgus deformity and hammer toes may be seen.

Larger joints
Involvement of large joints (knees, ankles, elbows, hips and shoulders)
is common but generally occurs somewhat later than small joint
involvement.
Shoulder joint involvement may present as glenohumeral arthritis, rotator
cuff fraying and rupture.
Synovial cysts: They present as fluctuant masses around involved joints
(large or small). Best examples of synovial cyst is popliteal (‘Baker’s)
cysts which develops in the knee joint. The knee synovitis produces
excess synovial fluid that communicates posteriorly with the cyst
(between the knee joint and the popliteal space) but is prevented from
returning to the joint by a one-way valve-like mechanism. Ruptured
Baker’s cysts can resemble a deep vein thrombosis.
Other jointsAlthough most of the spine is spared in RA, the cervical spine
(atlantoaxial subluxation) can be involved producing quadriparesis.
Cricoarytenoid joint involvement may present (30%) with hoarseness of
voice and inspiratory stridor.
Extra-articular Manifestations (Fig. 9.2)
Q. Write short note on extra-articular manifestations of rheumatoid
arthritis including skin manifestations.
Constitutional: RA is a systemic disease and features such as fatigue, weight
loss, and low-grade fevers (<38°C) occur frequently. Systemic features are
more common in patients who have RF or ACPA antibodies, or both.
Rheumatoid nodulesRheumatoid nodules are usually subcutaneous and are typically benign.

Fig. 9.2:  Extra-articular manifestations of RA.
Significance: Nodules are seen in about one-fourth of patients with RA
and, almost exclusively in those patients who are seropositive for
rheumatoid factor. They are clinical predictors of more severe arthritis,
sero-positivity, joint erosions and rheumatoid vasculitis.Sites: Typically occur on extensor surfaces, over joints or on areas subject
to repeated trauma (particularly forearms sacral prominences, scalp and
the Achilles tendon). Rarely, they develop in lungs, pleura, heart,
pericardium or in the sclera of the eye.Characteristics: On examination, rheumatoid nodules are firm and
nontender (unless traumatized). They have a characteristic histologic
picture (central area of fibrinoid material surrounded by a palisade of
proliferating mononuclear cells), and are thought to be triggered by small
vessel vasculitis.Methotrexate therapy can trigger a syndrome of increased nodulosis
despite good control of the joint disease of RA.

Rheumatoid vasculitis
RA-associated small vessel vasculitis: It can manifest as digital infarcts,
cutaneous ulcerations, palpable purpurae, distal gangrene and
leukocytoclastic vasculitis. They require prompt more aggressive
treatment with disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs).Other manifestations: Polyneuropathy, mononeuritis multiplex and
visceral infarction (resulting in stroke and acute myocardial infarction)
and mesenteric arteritis. Pyoderma gangrenosum occurs with increased
frequency with RA.
Pleuropulmonary manifestations
Q. Write short essay/note on pleuropulmonary manifestations of
rheumatoid arthritis.
Pleural lesions: Pleural effusions (exudative) occur more commonly in
men and are usually small and asymptomatic. Pleural fluid is characterized
by low glucose and pH.
Pulmonary lesions:
–   Rheumatoid nodules especially in men; usually solid, but may calcify,
cavitate or become infected.
–   Diffuse interstitial fibrosis causes dyspnea and may progress to cor
pulmonale.
–   Bronchiolitis obliterans with or without organizing pneumonia.
–   Granulomatous pneumonitis.
–   Pulmonary arteritis (vasculitis) may result in infarction.
–   Caplan’s syndrome: It is characterized by the coexistence of sero-
positive RA and rounded fibrotic, peripherally located nodules of 0.5–
5 cm diameter in the lung along with coal worker’s pneumoconiosis
(CWP)/silicosis.
Treatment induced: Methotrexate induced lung fibrosis,
immunosuppression related infections like TB.
Cardiac manifestationsPericardial effusions are common. Rarely, long-standing pericardial
disease results in a fibrinous pericarditis and constrictive pericarditis.
Coronary artery disease due to premature atherosclerosis. Rarely,

valvular involvement and conduction defects.
Neurological manifestations
Peripheral nerve entrapment syndromes: For example, carpal tunnel
syndrome (median nerve at the wrist), and tarsal tunnel syndrome (anterior
tibial nerve at the ankle).
Myelopathy: Due to spinal cord compression produced by acquired
atlanto-axial dislocation.
Mononeuritis multiplex: Due to vasculitis.
Ophthalmological manifestations
Sicca complex:  Comprising keratoconjunctivitis sicca, xerostomia and
salivary (parotid) gland enlargement.
Scleritis, episcleritis may progress to perforation of the orbit
(scleromalacia perforans).
Brown’s syndrome: Diplopia due to tendinitis of the superior oblique
muscles.
Felty’s syndrome: It is the triad of RA, splenomegaly, and neutropenia (refer
page 678).
Osteoporosis: Osteoporosis secondary to rheumatoid involvements is very
common especially with corticosteroid therapy and immobilization.
Hematological manifestationsRBC: Normocytic normochromic anemia. Causes of anemia in RA
include anemia of chronic disease, anemia due to gastrointestinal bleed
secondary to NSAID/steroids, methotrexate induced folate deficiency,
marrow suppression due to disease/drugs and part of hypersplenism if
splenomegaly present.WBC: Eosinophilia and mild leukocytosis. Neutropenia in cases of Felty’s
syndrome and large granular lymphocyte syndrome. Patients with RA are
at an increased risk for infections, and this risk is further increased by
some therapies.Platelets: Thrombocytosis.
Renal involvement: In the form of glomerulonephropathy, vasculitis, drug
toxicities and secondary amyloidosis.
Malignancies: RA patients have an increased risk of lymphomas.

Box 9.2: American College of Rheumatology (ACR) criteria for rheumatoid
arthritis.
Morning stiffnessa
Arthritis of 3 joint areasa
Arthritis of the handsa
Symmetric arthritisa
Rheumatoid nodules
Serum rheumatoid factor positive
Radiographic changes
aThese criteria must be present for more than 6 weeks. Presence of 4 criteria favors definite diagnosis
of RA.
Diagnosis
Q. Mention the ACR (American College of Rheumatology)/EULAR
criteria for the diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis.
Diagnostic criteria of rheumatoid arthritis: In 2010, a collaborative effort
between the American College of Rheumatology (ACR-Box 9.2) and the
ACR/European League against Rheumatism (EULAR) presented the
criteria for the diagnosis of RA (Table 9.8).The Disease Activity Score derivative for 28 joints (DAS28) is used to
grade severity of RA.
Simplified Disease Activity Index (SDAI) and Clinical Disease Activity
Index (CDAI) are also used in monitoring.
Investigations
Q. Write short essay/note on investigations of rheumatoid arthritis.
Serology
–   Rheumatoid factor (refer pages 667-8)
–   Anticyclic citrullinated protein antibodies (ACPA)
Markers of acute inflammation
–   Anemia of chronic disease is seen in majority of patients, and the
degree of anemia is proportional to the activity of the disease.
–   Thrombocytosis is common, and platelet counts return to normal as

the inflammation is controlled.
–   Acute phase reactants, erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-
reactive protein levels parallel the activity of the disease, and their
persistent elevation carries poor prognosis (joint destruction and
mortality).
–   WBC counts may be raised, normal, or profoundly depressed (Felty’s
syndrome).
Other autoantibodies: RA is associated with other autoantibodies, such
as antinuclear antibodies (30% of patients) and antineutrophilic
cytoplasmic antibodies, particularly of the perinuclear type (30% of
patients).Radiographs of the affected joints: Radiological changes include
symmetrical pattern of involvement, juxta-articular osteoporosis, soft
tissue swelling, bone erosions and narrowing of the joint space.Ultrasonography and MRI: More sensitive than plain radiographs and
detects soft-tissue synovitis before joint damage. Doppler ultrasound is
useful for demonstration persistent synovitis when deciding on the need
for DMARDs or assessing their efficacy.Synovial fluid analysis: White blood cell counts typically range from
5000–50,000 per microliter with approximately two-third of the cells
being neutrophils with no crystals or organism. None of the synovial fluid
findings are pathognomonic.
Table 9.8: American College of Rheumatology (ACR)/European League
against Rheumatism (EULAR) classification criteria for
rheumatoid arthritis: 2010.
Features Score
A. Joint involvement*1 large joint (shoulder, elbow, hip, knee, ankle) 0
2–10 large joints 1
1–3 small joints (MCP, PIP, thumb IP, MTP, wrists) + involvement of
large joints2
4–10 small joints + involvement of large joints 3
>10 joints (at least 1 small joint) 5
B. Serology (at least one test result is needed for classification)

Negative RF and negative ACPA 0
Low-positive RF or low-positive ACPA (≤3 times ULN) 2
High-positive RF or high-positive ACPA (≥3 times ULN) 3
C. Acute-phase reactants (at least one test result is needed for classification)
Normal CRP and normal ESR 0
Abnormal CRP or abnormal ESR 1
D. Duration of symptoms
< 6 weeks 0
≥ 6 weeks 1
(MCP: metacarpophalangeal joint; PIP: proximal interphalangeal joint; IP: interphalangeal joint; MTP:
metatarsophalangeal joint; RF: rheumatoid factor; ACPA: anticitrullinated protein antibodies; ULN:
upper limit of normal; CRP: C-reactive protein; ESR: erythrocyte sedimentation rate)
• Above criteria yields a score of 0–10. A score of  ≥ 6 required for definitive diagnosis of RA.
• A score of < 6/10 are not classifiable as RA, but their status to be reassessed over time.
Q. Write short essay on treatment of rheumatoid arthritis.
Management
General Measures
There is no cure for rheumatoid arthritis, which is a lifelong disease process requiring lifelong
treatment. The goal of therapy  is disease remission  and to maintain this remission by continuing
therapy.
Rest and splinting of the involved joints during the acute stage.
Physiotherapy: Helps in mobilization and prevention of contractures.
Medical Therapy
Three types of medical therapies are used in the treatment of RA: (1) NSAIDs, (2) glucocorticoids,
and (3) DMARDs (both conventional and biologic).
1. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs): NSAIDs produce symptomatic relief
because of its analgesic and anti-inflammatory properties . However, they do not alter the
underlying disease process. Therefore, they are not used without the concomitant use of DMARDs.
Their chronic use should be minimized because of its side effects such as gastritis/peptic ulcer
disease and impairment of renal function.
2. Glucocorticoids:  These are the most potent anti-inflammatory treatments available and cause
dramatic and rapid improvement. Not only they produce symptomatic improvement, but also
significantly decrease the radiographic progression of RA. However, the long-term therapy is
associated with mulltisystem toxicities.Prednisolone is the most commonly used glucocorticoid and is administered orally.
Bridge therapy:  In ‘bridge therapy’, glucocorticoids are used first to shut off inflammation
rapidly and then to taper them as the DMARD is taking effect.
Pulse therapy:  Remission is induced with IM (intramuscular) depot methylprednisolone 80–
120 mg if synovitis persists beyond 6 weeks. Intraarticular long-acting glucocorticoids (e.g.
triamcinolone hexacetonide) are used to reduce synovitis.
3. Disease modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs).

Q. Write short note on disease modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs) including its
indications and current status.
DMARDs have the ability to inhibit greatly the disease process to modify or change the disabling
potential of RA. DMARDs are so named because in most of the cases they are able to slow or
prevent structural (radiographic) progression of RA.
Box 9.3:  Conventional DMARDs used in RA.
Methotrexate (MTX)
Hydroxychloroquine
Sulfasalazine
Leflunomide
Azathioprine
Gold (auranofin)
Minocycline
D-penicillamine
Conventional DMARDs used in RA (Box 9.3)
Conventional DMARDs exhibit a delayed onset of action and take 2–6 months to exert their full
effect.
Start DMARD therapy early in the disease process. Early in the course of disease, most patients
should be started on a combination of DMARDs and analgesics. Before using DMARDs,
complete blood count, serum creatinine, aminotransferases, and screening for hepatitis C,
hepatitis B, and latent tuberculosis infection. A chest radiograph should be obtained prior to
initiating treatment with MTX.
Methotrexate:  Currently, methotrexate is the DMARD of choice (considered as ‘gold standard’
drug) for RA and is the anchor drug for most combination therapies.Mechanism of action  in RA: At the dosages used for RA, methotrexate stimulates extracellular
release of adenosine from cells, which has anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory
properties. Enzymes inhibited by methotrexate in RA include thymidylate synthetase (TS) and
5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide ribonucleotide (AICAR) transformylase . It should not be
prescribed in pregnancy.Dose:  Usually given orally in the starting dose of 2.5–7.5 mg/week  as a single dose. If there is
no positive response within 4–8 weeks, and there is no toxicity, the dose should be increased
by 2.5–5 mg/week  each month to 15–25 mg/week before considering, the treatment a failure.
Oral absorption of methotrexate is variable. If oral treatment is not effective, it is given by
subcutaneous injections. It should be monitored with full blood counts and liver biochemistry.
Folic acid , 1 to 4 mg/day (or 5 mg once a week, on the day following methotrexate dose),
reduces most methotrexate associated toxicities (e.g. gastrointestinal intolerance, stomatitis,
hepatotoxicity, hyperhomocysteinemia, alopecia) without apparent loss of efficacy.
If methotrexate alone does not sufficiently control RA, it is combined with other DMARDs.
Other DMARDs
–   Hydroxychloroquine  is used usually in combination with other DMARDs, particularly
methotrexate. It is given orally at a dose of 200–400 mg daily. It is the least toxic DMARD but
also the least effective as monotherapy. Regular monitoring (every 6 months to a year) by
ophthalmoscopy to detect any signs of retinopathy, bull’s eye maculopathy should be done.
–   Sulfasalazine:  It is effective when given in doses of 1–3 g daily. Monitoring of blood cell

counts is recommended, particularly WBC counts, in the first 6 months. Combination of
sulfasalazine + hydroxychloroquine+ methotrexate is referred to as triple therapy.
–   Leflunomide is a pyrimidine antagonist, also inhibits enzyme dihydroorotate dehydrogenase,
interfering with cell signal transduction. It has a very long half-life and is given daily in a dose
of 10–20 mg. The most common toxicity is diarrhea, which may respond to dose reduction.
Leflunomide is teratogenic and hepatotoxic. It is used as monotherapy or in combination with
methotrexate and other DMARDs.
–   Others:  These include minocycline, gold salts, penicillamine and cyclosporine are used
sparingly now.
Biologic DMARDs/BiologicalsQ. List the biologicals used in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
–   They are usually given along with methotrexate or other conventional DMARDs.
–   Disadvantages: High cost  and long-term toxicities, notably infections (especially cellulitis,
septic joints, tuberculosis, histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, and Listeria) and
demyelinating syndromes
TNF-α Blockers
–   Etanercept, a recombinant TNF receptor fusion protein. Administered subcutaneously in a
dose of 25 mg twice weekly.
–   Infliximab  is a mouse/human chimeric monoclonal antibody against TNF-α. Itis given
intravenously (3–10 mg/kg) every 4–8 weeks.
–   Adalimumab  is a recombinant human IgG1 monoclonal antibody directed against TNF-α. It is
administered subcutaneously in a dose of 40 mg every other week.
IL-1 Receptor Blocker
–   Anakinra, a recombinant human interleukin-1 receptor antagonist. It is given subcutaneously
in a dose of 100 mg daily.
Anti-CD20 Antibodies.
Q. Write short note on rituximab.
–   Rituximab  is a genetically engineered chimeric murine/human monoclonal antibody directed
against the CD20 molecule found on the surface of B cells. It is given intravenously as two
infusions 2 weeks apart for the treatment of patients with refractory RA.
T-cell Agent
–   Abatacept is a recombinant fusion protein of the extracellular domain of human CTLA4 and a
fragment of the Fc domain of human IgG1. It is administered by intravenous infusion every 4
weeks in a dose of approximately 10 mg/kg.
–   Tofacitinib, the orally administered Janus kinase inhibitor, can also be used in combination
with MTX or as monotherapy.
Immunosuppressants:  These are used as third-line drugs for RA that recurs or does not respond to
second-line agents. These include cyclophosphamide and azathioprine. However, in RA with acute
vasculitis causing serious organ involvement, intravenous administration of cyclophosphamide may
be lifesaving.
Surgery
Surgical therapy may improve pain and disability when there is failure of medical therapy. It is useful
in maintenance of joint function, and prevention and correction of deformities. Surgical procedures of
the joint include (a) synovectomy of the inflammed joint before joint damage; (b) osteotomy to
correct the deformity and relieve pain in the upper end of the tibia, and excision of the lower end of

the ulna; (c) arthrodesis of the joint to relieve pain in the atlanto-axial joint, wrists, ankle and subtalar
joints; (d) excision arthroplasty and (e) joint replacement.
Physiotherapy, Rehabilitation and Assistive Devices
Exercise and physical activity improve muscle strength. Judicious use of wrist splints can decrease
pain.
Treatment algorithm for rheumatoid arthritis is presented in Flowchart 9.1.
Flowchart 9.1:  Treatment algorithm for rheumatoid arthritis.
Felty’s Syndrome
Q. Write short essay/note on Felty’s syndrome and its components.
Felty’s syndrome is the triad of RA, neutropenia and splenomegaly.
It is seen in patients with long-standing chronic, severe and sero-positive
RA.

Clinical Features (Box 9.4)
Box 9.4: Clinical features of Felty’s syndrome.
Features of RA (rheumatoid arthritis)
Splenomegaly
Lymphadenopathy
Skin pigmentation
Fever
Weight loss
Features of neutropenia and thrombocytopenia
Recurrent infections and chronic leg ulcers
Vasculitis
Subcutaneous nodules
Carpal tunnel syndrome
Higher risk of Hodgkin’s lymphoma
Laboratory Findings
Blood: Neutropenia <1500/mm3, anemia and thrombocytopenia.
Rheumatoid factor (RF): High titers.
Circulating immune complexes (CIC): Increased levels.
Treatment
Do not require special specific therapy; instead treat underlying severe RA. Immunosuppressive
agents particularly methotrexate and azathioprine are beneficial.
G-CSF and GM-CSF can be tried.
Splenectomy is indicated in: Severe and persistent neutropenia (< 500 cells/mm3), recurrent or
serious bacterial infections, chronic, nonhealing leg ulcers, hypersplenism producing severe
anemia or thrombocytopenic hemorrhage.
Prognosis
Poor with an increased mortality due to increased incidence of severe
infection.
Non-steroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are the most widely used drugs, but
they have an increased risk of cardiovascular disease. Oral NSAIDs are used
for the management of pain due to inflammation.
Mechanism of NSAID action: Arachidonic acid (AA) is derived from
membrane phospholipid and its metabolism occurs along two major

enzymatic pathways namely cyclooxygenase pathway (produces
prostaglandins by the cyclooxygenase) (COX) and lipoxygenase pathway
(produces leukotrienes by 5-lipoxygenase).
Q. Write short essay/note on COX enzymes and COX-2 inhibitors.
Traditional NSAIDs versus COX-2 Inhibitors
Traditional NSAIDs (e.g. ibuprofen, diclofenac, and naproxen) exert
their anti-inflammatory effect by inhibiting synthesis of prostaglandin
from arachidonic acid by blocking both COX enzymes. They do not have
a disease-modifying effect in either osteoarthritis or inflammatory
rheumatic diseases. Inhibition of COX-1 is required for anti-inflammatory
and analgesic effects, but can damage the mucosa of stomach and
duodenum and is associated with an increased risk of upper
gastrointestinal ulceration, bleeding and perforation. Simultaneous
administration of omeprazole (20 mg daily) or misoprostol (200 μg twice
or 3 times daily) reduces the risk of NSAID-induced ulceration and
bleeding. Other side-effects include fluid retention, renal impairment due
to inhibition of renal prostaglandin production, and rashes.COX-2 (cyclooxygenase-2) selective NSAIDs  (e.g. celecoxib, etoricoxib,
etodolac, rofecoxib and valdecoxib) selectively inhibit COX-2. They have
analgesic and anti-inflammatory properties similar to traditional
NSAIDs. However, they are much less likely to cause gastrointestinal
toxicity and have minimal antiplatelet effects. Similar to traditional
NSAIDs, they can produce significant changes in renal function, and
hence, should be cautiously used in patients with diabetes, dehydration
and congestive heart failure. They play an important role in the
management of inflammation and pain caused by arthritis. It has been
observed that there is a higher risk of myocardial infarction and stroke
(thromboembolic complications) in patients using COX-2 inhibitors
compared to traditional NSAIDs. Hence, two COX-2 inhibitors namely
rofecoxib and valdecoxib have been withdrawn.
Differences between Rheumatic Arthritis and Rheumatoid
Arthritis (Table 9.9)Q. Write short note on differentiation of rheumatic arthritis from
rheumatoid arthritis.

SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS (SLE)
Q. Discuss the clinical manifestations, diagnosis and management of
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic, multisystemic
autoimmune disease that results from immune system-mediated tissue
damage and is characterized by the presence of broad spectrum of
autoantibodies.
Arthralgia and rashes are the most common clinical features, whereas
cerebral and renal diseases constitute most serious problems.
Table 9.9: Differences between rheumatic arthritis and rheumatoid
arthritis.
Rheumatic arthritis Rheumatoid arthritis
Onset Acute Subacute/chronic
Joints involved Major joints (e.g. knee), rarely
involves small joints of
hands/wrists/feet.[Small joints, e.g. palm-finger (MCP)
joints, joints of the wrist/feet]
Joints spared Spares hip joints Spares distal interphalangeal (DIP)
joint
Spine Not involved C1, C2 involved
Presentation Migratory Non-migratory, static
Morning stiffness +/– +++
Pattern of
involvementAsymmetrical Symmetrical
Cause Poststreptococcal Immune
Deformities Rare (Jaccouds) Common
Nodules Rare, located only subcutaneously,
painlessCommon, painful, located
periarticular, pleura, internal organs
Criteria used for
diagnosisJones ACR/EULAR
Antibodies ASO RF/ACPA
Treatment Penicillin/aspirin +/– steroids DMARDS/biologics
Other systems
involvedCardiac, basal ganglia All systems involved
(ASO: antistreptolysin O; ACR: American College of Rheumatology; EULAR: European League
against Rheumatism; RF: rheumatoid factor; ACPA: anticyclic citrullinated protein antibodies;
DMARD: disease modifying antirheumatic drugs)

Age: It usually occurs in young women between 20 to 30 years, but may
manifest at any age.
Sex: It predominantly affects women, with female-to-male ratio of 9:1.
Clinical Features (Table 9.10)
Q. Write short essay/note on clinical features of systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE).
Table 9.10: Common clinical manifestations of SLE.
System involved % Clinical manifestations
Common Uncommon
Systemic 95 Fatigue, malaise, fever, anorexia,
nausea, weight lossGeneralized
lymphadenopathy
Musculoskeletal 95 Arthralgias/myalgias, non-erosive
polyarthritis myopathyMyositis
Cutaneous 80 Photosensitivity, malar rash
(‘butterfly’ rash), oral ulcers, alopecia,
discoid rash, Raynaud phenomenon,
livedo reticularis, panniculitis, splinter
hemorrhagesAngioedema, bullous lupus,
cutaneous vasculitis
thromboembolic
manifestations
Hematological 85 Anemia, leukopenia (<4000/μL),
lymphopenia (<1500/μL),
thrombocytopenia (100,000/μL),
lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly,
hemolytic anemia
Neurologic 60 Delirium, psychosis, seizures,
mono/polyneuropathy, mood disorder,
headacheCranial neuropathy, chorea
Cardiopulmonary 60 Pericarditis/pericardial effusions,
coronary artery disease,
pleurisy/pleural effusions, lupus
pneumonitis, pulmonary
hypertensionMyocarditis, Libman-Sacks
endocarditis, pulmonary
hemorrhage
Renal 30 to
50Proteinuria 500 mg/24 h, cellular
casts, nephrotic syndrome, renal
failure
Gastrointestinal 40 Non-specific symptoms (nausea, mild
pain, diarrhea), bleeding or
perforation, abnormal live enzymesMesenteric vasculitis (with
or without ischemia), colitis,
splenomegaly
Thrombosis 15 Venous and arterial
Ocular 15 Sicca syndrome, conjunctivitis,
episcleritis, retinal vasculitisOptic neuritis, uveitis,
retinitis

Musculoskeletal Manifestations
Arthralgia and nonerosive arthritis are most common (> 85%). Commonly
involves proximal interphalangeal and metacarpophalangeal joints of the
hand, along with the knees and wrists.
In about 10% of patients, deformities result from damage to
periarticular tissue, a condition termed Jaccoud’s arthropathy.
Cutaneous Manifestations
Classic malar rash  consists of erythematous (flat or raised) facial rash
with a butterfly distribution  across the malar and nasal prominences and
sparing of the nasolabial folds (Fig. 9.3) and is seen in 30–60% of patients.
Butterfly rash is often triggered by sun exposure .
Fig. 9.3:  Systemic lupus erythematosus with malar rash and alopecia.
Discoid lupus is a benign variant of lupus in which only the skin is
involved. Discoid rash consists of erythematous, slightly raised patches
with adherent keratotic scaling and follicular plugging. Discoid rash

without any systemic features occurs in discoid lupus erythematosus
(DLE). Only 5% of patients with DLE have SLE; however, as many as
20% SLE patients have DLE. This rash is primarily seen on the face and
scalp.
Generalized photosensitivity (skin rash on exposure to sunlight) and
alopecia.
Mucous Membrane Manifestations
Recurrent crops of small, painful ulcerations on the oral or nasal mucosa.
Dryness secondary to Sjögren’s syndrome.
Hematologic Manifestations
Antibodies that target each of the cellular blood elements are responsible for
hematological changes.
RBC: Normocytic normochromic anemia, reflecting chronic illness.
Hemolytic anemia: Coombs’ test positive or microangiopathic hemolysis.
WBC: Leukopenia, particularly lymphopenia
Platelets: Idiopathic/immune thrombocytopenic purpura induced by
antiplatelet antibodies.
Antibodies to clotting factors can contribute to impaired clot formation
and hemorrhage.
Renal Manifestations
Q. Write short note on renal manifestations of SLE.
Kidney may be involved in 30–50% of SLE patients and is one of the
most important organs involved.
Often asymptomatic in most lupus patients, particularly initially. Hence,
urinalysis should be done in any person suspected of having SLE
followed by regular urinalysis and blood pressure monitoring.Characterized by proteinuria (>500 mg/24 hours) and/or cellular (red cell)
casts.
Histological classification of lupus nephritis (Table 9.11).
Table 9.11: ISN/RPS classification of lups nephritis.
Class Histological type

I Minimal mesangial lupus nephritis (Light microscopy:
Normal glomeruli)
II Mesangial proliferative LN (few isolated
subepithelial/endothelial deposits visible by IF or electron
microscopy)
III Focal lupus nephritis (<50% glomeruli, subendothelial
deposits)
–   IIIA Active lesions
–   IIIA/C Active and chronic lesions
–   IIIC Chronic lesions
IV Diffuse lupus nephritis >50% glomerul involved, segmental
and global lesions
–   IV–S (A) Active lesions—Diffuse segmental proliferative lupus
nephritis
–   IV–G (A) Active lesions—Diffuse global proliferative lupus nephritis
–   IV–S (A/C) Active and chronic lesions—Diffuse segmental
proliferative and sclerosing lupus nephritis
–   IV–G (A/C) Active and chronic lesions—Diffuse global proliferative
and sclerosing lupus nephritis
–   IV–S (C) Chronic in active lesions with scars—Diffuse segmental
sclerosing lupus nephritis
–   IV–G (C) Chronic in active lesions with scars—Diffuse segmental
global lupus nephritisV Membranous lupus nephritis
VI Advanced sclerosing lupus nephritis
Neuropsychiatric Features
Nervous system involvement in SLE produces both neurologic and
psychiatric manifestations.
Clinical features include cognitive dysfunction (due to SLE cerebritis),
headache and seizures, psychiatric features including depression and
psychosis. Peripheral nervous system involvement can cause neuropathy.
Cranial nerve and ocular involvement due to vasculopathy.

Fig. 9.4: Clinical features of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
Cardiac Manifestations
Pericarditis most frequent; serious manifestations are myocarditis and
Libman-Sack (noninfective endocarditis involving the mitral valve)
endocarditis.
Increased risk for myocardial infarction , usually due to accelerated
atherosclerosis and vasculitis.
Pulmonary Manifestations
Pleural lesions: Pleurisy with or without pleural effusion—most common
pulmonary manifestation. Pleural effusion is exudative with low C3 and
ANA test positive in the pleural fluid.Lung lesions: Pneumonitis (exclude infection before ascribing a lung
lesion to SLE), shrinking lung syndrome, interstitial inflammation leading
to fibrosis and intra-alveolar hemorrhage.

Gastrointestinal Features
Non-specific diffuse abdominal pain (caused by autoimmune peritonitis
and/or intestinal vasculitis), nausea sometimes with vomiting and diarrhea.
Increases in serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alanine
aminotransferase (ALT). Mesenteric vasculitis can cause infarction or
perforation of small intestine.
Box 9.5: Causes of death in SLE.
Infections and renal failure: Cause of death in the first decade of disease
Thromboembolic events:  Cause of death in the second and later decades
Cardiovascular:  Due to premature atherosclerosis
Ocular Manifestations
Sicca syndrome (Sjögren’s syndrome) and nonspecific conjunctivitis are
common.
Serious manifestations are retinal vasculitis (can cause infarcts and cytoid
bodies) and optic neuritis. Complications of glucocorticosteroid therapy
include cataracts (common) and glaucoma.
Other Manifestations
Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease (splenomegaly, lymphadenopathy),
antiphospholipid syndrome, osteoporosis, and complement deficiencies are
associated with SLE. Increased risk of hematologic malignancies
(particularly non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma) and possibly lung and hepatobiliary
cancers.
Clinical features are summarized diagrammatically in Figure 9.4. Causes of
death in SLE are listed in Box 9.5.
Laboratory Findings
Purpose: (1) To establish or rule out the diagnosis, (2) follow the course of
disease, and (3) to identify adverse effects of therapies.Autoantibodies in SLE
Q. Write short essay/note on the various autoantibodies in systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE).
SLE is characterized by the production of several diverse autoantibodies.

Some antibodies are against different nuclear and cytoplasmic components
of the cell that are not organ specific. Other antibodies are directed against
specific cell surface antigens of blood cells.
Importance of autoantibodies: (1) Diagnosis and management of
patients with SLE, and (2) responsible for pathogenesis of tissue damage.
Table 9.12: Autoantibodies in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE).
Antinuclear antibodies (ANA)
Anti-dsDNA (ds = double stranded)
Anti-Sm (Anti-Smith)
Anti-RNP
Anti-Ro (SSA)
Anti-La (SSB)Antihistone
Antiphospholipid
Antierythrocyte
Antiplatelet
Antineuronal
Antiribosomal
Types of antibodies (Table 9.12)
Antinuclear antibody (ANA): Best screening test and > 90% of the
patients show a positive test. However, a positive test is not specific for
SLE. It can be positive in some normal individual (especially elderly),
other autoimmune diseases, acute viral infections, chronic inflammatory
processes and with certain drugs.Anti-double-stranded DNA (Anti-dsDNA) antibodies are common in
SLE. Anti-Sm antibodies are highly specific for SLE. Rising levels of
anti-dsDNA and low levels of complement (C3 and C4) usually reflect
disease activity.Rheumatoid factor is positive in 30%.
Other Tests
Complete blood count: Essential and aids in diagnosis and management.
Anemia (normocytic normochromic and Coombs’ positive), leucopenia,
lymphopenia and thrombocytopenia may be present.
Activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT): Prolonged in the
presence of pathogenic antiphospholipid antibodies. These antibodies
give a false-positive result in the serologic test for syphilis.
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR): Nonspecific indicator of
systemic inflammation. It is often monitored in many patients to know the

disease activity.
C-reactive protein (CRP): It is an acute phase reactant which is
relatively uninformative and normal in SLE. It does not usually rise with
disease activity unless there is infection, arthritis or serositis.
Urinalysis: When there is active nephritis, urinalysis shows proteinuria,
hematuria and cellular (red and white blood cell casts in the urinary
sediment suggest proliferative GN) or granular casts. Blood urea nitrogen
and serum creatinine are elevated in acute kidney injury. If there is
proteinuria, urine albumin/creatinine ratio should be measured. Renal
biopsy confirms renal involvement.Compliment levels: Low levels of C3 indicate active disease especially
nephritis.
LE cell: Phagocytic leukocyte (neutrophil or macrophage) that has
engulfed the denatured nucleus of an injured cell is positive. Rarely done
nowadays.
Imaging
Chest X-ray: To exclude other pathology, for cardiac size and in lung
disease.
High resolution CT: To demonstrate fibrotic lung.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of brain or spinal cord in cases with
central nervous system disease involvement.
Diagnostic Criteria for Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
Q. Write short essay/note on diagnostic criteria/revised American
Rheumatism Association criteria for systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE).
The clinical presentation of SLE is so variable that the American College of
Rheumatology has established a complex set of criteria (Table 9.13). The
presence of 4 of the 11 ACR criteria yields a sensitivity of 85% and a
specificity of 95% for SLE.
Table 9.13: Revised criteria for classification of systemic lupus
erythematosus (American College of Rheumatology Criteria):
1997.

Criteria Description
1.   Malar rash Fixed erythema, flat or raised, over the malar eminences tending to
spare the nasolabial folds
2.   Discoid rash Erythematous raised patches with adherent keratotic scaling and
follicular plugging
3.   Photosensitivity Skin rash as a result of unusual reaction to sunlight, by patient history
or physician observation
4.   Oral ulcers Oral or nasopharyngeal ulceration, usually painless, observed by
physician
5.   Arthritis Non-erosive arthritis involving two or more peripheral joints
6.   Serositis Pleuritis or pleural effusion or
Pericarditis or pericardial effusion
7.   Renal disorder Persistent proteinuria >0.5 g/day or >3 + if quantitation not performed
or cellular casts (red blood cell, hemoglobin, granular, tubular, or
mixed)
8.   Neurologic disorder Seizures: In the absence of offending drugs or known metabolic
derangements (e.g. uremia, ketoacidosis, or electrolyte imbalance) or
Psychosis: In the absence of offending drugs or known metabolic
derangements
9.   Hematologic disorderHemolytic anemia with reticulocytosis or leucopenia (<4000/mm3)
total on two or more occasions or lymphopenia (<1500/mm3) on two
or more occasions or thrombocytopenia (<1,00,000/mm3) in the
absence of offending drugs
10.   Immunologic disorder Anti-DNA antibody to native DNA in abnormal titer, or Anti-Sm—
presence of antibody to Sm nuclear antigen, or Positive finding of
antiphospholipid antibodies based on: (1) an abnormal serum level of
IgG or IgM anticardiolipin antibodies, (2) a positive test for lupus
anticoagulant using a standard test, or (3) a false-positive serologic
test for syphilis known to be positive for at least 6 months and
confirmed by negative Treponema pallidumimmobilization or
fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption test
11.   Antinuclear antibody An abnormal titer of antinuclear antibody by immunofluorescence or
an equivalent assay at any point in time and in the absence of drugs
known to be associated with drug-induced lupus syndrome
Presence of any four or more criteria of the 11 (serially or simultaneously, during any period of
observation) is diagnostic of SLE.
Flowchart 9.2:  Treatment algorithm for systemic lupus erythematosus.

(NSAIDs: nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs; HCQ: hydroxychloroquine; GCs: glucocorticoids;
CLE: cutaneous lupus erythematosus; MMF: mycophenolate mofetil)
Management (Flowchart 9.2)
Q. Write short essay/note on management of systemic lupus erythematosus.
General
To avoid known triggers of disease exacerbation, such as ultraviolet light, smoking cessation.
Need for adequate rest.
Conservative therapies for management of non-life-threatening disease
In patients with fatigue, pain, and autoantibodies of SLE, but without major organ involvement are
managed by analgesics (NSAIDs), antimalarials (hydroxychloroquine , chloroquine, and quinacrine)
and low-dose corticosteroids . Skin lesions and arthritis also respond to hydroxychloroquine.
Photosensitive skin lesions need application of sun-screen lotions.
Life-threatening Sle: Proliferative forms of lupus nephritis
Life-threatening SLE or patients with severe symptoms should receive corticosteroids.
Acutely ill patients and patients with active proliferative glomerulonephritis may be treated with
prednisone at 60 mg daily or 1 g of intravenous methylprednisolone administered daily for 3 days.
Immunosuppressive agents:  These include azathioprine, methotrexate, cyclophosphamide,
mycophenolate mofetil and are also useful in controlling severe disease. They are particularly
useful in patients with renal involvement. A combination of intravenous cyclophosphamide and
steroids is the most effective regimen. Following intravenous cyclophosphamide, oral
mycophenolate mofetil is an alternative to maintain remission. Drugs targeting B-cell pathways,
such as belimumab and rituximab are used in refractory cases.

Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinics (SLICC)
Classification 2012 criteria* (Table 9.14).
Table 9.14: Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinics (SLICC)
Classification 2012 criteria.
Lupus nephritis proved by biopsy and ANA or anti-DNA or at least 4 criteria (1 needs to be
immunological)
Clinical Immunological
Acute cutaneous LE ANA
Chronic cutaneous LE Anti-dsDNA
Oral ulcer Anti-Sm
Alopecia aPL antibodies
Synovitis Low complement
Serositis Direct Coombs’ test positive
Renal
Neurologic
Hemolytic anemia
Leukopenia/lymphopenia
Thrombocytopenia
Differences between rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus
are presented in Table 9.15.
Table 9.15: Differences between rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus
erythematosus.
Features Rheumatoid arthritis Systemic lupus erythematosus
Smoking Predisposing factor No relation
Female:Male 3:1 9:1
Type of arthritis Erosive Non-erosive
Deformities Common Rare, Jaccoud’s arthropathy
(10%)
Systemic involvement Relatively less Marked
Nodules Rheumatoid nodules Absent
Malar (skin) rash Nil Striking feature: malar rash,
discoid rash

Photosensitivity Absent Photosensitivity present
Oral ulcer and alopecia Absent Present
Spine involvement Involves cervical spine Rare
Pyoderma gangrenosum May develop Rare
Renal involvement Uncommon Common and severe
Platelet abnormality Thrombocythemia Thrombocytopenia
Serology RA factor and ACPA ANA and anti-dsDNA
Criteria for diagnosis ACR/EULAR SLICC/ACR
Response to DMARDs Present Less response
(ACPA: anticyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies; ANA: antinuclear antibodies; ds: double stranded;
ACR: American college of rheumatology; EULAR: European league against rheumatism; SLICC:
systemic lupus international collaborating clinics (SLICC) classification)
Drug-induced Lupus
Q. Write short essay/note on drug-induced lupus.
It is a syndrome consisting of positive ANA associated with symptoms such
as fever, malaise, arthritis or intense arthralgias/myalgias, serositis, and/or
rash.
Etiology: The syndrome develops during therapy with certain medications
and includes:
Drugs:  Antiarrhythmics (e.g. procainamide, diltiazem, disopyramide, and propafenone),
antihypertensive (e.g. hydralazine), methyl dopa, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, beta
blockers, antithyroid propylthiouracil, antipsychotics (e.g. chlorpromazine and lithium),
anticonvulsants (e.g. carbamazepine and phenytoin), antibiotics (e.g. isoniazid, minocycline, and
macrodantin), antirheumatic (e.g. sulfasalazine), diuretic (e.g. hydrochlorothiazide) and
antihyperlipidemics (e.g. lovastatin and simvastatin).Biologic agents: Interferons and TNF inhibitors.
Symptoms: Usually resolve after discontinuation of the offending drug.
Box 9.6 lists the features that differentiates drug-induced lupus from SLE.
Box 9.6: Features that differentiate drug-induced lupus from SLE.
Drug-induced lupus
Less female predilection than SLE
Kidneys or brain involvement rare, less cutaneous involvement.
Antinuclear antibodies positive; antihistone antibodies positive (95%); autoantibodies to dsDNA
absent
C3 levels normal

SPONDYLOARTHROPATHIES
(SPONDYLOARTHRITIDES) (SPAS)
Q. Write short essay/note on spondyloarthropathies.
Q. Write short essay/note on seronegative spondyloarthropathies (SSA).
Definition: The spondyloarthropathies (SpAs) are a group of related
inflammatory joint diseases (Box 9.7) that share clinical features and
genetic susceptibility.
Box 9.7: Diseases included under spondyloarthropathies (SpAs).
1. Ankylosing spondylitis (AnS)
2. Reactive arthritis (ReA) (including Reiter’s syndrome)
3. Psoriatic arthritis (PsA)
4. Arthropathy associated with inflammatory bowel disease
5. Undifferentiated spondyloarthritis
Common Features of SpAs
The similarities in clinical features and genetic predisposition suggest that these disorders share
pathogenic mechanisms.
1. Common clinical features:Strong predilection for the spine , in particular the sacroiliac joints. Inflammatory back pain
due to sacroiilitis and spondylitis.
Tendency for new bone formation  at sites of chronic inflammation, with joint ankylosis as a
consequence.
If peripheral arthritis  occurs, it is usually in the lower extremity and asymmetrical .
Predilection for sites of tendon insertion into bone (enthesis). Enthesitis is inflammation at
sites where tendons, ligaments or joint capsules attach to bone and is one of the most specific
clinical manifestations  of the SpAs.
RF negative; hence, known as ‘seronegative’ .
2. Common genetic predisposing factor:  All subsets have an association with HLA-B27 allele.
Ankylosing Spondylitis
Q. Write short essay/note on ankylosing spondylitis, rheumatoid
spondylitis or Bekhterev-Strümpell-Marie disease.
Ankylosing spondylitis (AnS) is a chronic inflammatory disorder of unknown
causes that primarily affects the axial skeleton (predominantly sacroiliac
joints and spine). The peripheral joints and extra-articular structures are also

frequently involved.
Age and gender: Usually begins in the second or third decade; male to
female ratio is between 2:1 and 3:1.
Clinical Features
Targets in ankylosing spondylitis (Fig. 9.5): Mainly involves spine,
sacroiliac joints and large peripheral joints in an asymmetrical pattern.
Involvement of lumbar spine
Classical presentation is the insidious onset of inflammatory low back
pain. The pain is dull and located in the lower lumbar regions or gluteal
region and shows nocturnal exacerbation.
Back pain persists for > 3 months. It is accompanied by early-morning
stiffness that typically improves with activity/exercise and exacerbated
by inactivity.
Physical examination: Physical examination of the spine shows loss of
spinal mobility in all directions and pain on sacroiliac stressing.
Modified Schober test: Used to measure lumbar spine flexion. The
patient stands upright with heels together. Two marks are made on the
spine; one at the lumbosacral junction (identified by a horizontal line
between the posterosuperior iliac spines) and other 10 cm above. The
patient then bends forward maximally with knees fully extended. The
distance between the two marks is measured. This distance increases by
>5 cm in the case of normal mobility and by <4 cm in the case of
decreased mobility.

Fig. 9.5:  Pattern of joint involvement in ankylosing spondylitis.
Involvement of sacroiliac joint
The tests mentioned below produce stress and pain in the sacroiliac joint.
Patrick’s test (figure of 4 test): Pain in the sacroiliac joints may be
elicited either by direct pressure or by maneuvers that stress the joint,
namely, Patrick’s test. One leg is guided into ‘figure of 4’ position with
the ipsilateral ankle resting across the contralateral thigh. The ipsilateral
knee is then pressed downwards with one hand while providing counter
pressure with the other hand on the contralateral anterior superior iliac
spine.FABER (flexion abduction external rotation) maneuver: Patient lies
supine while the examiner flexes and externally rotates the hip.
Gaenslen’s maneuver: The examiner extends the hip by letting the leg
dangle off the side of the examining table.
Occiput to wall test (Flesch test): Normally zero, in AnS it is increased.
Peripheral joints-enthesitis

Enthesitis is inflammation at the sites of tendon/ligament insertions.
Heel pain  due to inflammation at the Achilles tendon  (Achilles tendinitis)
and plantar fascia (plantar fasciitis) at calcaneal insertions is common.
Like arthritis, enthesitis is also aggravated by rest and improved with
activity.
Other sites of enthesitis include superior and inferior aspects of patella,
metatarsal heads and spinal ligament insertions on vertebral bodies.
Other sites
Involvement of the thoracic spine, costovertebral joints and costosternal
joints leads to chest pain, reduced expansion of chest (<5 cm) and thoracic
kyphosis.Involvement of the cervical spine produces neck pain and a forward stoop
of the neck.
Peripheral arthritis usually occurs late and asymmetric. Involvement of
hips and shoulders result in pain and limitation of movement.
Dactylitis (sausage digits) is characterized by diffuse swelling of toes or
fingers.
Extra-articular manifestations (Table 9.16)
Table 9.16: Extra-articular manifestations of ankylosing spondylitis.
Acute anterior uveitis (Iritis)
Inflammatory bowel disease
Aortic insufficiency, cardiac conduction
defects and heart failure
Psoriasis
Pulmonary fibrosis and cavitation (apical)Osteoporosis
Myelopathy secondary to atlantoaxial
subluxation and spinal fracture
Cauda equina syndrome
Amyloidosis
Investigations
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein: Raised.
Tests for rheumatoid factor (RF): Negative.
Anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (CCP) and antinuclear antibodies
(ANAs): Negative.
HLA-B27: Present in > 90% cases. High sensitivity and specificity.
MRI and bone scan: They can detect early sacroiliitis.

Radiographic Findings
X-ray
Sacroiliac joint: The medial and lateral cortical margins of both sacroiliac
joints lose definition owing to erosions. They show irregularity and loss of
cortical margins (blurring of the cortical margins of the subchondral
bone), erosions in the joint line, and ‘pseudowidening’ of the joint space.
Subsequently, it shows subchondral sclerosis, joint space narrowing and
fusion, bony ankylosis reflecting complete bony replacement of the
sacroiliac joints.Lumbar spine: Radiographs of the spine may show anterior ‘ squaring’
(loss of the normal anterior concavity of the lumbar vertebra), ‘shiny
corners’ (subchondral sclerosis at the upper edge of the vertebral body), or
even ‘barreling’ of one or more vertebral bodies due to erosion and
sclerosis of the anterior corners of vertebrae with subsequent erosion.
These are manifestations of enthesitis.
–   Bridging syndesmophytes are areas of calcification that follow the
outermost fibers of the annulus and may also be seen in AS.
Progressive ossification may lead to formation of marginal
syndesmophytes make the diagnosis clear. They are observed as bony
bridges connecting successive vertebral bodies anteriorly and laterally.
In advanced disease, ossification of the anterior longitudinal ligament
and facet joint fusion may also be seen. Eventually, the changes may
result in a ‘bamboo spine’ (Fig. 9.6), so called because the multiple
bridging syndesmophytes (bridging the intervertebral spaces) can
mimic the appearance of bamboo.

Fig. 9.6:  Bamboo spine in ankylosing spondylitis.
–   Diffuse osteoporosis of spine and atlantoaxial dislocation can be seen
as late feature. Erosive changes may be observed in the symphysis
pubis, the ischial tuberosities and peripheral joints.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
MRI is much more sensitive for detection of early sacroiliitis than X-ray and
can also detect inflammatory changes in the lumbar spine.
Diagnostic Criteria (Box 9.8)
Management
Early diagnosis is important to maintain posture and range of motion.
Regular exercises is started with active and passive physiotherapy before syndesmophytes have
formed.
Symptomatic relief of pain and stiffness can be obtained with long-acting or slow-release NSAID
or an NSAID suppository improves sleep, peripheral arthritis and enthesitis are managed with
NSAIDs or local steroid injections. Indomethacin is the most effective drug and may be given up
to a maximum dose of 100 mg/day. Systemic glucocorticoids have limited role.Sulfasalazine and methotrexate  are useful to control effective for peripheral arthritis but not for
spinal disease.
–   Peripheral arthritis and enthesitis are managed with NSAIDs or local steroid injections. Rarely
systemic corticosteroids may be necessary.
Box 9.8:  Modified New York Criteria (1984) for ankylosing spondylitis.
Clinical criteria
Low back pain and stiffness for >3 months that improve with exercise but are not relieved by rest
Limitation of motion of the lumbar spine in both sagittal and frontal planes
Limitation of chest expansion

Radiologic criteria
Sacroilitis: Grade ≥2 bilateral orgrade 3 or 4 unilateral
Grading
Definite AS (ankylosing spondylitis) if the radiologic criterion is associated with at least one
clinical variable
Probable ankylosing spondylitis (AS) if:
The three clinical criteria are present
The radiologic criterion is present without the clinical criteria
Anti-tumor necrosis factor therapy
Biologic agents, such as monoclonal antibodies to TNF-α (infliximab, adalimumab, certolizumab,
golimumab)  or the soluble TNF receptor (etanercept) are options for patients with active ankylosing
spondylitis who are not satisfactorily responded to NSAIDs. Duration of treatment is 2–3 years.
Dosage
Infliximab: 3–5 mg/kg body weight intravenously every 6–8 weeks.
Etanercept: 25 mg subcutaneously twice a week initially/50 mg once weekly.
Adalimumab: 40 mg biweekly by subcutaneous injection.
Golimumab: 50 or 100 mg every 4 weeks, given by subcutaneous injection.
Others
Reconstructive surgery
Pamidronate
Control of uveitis by local steroid drugs.
Reactive Arthritis
Q. Write short essay/note on reactive arthritis and its causes.
Q. Write a short note on Reiter’s syndrome.
Reactive arthritis (ReA) refers to acute nonpurulent arthritis (aseptic
arthritis) complicating an extra-articular infection elsewhere in the
body, most typically enteric (GIT) or urogenital (GU tract) infections.
Classical triad of Reiter’s syndrome is (1) nonspecific urethritis, (2)
conjunctivitis and (3) arthritis.  However, the term is no longer in
common use.

Etiology
GIT infections: Common enteric organisms that trigger include
Salmonella typhimurium, Shigella flexneri and Yersinia enterocolitica.
GUT infection: Common urogential organisms are Chlamydia
trachomatis or Ureaplasma urealyticum.
More than 75% of ReA patients have the histocompatibility antigen HLA-
B27.
Clinical Features
Age and gender: Predominantly a disease of young (18–40 years) men,
with a male preponderance of 15:1.
Constitutional symptoms are common and include fatigue, malaise,
fever, and weight loss.
Arthritis: Arthritis is typically an acute, asymmetrical, lower limb (e.g.
knees, ankles, midtarsal and MTP joints) arthritis and occurs 1 to 3 weeks
after the GIT or GUT infection, arthritis usually persists for 3–5 months.
Enthesitis is common.Dactylitis or ‘sausage digit,’ is a diffuse swelling of a solitary finger or
toe may also be seen. It is the result of inflammatory changes affecting the
joint capsule, entheses, periarticular structures, and periosteal bone.
Sacroiliitis may be seen in 25% patients.
Extra-articular features
–   Urogenital lesions: Urethritis and prostatitis in males, cervicitis or
salpingitis in females.
–   Mucocutaneous lesions: Circinate balanitis (a painless erythematous
lesion of the glans penis), keratoderma blennorrhagica (hyperkeratotic
lesions on the palms of the hands or the soles of the feet) and nail
dystrophy.
–   Ocular disease: Common and includes conjunctivitis, anterior uveitis
and acute iritis.
–   Others: Cardiac conduction defects, aortic regurgitation, central or
peripheral nervous system lesions, and pleuropulmonary infiltrates.
Usually a self-limiting course of 3–12 months. About 50% of patients
develop recurrent bouts of arthritis and 15–30% develop chronic arthritis

or sacroiliitis.
Investigations
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and acute-phase reactants: Usually
raised .
Peripheral blood: Anemia and polymorphonuclear leukocytosis.
Synovial fluid: Characteristic synovial fluid is leucocyte-rich  (> 2000
white blood cells/mL with a predominance of neutrophils) and may
contain multinucleated macrophages (Reiter’s cells).
HLA-B27: Positive in more than 75% of cases.
Serum tests for rheumatoid factor and antinuclear antibodies: Negative.
Urethritis: Confirmed in the ‘two-glass test’ by demonstration of mucoid
threads in the first-void specimen that clears in the second specimen.
Radiological features
Shows periarticular osteoporosis, joint space narrowing and proliferative
erosions in chronic or recurrent disease.
Periostitis, especially of metatarsals, phalanges and pelvis, and large,
‘fluffy’calcaneal spurs at the insertion of the plantar fascia.
–   Sacroiliitis (less common than ankylosing spondylitis) is often
asymmetrical and sometimes unilateral.
–   Syndesmophytes are predominantly coarse and asymmetrical, often
extending beyond the contours of the annulus (‘non-marginal’).
Management
Acute attack:
–   Treated with rest, oral NSAIDs and analgesics. Indomethacin, 75–150 mg/d in divided doses,
is the initial treatment of choice.
–   Intra-articular or local steroid injections and rarely systemic steroids in severe cases.
Non-specific chlamydial urethritis:  Treated with doxycycline or ciprofloxacin  or a single dose
of azithromycin course.
No role of antibiotics in reactive spondyloarthropathy secondary to enteric infections.
Sulfasalazine, azathioprine and methotrexate may be useful in patients with disabling relapsing
and remitting arthritis.
DMARDs:  For patients with persistent marked symptoms, recurrent arthritis or severe
keratoderma blennorrhagica.
Anterior uveitis is a medical emergency and treated by topical, subconjunctival or systemic
corticosteroids.
TNF- α blocking agents are the drugs of next choice in severe and persistent disease.

Psoriatic Arthritis
Q. Write short note on psoriatic arthritis.
Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) is a seronegative inflammatory arthritis that
characteristically occurs in patient with psoriasis, a past or family history
of psoriasis or with characteristic nail changes.
Occurs in about 7–20% of patients of psoriasis.
Types: Wright and Moll described five patterns of psoriatic arthritis (Box
9.9)
Newer pattern of psoriatic arthritis is described in HIV patients.
Box 9.9: Patterns of psoriatic arthritis.
1. Asymmetric inflammatory oligoarthritis
2. Symmetric polyarthritis similar to RA (rheumatoid arthritis)
3. Arthritis of the DIP (distal interphalangeal) joints
4. Psoriatic spondylitis
5. Arthritis mutilans
Clinical Features
It presents with pain and swelling affected joints and enthesitis.Asymmetrical inflammatory oligoarthritis: Most characteristically
occur in the hands and feet, when synovitis is associated with
tenosynovitis, enthesitis and inflammation of intervening tissue resulting
in a ‘sausage-shaped digit’ or dactylitis. Usually, less than four joints are
involved (oligoarthritis).Symmetrical polyarthritis: It is more common in women and may
strongly resemble RA.
Arthritis of the DIP joints: Uncommon and affects men more than
women. It involves finger DIP joints and surrounding periarticular tissues,
and is accompanied by nail dystrophy.Psoriatic spondylitis: Presents similar to AS but with less severe
involvement. It is typically unilateral or asymmetric in severity.
Arthritis mutilans is a severe, deforming erosive arthritis accompanied
by prominent cartilage and bone destruction results in marked instability
of fingers and toes. The encasing skin appears invaginated and
‘telescoped’ and the finger can be pulled back to its original length.

Skin lesions: Characteristic skin lesion of psoriasis may be present (refer
page 1155).
Nail changes (Fig. 9.7): Psoriatic nail dystrophy, onycholysis, pitting, and
hyperkeratosis observed in nearly 80% patients with arthritis.
Fig. 9.7:  Sausage digits in psoriatic arthritis and psoriatic nails.
Uveitis: Unilateral or bilateral and generally chronic.
Table 9.17: Distinguishing clinical features of psoriatic arthritis from
rheumatoid arthritis.
Psoriatic arthritis Rheumatoid arthritis
Psoriasis + -
Symmetric involvement + ++
Asymmetric involvement ++ +
Enthesopathy + -
Dactylitis + -
Nail dystrophy, psoriatic skin lesions + -
HIV association + -
DIP (distal interphalangeal)
involvement+ -
Inflammatory LBA (low backache) + -
Sacroiliac joint involvement + -

(+: present; –: absent)
Diagnosis
Acute phase reactants (ESR and CRP): Raised in active disease.
Rheumatoid factor and antinuclear antibodies: Negative.
Radiological findings: May be normal or show erosive change with joint
space narrowing similar to those of RA, but osteoporosis is relatively less
common. Distal interphalangeal joints may show ‘pencil-in-cup’ changes
(Fig. 9.8) because of marked resorption of bone. Other findings include
enthesitis with periosteal reaction, sacroiliitis and spondylitis.MRI and ultrasound with power Doppler are used to detect synovial
inflammation and inflammation at the enthuses (enthesitis).
Distinguishing clinical features of psoriatic arthritis from rheumatoid arthritis
(Table 9.17).
Fig. 9.8:  X-ray of hand shows pencil-in-cup appearance in psoriatic arthritis.
Management
NSAIDs and analgesics may be sufficient to control symptoms in mild disease.
Local synovitis may be treated by intra-articular corticosteroid injections.
DMARDs for persistent synovitis unresponsive to conservative treatment. Sulfasalazine or
methotrexate slows the development of joint damage.

Anti-TNF-α agents (e.g. etanercept, golimumab, infliximab and adalimumab) should be
considered for patients with active synovitis who respond inadequately to standard DMARDs.
Hydroxychloroquine must be avoided as it can cause exfoliative skin reactions.
Alefacept  is a fusion protein of soluble lymphocyte function antigen 3 with Fc fragments of IgG1.
It is used for moderate-to-severe psoriasis and associated arthritis.
Enteropathic Arthritis
Q. Write short essay/note on spondyloarthropathy associated with
inflammatory bowel disease.
Also called as enteropathic arthritis associated with inflammatory bowel
disease (ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease).
An acute inflammatory oligoarthritis occurs in 10–20% of patients with
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).
More often in patients with Crohn’s disease than in those with ulcerative
colitis.
Clinical Features
Peripheral arthritis
The arthritis is asymmetrical, inflammatory, nonerosive polyarthritis and
mainly involves lower-limb joints (knees, ankles, hips).
The clinical activity of the peripheral arthritis parallels the activity of the
gut inflammation. Effective treatment of the GI disease usually controls
the joint disease as well.It is not associated with HLA-B27 and follows a transient course.
Sacroiliitis
It is clinically and radiologically similar to classic AS.
It can manifest before or after the onset of IBD and there is no correlation
between activity of the spondylitis and bowel disease.
HLA-B27 is found in 50% of patients and it follows a chronic course.
Others: Enthesitis, dactylitis and extra-articular manifestations of IBD.
Treatment
NSAIDs to be used cautiously because they may worsen diarrhea.
A monoarthritis is treated by intra-articular corticosteroids.
Sulfasalazine more effective as it may help both bowel and joint disease. Azathioprine and
methotrexate may also be used.

TNF-α blocking drug infliximab used for IBD can help the arthritis.
Differences between inflammatory and mechanical low back pain (LBP)
(Table 9.18)
Q. What features in the history and physical examination are helpful in
differentiating inflammatory LBP in AS from mechanical LBP?
Seronegative Arthritis
Q. Write short note on seronegative arthritis and its causes.
Arthritis can be divided into seropositive and seronegative.
Seropositive arthritis refers to the presence of rheumatoid factor and anti-
CCP in the blood.
Seronegative arthritis generally called ‘seronegative spondyloarthropathy’
and include ankylosing spondylitis, psoriatic arthritis and reactive arthritis.
VASCULITIS
Q. Define and classify vasculitis.
Definition: Vasculitis refers to a heterogeneous group of disorders that is
characterized by destructive inflammation of blood vessel walls. The lumen
of the inflamed blood vessels is liable to occlude or rupture or develop a
thrombus, and this is associated with ischemia of the tissues supplied by the
involved vessel.
Classification (Fig. 9.9)
Vasculitis may involve a single organ (e.g. skin), or it may involve several
organ systems. One of the basis for classifying the vasculitides is the size of
the predominant blood vessels involved (Box 9.10).
Clinical ManifestationsQ. Write short essay/note on clinical features of vasculitis.
Constitutional symptoms: Fever, weight loss, malaise, arthralgias/arthritis
(common to vasculitides of all vessel sizes). Typical clinical manifestations
of large, medium, and small vessel vasculitis are presented in Table 9.19 and
vasculitis associated with granulomatous inflammation is listed in Table 9.20.

Table 9.18: Differences between inflammatory and mechanical low back
pain (LBP).
Features Inflammatory LBP Mechanical LBP
Age at onset < 40 years Any age
Type of onset Insidious Acute
Symptom duration > 3 months < 4 weeks
Morning stiffness > 60 minutes < 30 minutes
Nocturnal pain Frequent Absent
Effect of exercise Improvement Exacerbation
Sacroiliac joint tenderness Frequent Absent
Back mobility Loss in all planes Abnormal flexion
Chest expansion Often decreased Normal
Neurologic deficits Unusual Possible
Fig. 9.9:  Classification of vasculitis.
Box 9.10: Classification of the primary vasculitides according to size of

predominant blood vessels involved (Chapel Hill Consensus
Conference).
Predominantly large-vessel (aorta and its major tributaries) vasculitis
Giant cell arteritis
Takayasu arteritis
Cogan syndrome
Predominantly medium-vessel (medium and small-sized arteries and arterioles) vasculitis
Polyarteritis nodosa
Primary central nervous system disease
Buerger disease
Predominantly small-vessel (small arteries, arterioles, venules and capillaries) vasculitis
ANCA-associated small-vessel vasculitis
–   Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener granulomatosis)
–   Microscopic polyangiitis
–   Churg-Strauss syndrome (allergic angiitis and granulomatosis)
–   Drug-induced ANCA-associated vasculitisImmune complex mediated
–   Cutaneous leukocytoclastic angiitis (‘hypersensitivity’ vasculitis)
–   Henoch-Schönlein purpura
–   Urticarial vasculitis
Table 9.19: Typical clinical manifestations of vasculitis.
Large Medium Small
Limb claudication
Asymmetric blood pressures
Absence of pulses
Bruits
Aortic dilation
Renovascular hypertensionCutaneous nodules
Ulcers
Livedo reticularis
Digital gangrene
Mononeuritis multiplex
Microaneurysms
Renovascular hypertensionPurpura
Vesiculobullous lesions
Urticaria
Glomerulonephritis
Alveolar hemorrhage
Cutaneous extravascular
Necrotizing granulomas
Splinter hemorrhages
Uveitis/episcleritis/scleritis
Table 9.20: Vasculitis associated with granulomatous inflammation.
Giant cell arteritis
Takayasu’s arteritis
Cogan’s syndrome
Wegener’s granulomatosis (granulomatosis with
polyangiitis)Churg-Strauss syndrome
Primary angiitis of the central nervous system
Buerger’s disease
Rheumatoid vasculitis

Giant Cell Arteritis (GCA)
Q. Write short essay/note on temporal arteritis, cranial arteritis or giant
cell arteritis.
Giant cell arteritis (temporal arteritis or cranial arteritis) is inflammatory
granulomatous arteritis of large and medium sized arteries in the head
and neck . It can involve aorta and its primary and secondary branches.
Age and gender: It is a disease of the elderly and average age at onset is 70.
It is extremely rare below 60 years of age. Female to male ratio is about 3:1.
Vessels involved: One or more branches of the carotid artery (e.g. temporal
artery, occipital, ophthalmic, posterior ciliary arteries and vertebral arteries).
Can involve multiple arteries, aorta and its branches.
Clinical Features
Onset may be gradual or sudden.
Systemic manifestations: Severe malaise, tiredness, fever, anemia,
fatigue and weight loss.
Severe headache: Most severe and often localized along the course of the
superficial temporal artery or occipital region. Arteritis often occurs in the
carotid/temporal arteries. On palpation, the involved artery is tender,
thickened  and cord-like or nodular. It may be accompanied tenderness of
the scalp or of the temple.Jaw claudication: When chewing, eating or talking, due to ischemia of
the masseter muscles.
Visual symptoms: These include loss of visual acuity, reduced color
perception and papillary defects. It can even present as sudden blindness
in one eye due to occlusion of the posterior ciliary artery.
Neurological manifestations: It occurs in about 30% of patients and
includes transient ischemic attacks, brainstem infarcts and hemiparesis.
Investigation
Normochromic, normocytic anemia.
ESR is raised  (50–120 mm/h) and the CRP very high.
Temporal artery biopsy from the affected side is the definitive
diagnostic test. Characteristic biopsy findings are fragmentation of the
internal elastic lamina with necrosis of the media, mixed inflammatory

cell infiltrate and granulomatous inflammation of the intima and media
with giant cells.
Ultrasound or arteriography: It may be used for guiding the biopsy.
Duplex ultrasonography can detect the characteristic appearance.
Treatment
Corticosteroids are the treatment of choice and should be commenced urgently in suspected giant
cell arteritis to prevent the risk of visual loss. It responds dramatically within 24–48 hours of starting
corticosteroids. Prednisolone is given at a dose of 40–60 mg/day. NSAIDs should not be used.
Polymyalgia Rheumatic (PMR)
Q. Write short note on polymyalgia rheumatic.
PMR is characterized by pain, aching, and stiffness in the muscles of the
neck, shoulders, and hip-girdle area that are usually much worse in the
morning. PMR is closely associated with GCA (giant cell arteritis).
Criteria for the Diagnosis of PMR (Box 9.11)
Treatment
Corticosteroids:  Prednisolone (10–15 mg/day) is rapidly effective. Symptoms are relieved within
48–72 hours and the ESR normalizes after 7–10 days.
Box 9.11: Criteria for the diagnosis of PMR (Polymyalgia rheumatic).
Age > 50 years
Aching and stiffness for at least 1 month, affecting at least two of the three areas (i.e. shoulders,
neck, and pelvic girdle)
Morning stiffness lasting at least 1 hour
ESR > 40 mm/hour
Exclusion of other diseases except GCA (giant cell arteritis)
Rapid response to prednisone (20 mg/day)
All of the above criteria must be met to diagnose PMR
Classic Polyarteritis Nodosa (PAN)
Q. Write short essay on the clinical features, diagnosis and management
of classic polyarteritis nodosa (PAN).
Definition: Polyarteritis nodosa is also called classic polyarteritis nodosa is
a systemic, necrotizing vasculitis of small and medium-sized muscular
arteries that spares the smallest blood vessels (e.g. arterioles, venules or

capillaries). It characteristically involves the renal and visceral arteries and
is not associated with glomerulonephritis.
Two additional features that distinguish PAN from other forms of systemic
vasculitis are:
1. Confinement of the disease to the arterial rather than the venous
circulation.
2. Absence of granulomatous inflammation .
Organ systems involved: Commonly involves skin, kidneys, heart, liver,
and gastrointestinal tract. PAN does not involve pulmonary arteries.
About 30% of patients with PAN have chronic hepatitis B  with HBsAg-
HbsAb complexes in affected vessels.
Clinical Features
Q. Write short note on the clinical features of polyarteritis nodosa
(PAN).
Age and gender: Peak incidence between 40 to 50 years of age.
Predominantly affects middle aged males (M:F=2:1).
Subacute onset of constitutional vague symptoms such as fever, weight
loss, weakness, malaise and arthralgias are present in > 50% of cases.
Others include lower extremity nodules and ulcerations, mononeuritis
multiplex, and intestinal angina (postprandial pain caused by the
involvement of mesenteric vessels).Absence of pulmonary artery involvement helps distinguish PAN from
most cases of vasculitis.
Diagnosis
Anemia, thrombocytosis, and raised acute phase reactants.
Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg): It may be positive.
p-ANCA: Present in about 20% of cases.
Arteriograms: Demonstrates aneurysms of small and medium-sized
arteries in the kidney, liver, and visceral vasculature.
Biopsy: Presence of characteristic findings of vasculitis of involved organ
confirms the diagnosis. Biopsy of symptomatic organs such as nodular
skin lesions, painful testes, and nerve/muscle reveals vasculitis.
Microscopy shows destruction of the blood vessel wall by inflammatory

cells, accompanied by fibrinoid necrosis.
Treatment
Glucocorticoids and cytotoxic agents:  In idiopathic PAN, remissions or cures is achieved by
high doses of glucocorticoids alone. Cyclophosphamide is indicated when PAN is refractory to
corticosteroids or when there is serious involvement of major organs.
PAN with hepatitis B: Antiviral therapy used in combination with glucocorticoids and plasma
exchange.
Microscopic Polyangiitis
Q. Write short note on microscopic polyangiitis.
Definition: Microscopic polyangiitis (MPA) is the most common ANCA-
associated necrotizing vasculitis with few or no immune complexes in the
involved vessels. It affects small vessels (capillaries, venules or arterioles).
Clinical Features
Age and gender: Most common age of onset is 40–60 years. More
common in males than females.
Microscopic polyangiitis is the most common cause of the pulmonary-
renal syndrome, i.e. alveolar hemorrhage and glomerulonephritis.
Alveolar hemorrhage associated with hemoptysis and respiratory
compromise.The five most common clinical manifestations of MPA are: (1)
glomerulonephritis (~80% of patients), (2) weight loss (> 70%), (3)
mononeuritis multiplex (60%), (4) fever (55%), and (5) a variety of
cutaneous findings-cutaneous vasculitis (> 60%).
Other features: Migratory arthralgias or arthritis (either pauciarticular or
polyarticular), palpable purpura, sometimes with skin ulcerations,
nodules, livedo reticularis, and digital gangrene may be seen.
Diagnosis
p-ANCA is positive in most patients, although c-ANCA may also be
present in 40% cases.
Treatment
Combination of cyclophosphamide and glucocorticoids:  It is the cornerstone of treatment
regimens, because most patients with MPA have major organ involvement such as
glomerulonephritis, alveolar hemorrhage, or vasculitic neuropathy. Cyclophosphamide may be
administered on either a daily or intermittent basis.

‘Pulse’ methylprednisolone (1 g/d for 3 days) may be considered for patients with severe organ
involvement at diagnosis.
In severe cases (e.g. renal failure or diffuse alveolar hemorrhage), additional use of plasmapheresis
is beneficial.
Other treatment regimens: This includes methotrexate, azathioprine and intravenous
immunoglobulin.
Churg-Strauss Syndrome
Q. Write short essay/note on Churg-Strauss syndrome.
Churg-Strauss syndrome (CSS) or allergic angiitis and granulomatosis is
a rare syndrome that affects small to medium sized arteries and veins of
multiple organ systems.
Hallmarks: It is characterized by asthma, peripheral and tissue
eosinophilia, extravascular granuloma formation, and systemic
vasculitis.
Classic Clinical Features (Box 9.12)
Box 9.12: Classic clinical features of Churg-Strauss syndrome.
Allergic rhinitis and nasal polyposis
Reactive airway disease
Peripheral eosinophilia (10–60% of all circulating leukocytes)
Fleeting pulmonary infiltrates and occasional alveolar hemorrhage
Vasculitic neuropathy
Congestive heart failure
Mononeuritis multiplex and stroke
Coronary arteritis and myocarditis are the principal causes of morbidity and mortality
Investigations
Striking eosinophilia >10% (>1000 cells/μL) in peripheral blood.
Raised ESR fibrinogen, or α2-globulins and CRP. Increased IgE levels.
Urine: RBC casts and proteinuria.
Positive antinuclear cytoplasmic antibodies against myeloperoxidase (p-
ANCA) in ~48% of cases.
Chest X-ray: May show infiltrates and pleural effusion.
Biopsy: Three histologic criteria for the diagnosis: (1) the presence of
necrotizing vasculitis, (2) tissue infiltration by eosinophils, and (3)

extravascular granuloma.
Treatment
High-dose steroids and cyclophosphamide, followed by maintenance therapy with low-dose
steroids. Some cases may require addition of cytotoxic drugs.
In severe cases, anti-TNF-α agents like infliximab and etanercept are used.
Granulomatosis with Polyangiitis (Wegener’s Granulomatosis)
Q. Write short essay on clinical features, diagnosis and treatment of
granulomatosis with polyangiitis (Wegener’s granulomatosis).
Definition: Granulomatosis with polyangiitis is a distinct clinicopathologic
entity characterized by necrotizing vasculitis, which involves the upper
respiratory tract, the lungs, and the kidneys.
It is one of the most common forms of systemic vasculitis. It involves
small to medium-sized blood vessels. It affects both the arterial and venous
circulations.
Clinical Features
Age and gender: It usually presents during fourth to fifth decade. Males
are affected more often than females.
Nasal involvement: Found in about 90% of patients. These include nasal
crusting, epistaxis (bleeding), paranasal sinus pain, sinusitis, nasal
mucosal ulceration and obstruction. Inflammation of nasal cartilage may
lead to nasal septal perforation and collapse of the nasal bridge (‘saddle
nose’ deformity). Erosive sinus disease and subglottic stenosis (narrowing
of the trachea due to inflammation just below the vocal cords) are highly
characteristic of granulomatosis with polyangiitis.Lesions in the mouth: Two classic mouth lesions are gum inflammation
(‘strawberry gums’) and tongue ulcers.
Deafness due to inner ear involvement and proptosis due to inflammation
of the retro-orbital tissue, diplopia due to entrapment of the extra-ocular
muscles, and loss of vision due to optic nerve compression may occur.
Lung involvement may produce cough, hemoptysis (due to alveolar
hemorrhage) and dyspnea.
Renal involvement occurs in the form of rapidly progressive
glomerulonephritis, resulting in proteinuria, hematuria, red blood cell casts

in the urine and renal failure.
Other manifestations: These include palpable purpurae, conjunctivitis,
episcleritis, scleritis, cranial neuritis and mononeuritis multiplex.
Diagnosis
ESR: Markedly elevated .
Non-specific abnormalities: These include mild anemia, leukocytosis and
mild hypergammaglobulinemia (particularly of the IgA class).
Compliment levels will be normal or elevated.Serum antiproteinase-3 ANCA (c-ANCA): Positive in about 90% of
patients.
Chest radiograph: It may show pulmonary infiltrates and nodules that
may cavitate.
Imaging of the upper airways or chest with MRI: It can be useful in
localizing abnormalities.
Lung biopsy: Used for confirmation of the diagnosis. It shows the
characteristic necrotizing granulomatous vasculitis.
Renal biopsy: It may show a segmental necrotizing crescentic
glomerulonephritis, with no immunoglobulin deposition (‘Pauci-
immune’).
Treatment:  Treatment is similar to that for microscopic polyangiitis (refer page 693).
Behçet’s Disease/Syndrome
Q. Write short essay/note on symptoms, diagnosis and treatment of
Behçet’s disease.
Behçet’s syndrome is characterized by triad of (1) recurrent episodes o f
oral/mouth  ulcers, (2) genital ulcers, and (3) eye inflammation (i.e. iritis).
Pathologic process is a vasculitis (leukocytoclastic) that may affect small,
medium, and large vessels in either the venous or the arterial circulation in
any organ.
Clinical Features
Diagnostic criteria: Diagnostic criteria of International Study Group for
Behçet’s syndrome is presented in Box 9.13. However, the spectrum of

Behçet’s syndrome consists of many manifestations (e.g. neurological
involvement seen in 5% of patients, recurrent thrombosis) that are not
included in these criteria.
Positive pathergy test: Highly specific to Behçet’s disease but may be
positive in only 50% of Behçet’s patients. It involves pricking the skin
with a needle and looking for evidence of pustule development within 48
hours.ESR and CRP raised but not autoantibodies.
Box 9.13: Diagnostic criteria for Behçet’s syndrome.
One required manifestation
Recurrent oral ulceration: Aphthous or herpetiform, at least three times
in 12 months, usually deep and multiple, and last for 10–30 days. This
is the cardinal clinical feature.
plus
At least two of the following:Recurrent genital ulceration occurs in 60–80% of cases.
Characteristic eye lesions: Anterior or posterior uveitis or retinal
vasculitis or cells in vitreous on slit-lamp examination.
Characteristic skin lesions: Erythema nodosum, pseudofolliculitis,
papulopustular lesions and acneiform nodules.
Positive pathergy test
Treatment
Oral and genital ulceration: Topical steroid preparations (soluble prednisolone mouthwashes,
steroid pastes). Thalidomide (100–300 mg/day for 28 days initially) is very effective for resistant
oral and genital ulceration but is teratogenic and neurotoxic.
Colchicine can be effective for erythema nodosum and joint pain.
Steroids and immunosuppressants and ciclosporin are indicated for chronic uveitis and rare
neurological complications. Anti-TNF agents can be used to control severe uveitis and serious
neurological manifestations and gastrointestinal Behçet’s disease.
Henoch-Schönlein Purpura IgA Vasculitis
Q. Write short note on Henoch-Schönlein purpura and anaphylactoid
purpura.

Henoch-Schönlein purpura (also referred to as IgA vasculitis or
anaphylactoid purpura), is the commonest systemic small-vessel
vasculitis caused by Ig A dominant immune complex deposition following
an infectious trigger. It often occurs after upper respiratory tract infections.Usually occurs in children (> 90% of cases) and young adults.
Diagnostic Criteria
Usual presentation:  Often present with the tetrad  of:
1. Purpura (vasculitic/non-thrombocytopenic/palpable purpura):
Palpable and found over the buttocks and lower legs (Fig. 9.10).
2. Arthralgia or arthritis:  Most patients develop a transient non-migratory
polyarthralgias in the absence of frank arthritis and resolves without
permanent damage to joints.
3. Gastrointestinal involvement: Seen in about 70% of pediatric patients. It
is characterized by recurrent colicky abdominal pain associated with
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or constipation, and the passage of blood and
mucus per rectum. In some cases, there may be intussusceptions.4. Renal involvement: Seen in 10–50% of patients. It usually produces mild
glomerulonephritis causing proteinuria, microscopic hematuria, with red
blood cell casts in the urine. It usually resolves spontaneously without
treatment.
Prognosis: HSP is self-limited most of the time. The vast majority of cases
resolve within 6–8 weeks. Adult cases are sometimes more recalcitrant (not
responsive to treatment).

Fig. 9.10:  Palpable purpura over lower legs in Henoch-Schönlein purpura.
Investigations
Acute phase reactants are elevated. Serum IgA levels are elevated.
Skin biopsy: Findings are pathognomonic. It demonstrates
leucocytoclastic vasculitis in capillary venules and direct
immunofluorescence of the skin biopsy shows IgA immune complexes
deposit in the small vessels.
Treatment
Usually a self-limiting disorder that settles spontaneously without specific treatment.
Patients respond to bed rest and NSAIDs.
Corticosteroids and immunosuppressive therapy may be indicated when HSP is severe disease,
particularly in the presence of nephritis.
Cogan Syndrome (CS)
An immune-mediated condition that primarily affects young adults, is
associated with ocular inflammation (usually interstitial keratitis) and
audiovestibular dysfunction.
Buerger Disease (Thromboangiitis Obliterans)
Classic patient is a young male smoker .

Diagnosis
Recognition of the compatible clinical findings—digital ischemia without
involvement of other organs. A major hallmark of Buerger disease is its
confinement to the extremities.
Identification of the typical pattern of vascular involvement by
angiography.
Major risk factor is tobacco exposure.
Absence of fibrinoid necrosis (it is a hallmark of most systemic
vasculitides).
Clinical Features
Initially, nonspecific pains in the calf, foot, or toes.
Later, the progression of thrombosis and vasculitis can lead to horrific
pain in the digits and limbs and ultimately to gangrene and tissue loss,
through either autoamputation or elective amputation.
The only effective intervention in Buerger disease is complete smoking
cessation .
Takayasu Arteritis
Q. Write short essay/note on Takayasu arteritis.
Takayasu arteritis, named for the Japanese ophthalmologist who first
described the ocular manifestations in 1908.
It is a large-vessel vasculitis of unknown  cause that chiefly affects
women during their reproductive years.
Sites: Most common sites are the aorta (65%) and the left subclavian
arteries (93%).
Presentation:
–   Vascular manifestations include: Bruit, claudication, hypertension,
light-headedness (associated with vertebral or carotid artery disease),
unequal blood pressures in the extremities, carotidynia, aortic
regurgitation, and loss of a pulse. Absence pulses in upper limbs
(called as reverse coarctation).
–   Bruits: Most frequent over the carotid arteries, but also often develop
in the supraclavicular or infraclavicular space (reflecting subclavian
disease), along the flexor surface of the upper arm (from axillary artery

disease), or in the abdomen (from renal or mesenteric artery vasculitis).
Many patients have multiple bruits.
–   A widened pulse pressure  and diastolic murmur along the right
sternal border may signal the aortic regurgitation that develops in 20%
of patients. Stroke, angina, and congestive heart failure affect a
significant minority of patients.
–   Cardiac complications: Hypertension, congestive heart failure,
angina, and aortic regurgitation.
–   About 50% of patients develop constitutional or musculoskeletal
symptoms. Asthenia, weight loss, fever, myalgia, and arthralgia occur
commonly.
Criteria for the diagnosis of Takayasu arteritis (Box 9.14).
Box 9.14: American College of Rheumatology classification Criteria for
Takayasu Arteritis.
1. Onset at age < 40 years
2. Limb claudication
3. Decreased brachial artery pulse
4. Unequal arm blood pressures (> 10 mm Hg)
5. Subclavian or aortic bruit
6. Angiographic evidence of narrowing or occlusion of the aorta or its primary branches, or large limb
arteritis
*The presence of three or more of the six criteria is sensitive (91%) and specific (98%) for the
diagnosis of Takayasu arteritis.Investigations
Elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rates or C-reactive protein values
during phases of active disease.
Anemia and thrombocytosis
Vascular abnormalities can be imaged by conventional angiography, MRI,
MRA, CT angiography, or ultrasonography. Conventional angiography is
the ‘gold standard’ for precisely delineating the stenosis, occlusions, and
aneurysms.
Treatment:  Glucocorticoids.
Differences between giant cell arteritis and Takayasu’s arteritis (Table 9.21).

Q. Write short note on differences between giant cell arteritis and
Takayasu’s arteritis.
Table 9.21: Comparison of giant cell arteritis and Takayasu’s arteritis.
Feature Giant cell arteritis Takayasu’s arteritis
Female-male ratio 2:1 8:1
Age range (years) 50 < 40
Average age of onset (years) 72 25
Visual loss 10–30% Rare
Involvement of aorta or its major branches 25% 100%
Pathology Granulomatous arteritis Granulomatous arteritis
Pulmonary artery involvement No Possible
Renal hypertension Rare Common
Claudication Uncommon Common
Ethnic groups with highest incidence Scandinavians Asians
Corticosteroid responsive Yes Yes
Bruits present Minority Majority
Surgical intervention Rarely needed Commonly needed
OSTEOARTHRITIS
Q. Write short essay/note on pathogenesis and clinical features and
management of osteoarthritis/degenerative joint diseases.
Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most common form of arthritis. OA refers to a
clinical syndrome of joint pain  accompanied by varying degrees o f
functional limitation and reduced quality of life.
OA is a noninflammatory, slowly progressive joint disease, mainly
involving the cartilage. It shows progressive destruction of articular
cartilage of weight-bearing joints of genetically susceptible older persons.
It leads to narrowing of joint, subchondral bone thickening, and finally
nonfunctioning, painful joint.
Joints Affected
Weight bearing joints (knee, hips and cervical and lumbar segments of
the spine).
Non-weight bearing distal interphalangeal (DIP) joints, thumb bases (first

CMC joints and trapezioscaphoid joints), first MTP joints, lower cervical
and lumbar facet joints, knees, and hips.
Etiology
Osteoarthritis (OA) is a multifactorial disease having both genetic and
environmental components (Table 9.22).
Table 9.22: Risk factors for incidence and progression of osteoarthritis.
Risk factors
Age Normal ageing process causes increased progression
Trauma Collateral ligament, meniscal tears and joint fractures
Occupation Heavy physical work (e.g. dockers, miners and farmers)
Exercise High impact sports
Gender Men under the age of 50 and women over 50
Genetics Genetic susceptibility to the disease. Genes involved in
prostaglandin  metabolism and Wnt  (Wingless-related integration
site)-signaling pathway
Obesity Strongest modifiable risk factor
Diet Lower vitamin C and D blood levels
Bone density Increasing bone density
Types of Osteoarthritis (Box 9.15)
Box 9.15: Types of osteoarthritis.
Idiopathic or primary osteoarthritis:  It develops as aging process and may affect few
(oligoarticular) or many joints.
Localized: Most commonly affects the hands, feet, knee, hip, and spine.
Generalized: Involves three or more joint sites
Secondary osteoarthritis: It appears in younger individuals with predisposing condition.
Previous injuries/trauma to a joint
Congenital or developmental deformity of a joint(s)
Secondary to systemic disease [e.g. diabetes, marked obesity, acromegaly, hypothyroidism,
neuropathic (Charcot) arthropathy]
Calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate deposition disease (CPPD)
Bone and joint disorders including rheumatoid arthritis, gouty arthritis, septic arthritis, and Paget
disease of bone and osteonecrosis
Identifiable Causes of Osteoarthritis (Table 9.23)

Table 9.23: Identifiable causes of osteoarthritis.
Congenital disorder (hip)
Legg-Calvé-Perthes disease
Acetabular dysplasia
Slipped capital femoral epiphysisMetabolic disorders
Hemochromatosis
Wilson disease
Ochronosis (alkaptonuria)
Inborn error of connective tissue
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
Marfan syndromeHistory of a septic joint
Post-traumatic (knee)
Anterior cruciate ligament tear
Meniscus tear with or without prior
meniscectomy surgeryPostinflammatory
Underlying rheumatoid arthritis
Clinical Manifestations
Age of onset: Usually after age 40.
Joints affected in osteoarthritis (Table 9.24 and Fig. 9.11)
Table 9.24: Joints affected in osteoarthritis.
Commonly affected joints Uncommonly affected joints
Cervical and lumbar spine Hip Shoulder
First carpometacarpal joint Knee Wrist
Proximal interphalangeal
jointSubtalar joint Elbow
Distal interphalangeal joint First metatarsophalangeal
jointMetacarpophalangeal joint

Fig. 9.11:  Pattern of joint involvement in osteoarthritis.
Fig. 9.12:  Osteoarthritis showing Heberden’s nodes (on DIP) and Bouchard’s nodes (on PIP).

Fig. 9.13:  Radiological features of osteoarthritis.
Signs, symptoms and diagnostic features of osteoarthritis (Box
9.16)
Box 9.16: Signs, symptoms and diagnostic features of osteoarthritis.
Symptoms
Joint pain that increases with activity
Stiffness: Morning stiffness relatively brief (for < 30 minutes) and self-limited
Gelling
Physical findings
Crepitus (a grating sensation) on active motion
Bony enlargement at the joint margin, hard bony enlargements, called Heberden’s nodes (on DIP)
and/or Bouchard’s nodes (on PIP) (Fig. 9.12)
Decreased range of motion
Malalignment
Tenderness to palpation over the joint
Absence of warmth
Synovial fluid analysis
Clear fluid
Noninflammatory synovial fluid (<1000 WBC/mm3)
Normal viscosity
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate normal for age

Negative serologic tests for antinuclear antibody and rheumatoid factor
Radiographic features
Nonuniform joint space narrowing (Fig. 9.13)
Subchondral eburnation (bony sclerosis)
Marginal osteophytes (spur) formation
Subchondral cysts
Diagrammatic representation of joint changes in osteoarthritis is shown in
Figure 9.14.
Fig. 9.14: Diagrammatic representation of joint changes in osteoarthritis.
Prevention
Preventing the onset of OA requires lifestyle changes.
Primary prevention: These include:
–   Weight control: Maintaining or reducing weight.
–   Occupational injury prevention: Avoiding repetitive joint use and its
injuries.
–   Sports injury prevention: Precautions to prevent injury such as
warming up and using proper equipment.
Secondary prevention .
–   Early diagnosis so that appropriate early intervention can be

utilized. However, this is difficult in OA since no effective
biomarkers are available to determine the progression of the
disease.
Tertiary prevention . Reduce, delay the onset of complications and
disability. The strategies include: self-management (weight control,
physical activity, education); home help programs; cognitive behavioral
interventions; rehabilitation services and medical surgical treatments.
Therapeutic Options in Osteoarthritis (Table 9.25)
Table 9.25: Therapeutic options in osteoarthritis.
Non-pharmacological treatment
Education (patient and spouse or family)
Social support
Physiotherapy (physical therapy)
Occupational therapy
Weight loss
Exercise
Orthotic devises
Laser
Pulsed EMF (Electromagnetic field therapy)
Ultrasound
Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation
(TENS)
Acupuncture
Nutrients
Herbal remedies
Vitamins/mineralsHormones
Psychotropic drugs
SYSADOA (Symptomatic Slow Acting Drugs
for OA (avocado/soybean unsaponifiables
(ASU), chondroitin, diacerein and glucosamine)
Topical NSAIDs
Topical capsaicin
Intra-articular treatment
Corticosteroids
Hyaluronans
Tidal irrigation
Surgical
Arthroscopy
Osteomy
UKR (unicompartmental knee replacement)
TKR (total knee replacement)
Pharmacological treatment
Paracetamol/acetaminophen
NSAIDs (Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs)
[plus misoprostol or a proton pump inhibitor]
COX-2 inhibitors (cyclo-oxygenase-2 selective
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs)
Opioid analgesicsDrugs in the pipeline
Inhibition of breakdown of cartilage by
collagenolytic enzymes or matrix
metalloproteinases (MMPs) —Doxycycline
Therapy that stimulates repair activity by
chondrocytes
Bisphosphonates
Growth factors
Cathepsin K inhibition Q. Write short essay/note on management of osteoarthritis.
SYSTEMIC SCLEROSIS (SCLERODERMA)

Q. Write a note/essay on scleroderma systemic sclerosis.
Q. Discuss the clinical manifestations, diagnosis and management of
systemic sclerosis.
Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a chronic multisystem disease of connective
tissue affecting the skin, musculoskeletal system, internal organs (e.g.
gastrointestinal tract, lungs, heart and kidneys) and vasculature. Scleroderma
literally means ‘hard skin’ and the hallmark of SSc is thickening and
hardening of the skin (scleroderma) due to skin fibrosis.
Classification
Systemic sclerosis is classified and subdivided into two principal subsets
defined largely by the anatomic skin distribution and associated with distinct
clinical and laboratory manifestations.Diffuse cutaneous systemic sclerosis (DCSS: 30% of cases): It is
associated with progressive skin thickening, starting in the fingers and
ascending from distal to proximal extremities, the face, and the trunk.
These patients have a risk of early pulmonary fibrosis and involvement of
kidney and other systems.Q. Write short note on CREST syndrome and its clinical features.
Limited cutaneous systemic sclerosis (LCSS: 70% of cases). Usually
these patients have long-standing Raynaud’s phenomenon before other
manifestations. Skin involvement progresses slowly and remains limited
to the fingers (sclerodactyly), distal extremities, and face, without
involvement of trunk. Few of these patients have prominent Calcinosis
cutis, Raynaud’s phenomenon, Esophageal dysmotility, Sclerodactyly
(scleroderma of the fingers), and Telangiectasia, which is termed CREST
syndrome. CREST syndrome generally show slow progression.
Age and gender: Peak incidence is between 30 and 50 years of age with
female to male ratio of 3:1.
Etiology: The cause is poorly understood. There is associations with alleles
at the HLA locus have been found. There is immunological dysfunction of T
lymphocytes, especially Th1 and Th17 subtype.
Clinical FeaturesQ. Write short note on symptoms and signs of systemic sclerosis.

Skin Manifestations
Limited disease or CREST syndrome: Skin involvement restricted to
sites distal to the elbow or knee (apart from the face).
Diffuse disease: Skin involvement proximal to the knee and elbow and on
the trunk.
Changes in skin (Figs. 9.15A to C)
Figs. 9.15A to C:  Systemic sclerosis. (A and B) show shiny, thickened skin of hands and feet; (C)
Shows mask like face with decreased oral aperture.
Symmetrical and bilateral skin thickening is the hallmark of SSc
Early stage: Shows non-pitting edema of fingers and flexor tendon
sheaths.
Later stages: Skin becomes shiny, firm, thickened, and distal skin creases
disappear. After many years, the skin may become thin, atrophic and
tightly bound to underlying subcutaneous tissue.Hyperpigmentation: Skin generally becomes hyperpigmented. In dark-
skinned individuals, vitiligo-like areas of hypopigmentation may occur.

Because pigment loss spares the perifollicular areas, the skin may develop
a ‘salt-and-pepper’ appearance most prominently on the upper back and
chest.
Changes in facial skin: Produces a beak-like nose, ‘mask-like’ face, and
decreased oral aperture (microstomia).
Other manifestations: These include flexion contractures, ulcers over
fingertips and bony prominences (due to breakdown of atrophic skin),
telangiectasia, calcinosis cutis and dry coarse skin.
Musculoskeletal Manifestations
Range from mild arthralgias to frank nonerosive arthritis with synovitis
resembling rheumatoid arthritis.
Generalized arthralgia, morning stiffness and flexor tenosynovitis are
common.
Muscle weakness and wasting due to disuse atrophy, myopathy and
myositis.
Restricted hand/limb function associated with contractures of the joints is
due to sclerosis of skin rather than joint disease.
Bone resorption is most common in the terminal phalanges, where it
causes loss of the distal tufts (acro-osteolysis) (pseudoclubbing).
Vascular Manifestations
Involvement of the vasculature is universal feature of SSc.
Raynaud’s phenomenon is an episodic reversible vasoconstriction of
the vessels of the digits (fingers and toes) that can result in ischemia of
the digits. It occurs in all patients with SSc and can precede other features
by many years. This is the first manifestation of the disease in almost
every patient.
–   Triggering factors: Factors which trigger attack include exposure to
cold, a decrease in temperature, emotional stress, and vibration.
Typical attacks start with pallor (vasoconstriction), followed by
cyanosis (ischemia) of variable duration and erythema (reperfusion)
develops spontaneously or with rewarming of the digit.A diffuse vasculopathy of peripheral arteries (in the extremities) may
cause narrowing or occlusion of the vessel lumen leading to tissue
ischemia. This may produce skin ulceration over pressure areas, localized

areas of infarction and pulp atrophy at the fingertips.
Vascular disease is fundamental to organ damage and subsequent
malfunction of the heart (cardiomyopathy), lung (pulmonary
hypertension), kidney [scleroderma renal crisis (SRC)], and other organs
in SSc.
Gastrointestinal Manifestations
Gastrointestinal disease in scleroderma usually involves both the upper and
lower gastrointestinal tract but clinical expression is highly variable.Esophageal involvement: It can manifest as reflux with erosive
esophagitis, dysphagia and odynophagia, strictures, and dilatation and
atony of lower esophagus.Stomach involvement: It results in dilatation, atony and delayed gastric
emptying. Recurrent occult upper gastrointestinal. bleeding may occur due
to antral vascular ectasia (‘watermelon’ stomach ) (Fig. 9.16).Small and large bowel involvement: It results in intermittent abdominal
distension, abdominal pain, constipation, intestinal obstruction,
malabsorption (due to bacterial overgrowth) and steatorrhea. Pseudo-
obstruction  is a known complication.
Pulmonary ManifestationsIt is a major cause of morbidity and mortality. Main forms of lung disease:
(1) inflammatory alveolitis leading to interstitial fibrosis and (2)
pulmonary arterial hypertension.Pulmonary hypertension presents with rapidly progressive dyspnea, right
heart failure and angina.
Other Manifestations
Renal involvement: Occurs in only a minority of patients and can be
acute or chronic. Acute hypertensive renal crisis (scleroderma renal crisis-
SRC) characterized by sudden onset of malignant hypertension and renal
failure was used to be the most common cause of death. At present, this is
not the case because ACE inhibitors with dialysis and renal transplantation
has improved the outlook.Cardiac involvement: Myocardial fibrosis may cause arrhythmias,
conduction defects and cardiomyopathy. Occasionally, pericarditis with or

without effusion may develop.
SSc sine scleroderma: Sometimes systemic features occur without skin
involvement.
Localized scleroderma: Localized form without systemic involvement
(morphea).
Fig. 9.16: Gastric antral vascular ectasia (watermelon stomach) in scleroderma.
Diagnosis (Box 9.17)
Box 9.17: Criteria for diagnosis of scleroderma.
Thickened (sclerodermatous) skin changes proximal to the
metacarpophalangeal joints
OR
At least two of the following:
–   Sclerodactyly
–   Digital pitting (residual loss of tissue on the finger pads due to
ischemia)
–   Bibasilar pulmonary fibrosis
Investigations

ESR: Elevated.
IgG levels: Raised.
Anemia: It may be due to: (1) chronic disease, (2) iron deficiency due to
gastrointestinal bleed, (3) folate and B12 deficiency due to blind loop
syndrome and (4) m icroangiopathic hemolytic anemia due to renal
involvement.
Urea and creatinine: Raised in acute kidney injury.
Urine microscopy and if there is proteinuria, measurement of urine
albumin/creatinine ratio.
Autoantibodies associated with scleroderma (Table 9.26)
Table 9.26: Autoantibodies associated with scleroderma.
Autoantibody Prevalence
Antinuclear antibody > 95%
Anti-Scl-70 (anti-topoisomerase I) 20–40%
Anti-centromere 20–40%
Anti-RNA polymerases 4–20%
Anti-B23 10%
Anti-Pm-Scl 2–10%
Anti-U3-RNP (anti-fibrillarin) 8%
Anti-U1-RNP 5%
Anti-Th/To 1–5%
Rheumatoid factor: Positive in 30%.
Nailfold capillary changes: Visualization of capillaries of the skin at the
nailfold by diascopy gives insight into a patient’s microvasculature status.
Nailfold capillary dropout and dilated capillary loops are seen in nearly
every patient with scleroderma but are not specific for scleroderma.Imaging
–   Chest X-ray: For changes in cardiac size and evidence of lung disease.
–   X-ray of hands: For deposits of calcium around fingers. In severe
cases, erosion and absorption of the distal phalanges (acro-osteolysis).
–   Barium swallow: To demonstrate impaired esophageal motility.
Scintigraphy, manometry, impedance, and upper GI endoscopy are
also useful.

–   High-resolution CT: To demonstrate interstitial lung disease.
Other investigations: Echocardiography for cardiac involvement and
pulmonary hypertension.
Treatment
There is no cure and no treatment can halt or reverse the fibrotic changes produced in systemic
sclerosis. Treatment should be organ-based to ameliorate the effects of the disease on target organs.
General measures:
–   Education, counseling and family support.
–   Regular exercises and skin lubricants.
–   Monitoring of blood counts, renal functions and analysis of urine on regular basis.
Control of Raynaud’s syndrome and digital ulcers
–   Raynaud’s phenomenon: Avoid triggering factors. Use hand warmers, and oral vasodilators
(calcium-channel blockers, ACE inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers). Parenteral
vasodilators (prostacyclin analogues and calcitonin gene-related peptide) may be beneficial in
severe digital ischemia.
–   Digital ulcers: Endothelin 1 antagonist bosentan promotes healing of digital ulcers. If ulcers
become infected, antibiotics may be required.
–   Surgical management:  Lumbar sympathectomy , radical micro-arteriolysis (digital
sympathectomy), and thoracic sympathectomy may be beneficial.
Hypertension:  Treated aggressively with ACE inhibitors, even if renal impairment is present.
Esophageal reflux:  Treated with proton pump inhibitors and anti-reflux agents, but prokinetic
drugs are rarely useful.
Intestinal involvement:  Symptomatic malabsorption requires nutritional supplements. Antibiotics
may be necessary for small intestinal bacterial overgrowth syndromes, and metoclopramide or
domperidone may be useful for symptoms of pseudo-obstruction.
Joint involvement:  Treated with analgesics and/or NSAID. If synovitis is present,
immunosuppressants such as methotrexate can be used.
Pulmonary hypertension:  Treated with oral vasodilators, oxygen and warfarin. Advanced cases
require prostacyclin therapy (inhaled, subcutaneous or intravenous) or the oral endothelin-receptor
antagonists (bosentan and sitaxsentan). Low-dose oral corticosteroids and cytotoxic drugs (e.g.
cyclophosphamide or azathioprine) are indicated when myositis or pulmonary fibrosis is co-exist.D-Penicillamine: May reduce skin thickening and also systemic involvement.
Prognosis
Prognosis is highly dependent on the extent of major organ disease.
Can be predicted to some extent by the degree of skin involvement:
Limited scleroderma has a normal life expectancy, about 90% 5-year
survival rate.
Diffuse skin disease have only about a 70–80% 5-year survival rate.

SJÖGREN’S SYNDROME
Q. Discuss the classification, clinical manifestations, diagnosis and
management of Sjögren’s syndrome (SS).
It mainly affects the exocrine (salivary and lachrymal) glands and is
characterized by the immune-mediated destruction of exocrine glands with
secondary development of keratoconjunctivitis sicca (dry eyes) and
xerostomia (dryness of the mouth).
Classification
Primary: SjÖgren’s syndrome’ (sicca syndrome): It occurs in the absence
of any underlying connective tissue disorder.
Secondary: It occurs in association with other autoimmune disorders.
These include rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus,
systemic sclerosis (scleroderma), mixed connective tissue disease, primary
biliary cirrhosis, vasculitis and chronic active hepatitis.
Age and gender: Usual age of onset is 40 to 50 years, with female to male
ratio of 9:1.
Mechanisms of tissue destruction: Lymphocytic infiltration and immune-
complex deposition.
Clinical Features (Table 9.27)
Q. Write short note on keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
Laboratory Investigations
Schirmer tear test: This is the most commonly used test for the diagnosis
of SS. It measures wetting of standardized tear test strips by tear flow over
5 minutes. A standard tear test (absorbent) paper strips is placed between
the eyeball and inside of the lower eyelid. Normal result is more than 10
mm of wetting in 5 minutes and if wetting is <10 mm in 5 minutes it
indicates defective tear production.Rose Bengal staining. Staining of the eyes with rose Bengal may show
punctate or filamentary keratitis over the area not covered by the open
eyelid.Biopsy: If the diagnosis remains in doubt, it can be confirmed by biopsies
of the salivary gland or of the lip (labial minor salivary gland). They show

a focal infiltration by lymphocytes and plasma cells. Minor salivary gland
biopsy remains a highly specific test for the diagnosis of SS.
Table 9.27: Major clinical manifestations of Sjögren syndrome.
Organ Manifestations
Mouth Oral dryness (xerostomia), soreness, caries, periodontal disease,
oral candidiasis, parotid swelling
Eyes (keratoconjunctivitis
sicca)Ocular dryness (xerophthalmia), corneal ulcers, conjunctivitis and
blepharitis (lack of lubricating tears)
Nose and throat Nasal dryness, chronic cough
Extraglandular manifestations
Skin Cutaneous dryness, palpable purpura, urticarial lesions, Raynaud
phenomenon
Joints Arthralgias, non-erosive symmetric arthritis
Lungs Obstructive chronic lung disease, interstitial pneumopathy
Cardiovascular Raynaud phenomenon, pericarditis, autonomic disturbances
Liver Associated hepatitis C virus infection, primary biliary cirrhosis,
type 1 autoimmune hepatitis
Kidneys Renal tubular acidosis type I (distal), glomerulonephritis
Peripheral nerve Mixed polyneuropathy, pure sensitive neuropathy, mononeuritis
multiplex
Central nervous system White matter lesions, cranial nerve involvement (V, VIII, and VII),
myelopathy
Ears Sensorineural hearing loss
Thyroid Autoimmune (Hashimoto’s) thyroiditis
General symptoms Low-grade fever, generalized pain, myalgias, fatigue, weakness,
fibromyalgia, polyadenopathies, depression, anxiety, increased risk
of non-Hodgkin’s lymphomaTests for salivary gland involvement: Other diagnostic tests include
sialometry (to measure salivary flow), sialography, and scintigraphy.
Newer imaging techniques such as ultrasound, MRI or MR sialography of
the major salivary glands are also useful.Common laboratory abnormalities
–   Most patients have an elevated ESR, raised immunoglobulin levels
(hypergammaglobulinemia), and circulating immune complexes.
–   Autoantibodies
♦   Rheumatoid factor: Usually positive (75–90%).

♦   Antinuclear antibodies: Positive in 80% of cases.
♦   Anti-mitochondrial antibodies: Positive in 10%.
♦   Anti-Ro (SSA) antibodies: Positive in 60–90% (in 10% of cases of
RA and secondary Sjögren’s syndrome). This antibody can cross the
placenta and cause congenital heart block.
♦   Anti-La (SSB) antibodies: Present in 40%.
–   Others: Leucopenia, thrombocytosis.
TreatmentManagement is symptomatic.
Ocular symptoms:  Symptomatic treatment is with artificial tears. Lachrymal substitutes (e.g.
hypromellose) during the day and more viscous ophthalmologic lubricating ointment at night.
Cyclosporine emulsion may be useful in ocular dryness.
Oral symptoms:  Best replacement for xerostomia is water, lubricating agents and saliva-
replacement solutions. Stimulation of saliva flow by sugar-free chewing gum or lozenges may be
of help. Vaginal dryness is treated with lubricants such as K-Y jelly.
Muscarinic agonists (pilocarpine and cevimeline) have been recently used for the treatment of
sicca symptoms in SS. They stimulate the M1 and M3 receptors present on salivary glands and
tear glands leading to increased secretory function.Hydroxychloroquine is helpful for fatigue and arthralgia.
Glucocorticoids and immunosuppresive agents are reserved for potentially severe disease.
Corticosteroids are used to treat persistent salivary gland swelling or neuropathy.
Biological agents, including infliximab, interferon-α and anti-CD20 antibodies (rituximab) are
tried.
Overlap Syndromes and Mixed Connective Tissue Disease
(MCTD)
Q. Write short note on definition of mixed connective tissue disease/overlap syndromes.
Overlap syndromes  are diseases in which clinical or laboratory signs and symptoms of another
defined connective tissue disease occur, such as systemic lupus erythematosus, scleroderma,
rheumatoid arthritis, SjÖgren’s syndrome, Churg–Strauss arteritis, thrombotic thrombocytopenic
purpura, antiphospholipid antibody syndrome and autoimmune thyroid disease.
Mixed connective-tissue disease (MCTD) is a disorder with overlapping clinical features of systemic
lupus erythematosus, scleroderma, and myositis, with the presence of a distinctive antibody against
U1-ribonucleoprotein (RNP) .
CRYSTAL ARTHROPATHIES
Gout

Q. Discuss the etiology, clinical manifestations, diagnosis and
management of gout.
Q. Write short essay on the various causes, clinical manifestations,
investigations and management of hyperuricemia.
Gout is a heterogeneous group of inflammatory diseases characterized by
hyperuricemia (plasma urate level above 6.8 mg/dL) and monosodium
urate crystal deposition in  and around synovial joints and kidneys.
Etiology of Gout and Hyperuricemia (Box 9.18)
Box 9.18: Classification of hyperuricemia.
Urate overproduction
Primary hyperuricemia
–   Idiopathic
–   Complete or partial deficiency of HGPRT
–   Superactivity of PRPP synthetase
Secondary hyperuricemia
–   Excessive purine consumption
–   Myeloproliferative or lymphoproliferative disorders
–   Hemolytic diseases
–   Psoriasis
–   Glycogen storage diseases: types 1, 3, 5, and 7
Uric acid under excretionPrimary hyperuricemia
–   Idiopathic
Secondary hyperuricemia
–   Decreased renal function
–   Metabolic acidosis (ketoacidosis or lactic acidosis)
–   Dehydration
–   Diuretics
–   Hypertension
–   Hyperparathyroidism
–   Drugs including cyclosporine, pyrazinamide, ethambutol and low-dose salicylates
–   Lead nephropathy
Overproduction and under excretionAlcohol use
Glucose-6-phosphatase deficiency
Fructose-1-phosphate-aldolase deficiency
(HGPRT: hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyltransferase; PRPP: 5’-phosphoribosyl-1-

pyrophosphate)
Q. Write short note on causes of hyperuricemia.
Uric acid is the end product of purine metabolism, which is eliminated only
in the urine. Humans do not have uricase, an enzyme which degrades uric
acid. Usually, there is a balance between uric acid production and tissue
deposition of urates.
Clinical Features
The natural history of gout has four stages:1. Asymptomatic hyperuricemia: It is a state in which serum urate exceeds
the level of solubility but symptoms of crystalline deposition have not
occurred. Appears at puberty in males and after menopause in females.
2. Acute gouty arthritis:
Acute gouty arthritis usually follows decades of asymptomatic
hyperuricemia. Usually the first attack occurs in a middle-aged male.
Presentation: It appears as sudden excruciating (agonizing) joint
pain, swelling, intense redness and tenderness of the first
metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint (termed podagra) (Fig. 9.17).
Other joints that can be involved are tarsal joints, ankles, knees and
wrists. Gout can also cause bursitis and tenosynovitis.

Fig. 9.17: Acute gouty arthritis involving the first metatarsophalangeal (MTP) joint (termed
podagra).
Systemic symptoms: The acute attack may be accompanied by fever,
chills, and malaise, leukocytosis and raised ESR.
Factors which precipitate acute attack are those that cause
fluctuations (rapidly raising or lowering) in serum urate levels. These
include overindulgence in certain high-purine foods, alcohol ingestion,
starvation, dehydration certain drugs (e.g. diuretic, salicylates, urate-
lowering drugs allopurinol and radiographic contrast agents), trauma
and surgery.Termination of attack: Even if not treated, acute attacks of gout are
usually self-limited, subside spontaneously and first several acute
attacks last for 5 to 8 days. Recovery is usually associated with
desquamation of the overlying skin. There is no damage to any organ
system during the acute attack. 3. Intercritical gout: With resolution of the attack, patients enter an interval
termed the ‘intercritical period’. It is the asymptomatic period between the
first acute attack and subsequent attacks. During this period, the previously
affected joints are free of symptoms. Despite this, monosodium urate
crystal deposition continues.

Q. Write short essay/note on chronic tophaceous gout.
4.   Chronic tophaceous gout (tophi and chronic gouty arthritis)
Eventually the untreated patient progresses to chronic polyarticular
gout (advanced gout). This stage usually develops after several years
(10 or more years) of acute gouty arthritis, which may lead to severe
crippling disease.The intensity of pain in chronic is not severe compared to that of acute
attacks.
Most characteristic lesion  of advanced gout is subcutaneous tophus.
It results from deposition of crystals in cartilage, synovial membranes,
tendons and soft tissues. It can occur anywhere in the body but are most
common in the fingers, wrists, ears (helix and antihelix), knees, and
olecranon bursa.Nephropathy
Occurs in 90% of patients with gouty arthritis. Two types of parenchymal
renal damage can occur.
Urate nephropathy: It is characterized by deposition of urate crystals in
the interstitial tissue. It may lead to albuminuria, isosthenuria or renal
failure.Obstructive uropathy (nephrolithiasis): Chronic hyperuricemia may be
complicated by formation of uric acid renal stone with blockage of urine
flow. The factors favoring stone formation are hyperuricosuria,
overproduction of purine, increased ingestion of purine, uricosuric drugs
and acidic urine.
Other features: Hypertension is a risk factor for development of gout and
gout may be associated with increased incidence of hypertension and
cardiovascular disorders.Investigations
Joint fluid microscopy: Most specific and diagnostic test but is
technically difficult. Synovial fluid examined by compensated polarized
microscopy shows urate crystals. These crystals are bright yellow in
color and appear as slender, needle shaped, negatively birefringent
structures.
–   Acute gout: Synovial fluid is turbid due to the greatly elevated cell

count (> 90% neutrophils).
–   Chronic gout: More variable but occasionally it appears white due to
the high crystal load. Crystals may be seen between attacks.
Serum uric acid: Raised hyperuricemia (>7.0 mg/dL in males and > 6.0
mg/dL in females) does not confirm the diagnosis. However, levels may
be normal (in 50% cases) during an acute attack.
Serum urea, creatinine: Monitoring is needed to detect any signs of renal
impairment.
Raised ESR and CRP and neutrophilia are observed during acute gout, and
they return to normal as the attack subsides.
Plain radiographs: Usually normal in acute gout. In chronic or
tophaceous gout, well-demarcated rounded or oval punched out erosions
with hypertrophic calcified ‘overhanging edge’ (Martel sign) are
characteristically observed. RA causes marginal erosions within the limits
of the joint capsule.Q. Write short note on management of acute attack of gout.
Management
Treatment of acute attack
NSAIDs:  They rapidly relieve pain and swelling during the acute attack and are the agents of
choice. Commonly used drugs include indomethacin (75 mg immediately, then 50 mg 6–8 hours),
naproxen (750 mg immediately, then 500 mg every 8–12 hours), diclofenac  (75–100 mg
immediately, then 50 mg every 6–8 hours) and fenoprofen. NSAIDs may cause renal impairment.
Local ice packs can produce symptomatic relief.
Oral colchicine:  It is the second drug of choice a which acts by inhibiting microtubule assembly
in neutrophils. It is very effective at a dose of 1.2 mg immediately, then 0.6 mg every 6–12 hours.
Side effects include diarrhea or colicky abdominal pain.
Corticosteroids:  If patient cannot tolerate NSAIDs or colchicine, oral prednisolone (20–30
mg/day) or intramuscular or intra-articular depot methylprednisolone may be tried.
ACTH gel:  A single injection of intramuscular ACTH gel (25 to 80 IU) is useful for terminating
an acute attack of gout.
Interleukin 1 inhibitors:  Anakinra, canakinumab have been tried.
Prophylaxis
Dietary advice
Avoid alcohol intake, especially beer, which is high in purines and fructose. Carbonated soft
drinks are also rich in fructose.
Avoid meat and shellfish.
Controlled weight reduction if patient is obese.
Avoid use of thiazides or loop diuretics.

Drugs for Prophylaxis
Urate-lowering therapy
It is indicated (Box 9.19) in patients who develop more than one acute attack within one year and
those with complications. Xanthine oxidase inhibitors are used in urate overproducers while
Uricosuric agents are used in urate underexcretors.
Box 9.19:  Indications for urate-lowering drugs.
Hyperuricemia associated with increased uric acid productionUrinary uric acid excretion of 1000 mg or more in 24 hours
Very high levels of serum uric acid
Hyperuricemia associated with HGPRT deficiency or PRPP synthetase over activity
Uric acid nephropathy
Nephrolithiasis
Prophylaxis before cytolytic therapy
Evidence of bone or joint damage
(HGPRT: hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyl-transferase; PRPP: 5’-phosphoribosyl-1-
pyrophosphate) Prophylaxis
Allopurinol  is the drug of first choice. It is an xanthine oxidase inhibitor that blocks the
conversion of xanthine into uric acid. Thus it reduces uric acid production and serum uric acid
levels rapidly.
–   Indication:  Should be used when the attacks are frequent and severe (despite dietary changes),
associated with renal impairment or tophi, or when NSAIDs or colchicine are difficult to
tolerate.
–   Dosage: 300–900 mg daily.
–   Common side effects:  These include gastrointestinal intolerance and skin rashes. Allopurinol
hypersensitivity syndrome is the most severe reaction characterized by fever, skin rash,
eosinophilia, hepatitis, progressive renal insufficiency, and death.Febuxostat is a non-purine selective inhibitor of xanthine oxidase, is a new urate lowering drug
that is possibly well tolerated, safer in renal impairment and superior to allopurinol. Dose is 40–
120 mg/day.Uricosuric agents like probenecid, benzbromarone, lesinurad, and sulfinpyrazone are
indicated in selected cases (when uric acid excretion in the urine is below 600 mg/day). Uricosuric
drugs are risky if urinary urate excretion is already > 800 mg/24 hours. These are contraindicated
in those with urate calculi. Uricosurics are ineffective in renal impairment (creatinine clearance <
50 mL/minute).Uricase, analogs as pegloticase and rasburicase  are used to promote depletion of body urate
pools.
Calcium Pyrophosphate Dihydrate Deposition Disease
Q. Write short essay/note on pseudo-gout; calcium pyrophosphate
dihydrate deposition disease; pyrophosphate arthropathy.
Calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate (CPPD) deposition disease is a condition

associated with deposition of calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate (CPPD)
crystals within articular and hyaline cartilage.
Common Causes (Box 9.20)
Box 9.20: Common causes of calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate crystal
deposition disease.
Idiopathic (most frequent): Occurs in association with aging
Complication of primary osteoarthritis
Long-term consequence of mechanical joint trauma or knee meniscectomy
Familial
Associated with systemic metabolic disease, e.g. hyperparathyroidism, dialysis-dependent renal
failure, hemochromatosis, hypomagnesemia
Clinical Features
May be asymptomatic or may result in a variety of clinical presentations.
A common presentation  is acute inflammatory arthritis that resembles
acute gout. Hence, also known as ‘pseudogout’. However, in contrast to
gout it is more common in elderly women and usually affects the knee
followed by the wrist, shoulder, ankle and elbow. Examination of joint
reveals a warm, tender erythematous joint with signs of a large effusion.
Fever is common.Trigger factors: These include trauma, intercurrent illness and surgery.
Chronic arthropathy: It may also occur in association with CPPD crystal
deposition disease.
Investigations
Examination of synovial fluid: CPPD crystals can be demonstrated using
compensated polarized microscopy and helps in differentiation from gout.
CPPD crystals are generally rhomboid-shaped and positively
birefringent. They appear blue when parallel to the long axis of the
compensator and yellow when perpendicular. The synovial fluid is turbid
and may be uniformly blood-stained.X-rays of the affected joint: It may show calcification in hyaline
cartilage and/or fibrocartilage (chondrocalcinosis).
Basic Calcium Phosphate Crystal Deposition
Basic calcium phosphate (BCP) deposition disease is due to the deposition

of hydroxyapatite or apatite crystals and other basic calcium phosphate
salts (e.g. octacalcium phosphate, tricalcium phosphate) in soft tissues.
Main sites of deposits: BCP crystal deposits are mainly seen in tendons,
ligaments and hyaline cartilage. In the shoulder, it may manifest as calcific
tendinitis of the rotator cuff.
Fluids for crystal detection: BCP crystals may be detected as
nonbirefringent globular clumps within leukocytes in synovial and
bursal fluids. Under light microscopy BCP crystal clumps stain positive
with the calcium-binding dye such as alizarin red S.
Therapeutics for Crystal Deposition Disease (Table 9.28)
MISCELLANEOUS
Relapsing Polychondritis (RP)Immune-mediated  condition associated with inflammation in
cartilaginous structures and other connective tissues  throughout the
body.
Sites: These include ears, nose, joints, respiratory tract, and others.
Table 9.28: Therapeutics for crystal deposition disease.
NSAIDs or COX-2 inhibitors Hydroxychloroquine for refractory chronic
inflammation
Intra-articular corticosteroids TLR2 antagonism for CPPD-associated
degenerative arthropathy
Systemic corticosteroids Oral calcium supplementation to suppress PTH
levels
ACTH ANKH anion channel blockade (probenecid)
Prophylactic low-dose colchicine NPP1 inhibition
Methotrexate for refractory chronic
inflammation and recurrent pseudogoutTG2 inhibition
Oral magnesium (for patients with
hypomagnesemia)Polyphosphates
Novel therapy Promotion of crystal dissolution by alkaline
phosphatase or polyaminesPhosphocitrate
Caspase-1 or IL-1 antagonism for CPPD
crystal-induced inflammation

Associated with diseases: Thirty percent occur in association with disease
such as systemic vasculitis (particularly Wegener granulomatosis),
connective tissue disorder (e.g. rheumatoid arthritis or systemic lupus
erythematosus), or a myelodysplastic syndrome.Presentation: Patients can present with respiratory obstruction, aortitis
and mitral regurgitation.
Treatment:  Steroids and in severe disease immunosuppresive agents are used.
Still’s Disease (Systemic Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis)
Q. Write short not on Still’s disease/juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA).
Inflammatory arthritis is rare in children. Systemic juvenile idiopathic
arthritis (JIA), formerly known as Still’s disease, is a systemic disorder
occurring in children. It presents with fever, rash, arthritis,
hepatosplenomegaly and serositis.Subtypes: Depending on the extent of involvement.
–   Oligoarticular JIA: More common (60%), occurs predominantly in
females, affect large joints in an asymmetrical pattern. It may be
associated with uveitis and many show ANA-positivity.
–   Rheumatoid factor-negative polyarthritis: Heterogeneous form,
polyarticular with more extensive joint involvement.
Lab tests: It shows raised ESR and CRP, negative rheumatoid factor,
neutrophilia, and thrombocytosis.
Treatment:  Corticosteroids, methotrexate, TNF blockers, IL-1 inhibitors and tocilizumab.
Prognosis: Oligoarthritis has good prognosis. Polyarticular have a poorer
prognosis.
Adult-Onset Still’s Disease (AOSD)
Q. Write short note on adult-onset Still’s disease.
A rare multisystemic inflammatory disorder of unknown cause (form of
Still’s disease) that occurs in adults.
Clinical features: Similar to juvenile idiopathic arthritis, it presents with
triad of high-spiking fever, rash and arthralgia.
–   Fever: Transient, lasting less than for 4 hours and is most commonly

quotidian or double quotidian  in pattern (rabbit ears pattern).
–   Rash: Maculopapular (Salmon-colored), mainly observed on the
proximal limbs and trunk.
–   Arthralgia: Most frequently affects knee, wrist and ankle joints.
–   Other manifestations: These include splenomegaly, hepatomegaly
and lymphadenopathy.
Investigations:
–   Marked elevation of the serum ferritin (above 3000 mg/mL) found
in more than 70% of patients.
–   Reduced level (< 20%) of glycosylated fraction of ferritin  is a more
useful marker.
–   RF and ANA: Negative.
–   Yamaguchi’s diagnostic criteria for Adult-Onset Still’s Disease
(AOSD) is presented in Table 9.29.
Table 9.29: Yamaguchi’s criteria for the diagnosis of Adult-Onset Still’s
Disease (AOSD).
Major criteria Minor criteria
Arthralgias >2 weeks Sore throat
Fever >39° intermittent, >1 week Lymphadenopathy and /or Spleenomegaly
Typical rash* Abnormal liver function tests
WBC > 10,000/cumm (>80% granulocytes) Negative rheumatoid factor and ANA
Diagnostic combination
Exclusion criteria Diagnosis
Infections 5 criteria with at least 2 major
Malignancy
Rheumatic disease
*Evanescent, salmon-pink, maculopapular eruption, predominant on the proximal limbs and trun
Treatment:  Most patients respond to corticosteroids. DMARDs may be necessary and given as
steroid-sparing agents.
Nonarticular RheumatismQ. Write short note on nonarticular rheumatism, and four forms of the
disorder.

Nonarticular rheumatism is not actually a true arthritis. It refers to aches
and pains that arise from structures outside of joints.
Forms: Four forms namely tendinitis, bursitis, FMS (fibromyalgia
syndrome), and the myofascial pain syndrome.
Common types of tendinitis and bursitis:
1. Tennis elbow: Pain over the lateral epicondyle of the elbow due to
inflammation of the tendons of the wrist extensor muscles that insert at
this location.
2. Golfer’s elbow: Pain over the medial epicondyle due to inflammation
of the wrist flexor tendons that insert at this location.
3. Shoulder impingement syndrome: It is due to impingement of the
tendons of the rotator cuff with shoulder abduction or flexion. It can be
associated with supraspinatus tendinitis, subacromial bursitis, or rotator
cuff tears.
4. Housemaid’s knee: It is prepatellar bursitis produced due to repetitive
trauma or overuse such as kneeling. Another common region for
bursitis is over the greater trochanter of the lateral hip.
Fibromyalgia SyndromeQ. Write short note on the criteria for diagnosis of fibromyalgia
syndrome (FMS).
Fibromyalgia syndrome is characterized by chronic widespread pain, and is
defined as pain for more than three months both above and below the waist.
Diagnostic criteria for FMS
–   At least 3 months of widespread pain that is bilateral, above and below
the waist.
–   It includes axial skeletal pain and pain to palpation at a minimum of 11
of 18 predefined tender points (refer below).
–   The diagnosis of other diseases does not exclude the diagnosis of FMS.
Physical examination: Normal except for tender points in precise
locations. Usually these points are tender bilaterally.
–   Tender points (Fig. 9.18): Typically located at the occiput, at the
midportion of the trapezius, the origin of the supraspinatus, low
anterior cervical region, second costochondral junction, lateral

epicondyle, outer upper quadrant of the buttocks, greater trochanter
region, and medial knee area.
Fig. 9.18: Trigger points in fibromyalgia.
Differential diagnosis: Medical illnesses that may exhibit symptoms
similar to those of FMS include: Celiac sprue, hepatitis C,
hyperparathyroidism, hypothyroidism, and polymyalgia rheumatica
(PMR).
OSTEOPOROSIS
Q. Write short essay/note on risk factors, prevention and treatment of
osteoporosis.
Osteoporosis is the most common bone disorder and is a component of the

fragility syndrome.
Definition
It is a bone disease characterized by low bone mass and micro-
architectural disruption of bone tissue that leads to increased bone fragility
and fracture risk.
WHO definition: Osteoporosis is defined as a bone mineral density
(BMD) of 2.5 standard deviations (SDs) below the young healthy adult
mean value (T-score ≤−2.5) or lower as measured by DXA (dual-energy
X-ray absorptiometry). The term ‘established osteoporosis’ includes the
presence of a fragility fracture. There is inverse relationship between bone
mineral density and fracture risk in postmenopausal women and older
men. However, this definition should not be applied to young women, men
or children.National Institute of Health (NIH) definition: Osteoporosis is defined as
a skeletal disorder characterized by compromised bone strength, which
predisposes an individual to an increased risk of fracture.Osteopenia: It is the term used when the BMD values lies between –1 and
–2.5 SDs below the young adult mean.
Epidemiology
Most common bone disorder. More common in women (4:1). More common
in Caucasian population than in other races.
Pathogenesis
In osteoporosis, there is loss of bone mass, despite normal
mineralization. In contrast, osteomalacia occurs when bone is not
being properly mineralized, despite the normal production of bone
matrix.
Osteoporosis develops due to an imbalance in bone remodeling. It can be
due to increased breakdown of bone (absorption of bone) by osteoclasts
and/or decreased bone formation by osteoblasts. The process
of mineralization of new bone matrix remains normal.
Osteoporosis affects both trabecular (long thick bones, e.g. femur)
and cortical bone (high surface area, think bones e.g. spine). When it
affects trabecular bones, reabsorption of bone is the main mechanism. 
Genetic factors play important role and multiple genes are involved,

including collagen type 1A, vitamin D receptor and estrogen receptor
genes.
Nutritional factors, sex hormone status and physical activity also play a
role. Cigarette smoking is an independent risk factor.
Classification of Osteoporosis
Generalized osteoporosis (Table 9.30): It involves the entire skeleton. It
may be
–   Primary or
–   Secondary to variety of conditions
Localized: Limited to certain bone or region (e.g. disuse osteoporosis of a
limb).
Table 9.30: Causes of generalized osteoporosis
Primary
Idiopathic
Postmenopausal
Senile
Secondary
Endocrine disorders
–   Addison disease
–   Type 1 diabetes mellitus
–   Hyperparathyroidism
–   Hyperthyroidism
–   Hypothyroidism
–   Pituitary tumors
–   Cushing’s syndrome
–   AcromegalyHypogonadal states
–   Turner’s syndrome
–   Klinefelter’s syndrome
–   Female hypogonadism
–   Premature and primary ovarian failure
–   Anorexia nervosa
–   Hypothalamic amenorrhea
–   HyperprolactinemiaNutritional and gastrointestinal disorders
–   Hepatic insufficiency, severe liver disease, especially biliary cirrhosis
–   Pernicious anemia

–   Subtotal gastrectomy
–   Malabsorption syndromes
–   Malnutrition
–   Parenteral nutrition
–   Vitamin C, D deficienciesRheumatologic disorders
–   Rheumatoid arthritis
–   Ankylosing spondylitis
Hematologic disorders/malignancy
–   Multiple myeloma
–   Lymphoma and leukemia
–   Malignancy with parathyroid hormone (PTHrP) production
–   Hemolytic anemias (e.g. thalassemia)
–   Systemic mastocytosis
–   Hemophilia
–   Disseminated carcinomaDrugs
–   Alcohol
–   Anticoagulants (e.g. heparin)
–   Anticonvulsants
–   Chemotherapy
–   Corticosteroids
–   Proton pump inhibitors
–   Ciclosporin, tacrolimusMiscellaneous
–   Homocystinuria
–   Immobilization
–   Osteogenesis imperfecta
–   Pulmonary disease
Clinical FeaturesRisk of fracture: Osteoporosis can be clinically silent and does not have
specific symptoms. However, it increases the risk of bone fractures and
fracture is the only cause of symptoms and thereby increases the
morbidity and mortality in elderly.
Fragility fracture: It is a low-trauma fracture, i.e. mechanical forces
(situations) that would not ordinarily result in fracture in healthy people.
They typically occur in trabecular bone. The most common sites are:
–   Spine (vertebrae): Sudden severe back pain (in the spine) that radiates
around to the front suggests vertebral crush fracture (compression

fracture).
–   Hip (proximal femur): Fractures of the proximal femur usually
occur in elderly persons falling on their side or back. Usually requires
prompt surgery.
–   Wrist (distal radius): Colles’ fractures follow a fall on an
outstretched arm.
–   Other sites include arm (humerus), pelvis, ribs, and other bones.
Investigations and Diagnosis
Conventional plain radiograph:  It is useful along with CT or MRI, for
detecting complications of osteopenia (reduced bone mass; pre-osteoporosis),
such as fractures. However, radiography is relatively insensitive for detection
of early disease as it requires a substantial amount of bone loss (about 30%)
to be apparent on X-ray images. The radiographic features of osteoporosis are
cortical thinning and increased radiolucency.
Bone biopsy: Tetracycline labeling of the skeleton on bone biopsy
determines the rate of skeletal growth. However, the current use of BMD
tests, in combination with hormonal evaluation and biochemical markers of
bone remodeling, has replaced the bone biopsy.
Biochemical markers: They provide an index of the overall rate of bone
remodeling. Markers for bone formation include serum bone-specific alkaline
phosphatase, serum osteocalcin, serum propeptide of type I procollagen.
Markers for bone resorption urine and serum cross-linked N-telopeptide,
urine and serum cross-linked C-telopeptide and urine total free
deoxypyridinoline.
Bone mineral density (BMD): It is a measure of the mineral content of
bone. It is mostly calcium, but also comprises potassium, manganese,
magnesium, strontium, selenium, and other minerals. The diagnosis of
osteoporosis can be made by measuring the bone mineral density (BMD).Dual energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA): It is the most commonly
used technique to measure BMD. Two low dose X-rays are directed to the
area of interest. It measures areal bone density (mineral/surface area rather
than a true volumetric density), usually spine (lumbar) and hip (proximal
femur). It uses low doses of radiation and is the ‘gold standard’ for the
diagnosis of osteoporosis. Results from DXA are expressed as either the
T-score or the Z-score.

Quantitative ultrasound: This has many advantages in assessing
osteoporosis being quick, easy and cheaper than other methods and does
not need ionizing radiation. It is used as a screening procedure prior to
DXA assessment and is not used for diagnostic purposes. The calcaneus is
the most common skeletal site for quantitative ultrasound assessment.Quantitative CT scanning: It assesses true volumetric mineral density in
mg/cm3. It gives separate estimates of BMD for trabecular and cortical
bone. It is more expensive and requires higher radiation than other
techniques.
Other investigations: These may be necessary to exclude other diseases or
identify contributory factors associated with osteoporosis. These include
thyroid function test, vitamin D levels and myeloma screen.
Treatment of Osteoporosis
The aim of treatment is to reduce the risk of fracture. Treatment plan for osteoporosis includes 1)
diagnosis of individuals at highest risk, 2) exclusion of secondary causes of osteoporosis and 3)
selecting appropriate treatment.
Prevention
Lifestyle changes:  Methods to prevent osteoporosis include: Nutrition: Sufficient daily  calcium  intake (1200–1500 mg/day) and vitamin D.
Cessation of smoking.
Reduction in alcohol intake.
Increase weight bearing exercise: They increase bone mass density and also helps
to prevent falls. At least 30 minutes weight bearing exercise 3x per week is needed to increase
bone density. Osteoporosis orthosis helps to prevent spine fractures and support the building up of
muscles.Fall prevention can help prevent osteoporosis complications.
Box 9.21:  NICE guidelines for use of biphosphates in osteoporosis.
1st line: Use a bisphosphonate
2nd line: If no improvement, try a different bisphosphonate
3rd line: If no improvement, try strontium
Pharmacological Management
Q. Write short note on drugs used in osteoporosis.
Drug treatments can reduce the risk of fracture by up to 50%.
The two main classes of drugs used namely: 1) antiresorptive agents and 2) anabolic agents.
1. Antiresorptive agents  (Box 9.21): They block bone resorption by inhibiting the activity of
osteoclasts. These include bisphosphonates, denosumab, raloxifene, and calcitonin.
Bisphosphonates: These drugs are essentially analogues of pyrophosphate and include
alendronic acid, risedronate, clodronate, pamidronate, etidronate. Usually taken weekly, and

with plenty of water. Poorly absorbed from the gut.
–   Should be taken on an empty stomach, as they can bind to calcium in food, after which, the
drug cannot be absorbed.
–   Only about 10% of the oral dose is absorbed under normal circumstances.
–   Alendronate, risedronate, ibandronate, pamidronate and zoledronic acid are effective for
both the prevention and treatment of osteoporosis.
–   Adverse drug reactions: These include: GI upset, esophagitis, bone pain, headache and
fever rarely osteonecrosis of jaw.
Hormone-replacement therapy (HRT)
–   No longer used as mainstream treatment. Used if other treatments are not tolerated or
effective.
–   It may be useful in women in post-menopausal osteoporosis. Most effective when started
early in menopause, and to be continued for > 5 years.
–   Disadvantages: (1) Bone loss continues, and is possibly increased upon stopping HRT and
(2) increases the risks of cardiovascular disease and stroke.
–   Estrogen analogs: Estrogen replacement therapy is good for prevention of osteoporosis.
However, it is not recommended unless there are other indications for its use. In
hypogonadal men testosterone has been shown to give improvement in bone quantity and
quality.
–   Raloxifene, Bazedoxifene:  It is a selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) that act
on the estrogen receptors throughout the body in a selective manner. Raloxifene has an
advantage of reducing the risk of invasive breast cancer. SERMs have been proven effective
in clinical trials.Calcitonin:  It directly inhibits osteoclastic bone resorption activity via the calcitonin receptor
on the surface of osteoclasts. It acts by inhibiting actin cytoskeleton which is needed for the
osteoclastic activity.
2. Bone anabolic agents:  They stimulate bone formation by acting primarily on osteoblasts. These
include parathyroid hormone and teriparatide.
Teriparatide and abaloparatide:  It acts like parathyroid hormone and stimulates osteoblasts
and increases their activity. Mostly used for patients with established osteoporosis, those with
low BMD or several risk factors for fracture or cannot tolerate the oral bisphosphonates. It is
given as a daily injection with the use of a pen-type injection device.Sodium fluoride:  It produces skeletal changes such as pronounced bone density with increased
number and thickness of trabeculae, cortical thickening, and partial obliteration of the
medullary space.
3. Other agents
RANKL inhibitors: Denosumab is a fully human monoclonal antibody that mimics the
activity of osteoprotegerin. It binds to RANKL, thereby preventing RANKL from interacting
with RANK and reducing its bone resorption. Anti-sclerostin antibody (romosozumab) is in
trials.Strontium ranelate:  It is an alternative oral treatment, belonging to a class of drugs called
‘dual action bone agents’ (DABAs). It has proven efficacy, especially in the prevention of
vertebral fracture. Strontium ranelate is taken as a 2 g oral suspension daily.
Supplements:  Dietary supplements are given as adjuncts to pharmacological therapy. These include
(1) calcium  and (2) vitamin D.

ANTIPHOSPHOLIPID ANTIBODY (APLA)
SYNDROME (HUGhES SYNDROME)
Q. Write short note on antiphospholipid antibody (APLA) syndrome
and antiphospholipid antibodies.
Antiphospholipid antibody (APLA) syndrome or antiphospholipid
syndrome (APS) is characterized by the presence of a family of
antibodies in the patient’s plasma known as antiphospholipid antibodies
(autoantibodies directed against phospholipids) and a syndrome of
hypercoagulability. This prothrombotic disorder is also associated with
thrombocytopenia.The term antiphospholipid antibody is misleading because these
antibodies react with plasma proteins which themselves bind and form
complexes with negatively charged phospholipids. So, in contrast to the
terminology antiphospholipid, there is no direct binding of antibodies to
phospholipids.
Types of Antiphospholipid Antibody Syndrome1. Primary antiphospholipid syndrome: They do not have any
predisposing cause and their only manifestation is hypercoagulable state.
2. Secondary antiphospholipid syndrome: These are found in association
with autoimmune diseases, like systemic lupus erythematosus. Because of
this association, they were formerly known as lupus anticoagulant
syndrome.
Clinical Features
It is the commonest acquired hematologic cause of recurrent thromboembolic
events. Clinical manifestations chiefly are due to a direct or indirect effect of
venous or arterial thrombosis and/or pregnancy morbidity (Table 9.31).
Diagnosis
Types of antiphospholipid antibodies: Antiphospholipid antibodies are a heterogeneous group of
autoantibodies directed against phospholipids-binding proteins. Many plasma proteins (e.g.
prothrombin, β 2-glycoprotein) bind to anionic phospholipids resulting in different antiphospholipid
antibodies. Antiphospholipid antibodies (APAs) may include (1) lupus anticoagulant  (LA)
antibody, (2) anticardiolipin antibody  (aCL), or (3) anti-β 2-glycoprotein-I (anti-β 2-GPI)
antibody.

Table 9.31: Clinical manifestations of antiphospholipid antibody syndrome.
Organ/System Manifestation
Venous thrombosis and related
consequencesDeep vein thrombosis
Cutaneous: Livedo reticularis (Fig. 9.19)
Lung:  Pulmonary embolism, pulmonary hypertension
Superficial thrombophlebitis
Thrombosis in various other sites
Arterial thrombosis and related
consequencesNeurologic:  Stroke, transient ischemic attack
Cardiac: Myocardial ischemia (infarction or angina),
valvular vegetation (Libman-Sacks endocarditis)
Cutaneous: Leg ulcers and/or digital gangrene
Arterial thrombosis in the extremities
Ophthalmologic: Retinal artery thrombosis/amaurosis fugax
Ischemia of visceral organs or avascular necrosis of bone
Multi-infarct dementia
Neurologic manifestations of
uncertain etiologyMigraine; epilepsy; chorea; cerebellar ataxia; transverse
myelopathy
Renal manifestations Renal artery/renal vein/glomerular thrombosis, renal
microangiopathy, renal infarction, acute renal failure,
hematuria
Osteoarticular manifestations Arthralgia; arthritis
Obstetric manifestations Preeclampsia; eclampsia
Fetal manifestations Early fetal loss (<10 weeks); late fetal loss (10 weeks);
premature birth among the live births
Hematologic manifestations Thrombocytopenia, autoimmune hemolytic anemia
1. Lupus anticoagulant (LA) antibody:
–   It is named lupus as it was first detected in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
–   It was called anticoagulant because it paradoxically prolongs the clotting times by coagulation
assays in vitro (e.g. prolongation of APTT).
–   However, the term lupus anticoagulant is a misnomer, because it is more frequently found in
patients without lupus and is not anticoagulant and is associated with a hypercoagulable state
rather than bleeding.
–   For LA screening, two or more phospholipid-dependent coagulation tests are necessary. These
include (1) activated partial thromboplastin time, (2) dilute Russell viper venom time (DRVVT)
and (3) kaolin clotting time.
2. Anticardiolipin antibody (aCL):  They target cardiolipin (a bovine cardiac protein) and are
detected by immunoassays.
3. Anti- β2-glycoprotein-I (anti- β2-GPI) antibody: They are directed against β2-glycoprotien I and
may be causal in APLA syndrome.
Significance
–   LA antibodies are more specific, whereas aCL antibodies are more sensitive for
antiphospholipid syndrome. IgG aCL antibodies are more specific than IgM type.

–   Antiphospholipid antibodies may be detected in 10% of normal population and 30–50% of SLE
patients. They can also be found in patients with infections such as human immunodeficiency
virus and during therapy with medications (e.g. chlorpromazine).
Fig. 9.19: Livedo reticularis-mottled reticulated vascular pattern that appears as a lace-like purplish
discoloration of the skin. It is due to swelling of the venules caused by obstruction of capillaries.
Criteria for Diagnosis: APLA Syndrome (Box 9.22)
Management
Treatment of Venous Thrombosis
Patients with APS have a high risk of recurrent thromboembolism. Hence, they should receive
antithrombotic therapy.
Anticoagulation with unfractionated heparin or low-molecular-weight heparin (LMWH), and oral
warfarin, for acute venous thromboembolism (VTE). This is followed by long-term oral warfarin
to a target international normalized ratio (INR) of 2 to 3, alone or in combination with 80 mg of
aspirin daily. Duration of treatment is probably lifelong.Steroids are often added to the above treatment.
In severe generalized thrombosis, plasmapheresis or intravenous immunoglobulin may be
necessary.
Box 9.22:  Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome classification criteria (revised Sapporo classification
criteria).
Vascular thrombosis
Arterial, venous, or small vessel
Pregnancy morbidity
One or more fetal deaths
One or more premature births due to severe preeclampsia or placental insufficiency
Three or more first trimester losses

PLUS
Lupus anticoagulant
Anticardiolipin IgG or IgM (medium to high titer)
Anti-beta 2 glycoprotein-1 IgG or IgM on two occasions 12 weeks (or more) apart
A definite diagnosis of antiphospholipid syndrome is made if the patient has one clinical and one
laboratory criteria.
Prevention of Recurrence of Arterial Thrombosis
Aspirin 325 mg/day or warfarin (INR between 1.4 to 2.8).
Prophylaxis of any Thrombotic Episode
Aspirin for preventing thrombosis in females with previous pregnancy loss.
Modification of other risk factors (e.g. hypercholesterolemia, smoking).
Management of Pregnancy in patients with Antiphospholipid Syndrome
Attempted conception:  Start aspirin 80 mg daily.
Confirmed intrauterine pregnancy by ultrasound, start heparin (5,000–10,000 units every 12
hours) or low-molecular-weight heparin in prophylactic doses (enoxaparin 1 mg/kg, dalteparin
5000 units once a day) and continue till late in the third trimester.Females with a history pregnancy losses:  The goal is to prevent recurrent pregnancy loss. Two
or more early pregnancy losses, or one or more late pregnancy losses without any previous history
of thrombosis should receive combination of aspirin and heparin (unfractionated or low molecular
weight) during pregnancy.
Treatment of APS-associated bleeding:  It depends on the site and severity of bleeding.For anticoagulation bleeding, withdraw the anticoagulant and give an antidote (e.g. protamine).
For thrombocytopenia bleeding, give platelet transfusions.
Catastrophic Antiphospholipid Syndrome
History of APS and/or aPL.
Three or more new organ thromboses within a week.
Treatment
Intravenous heparin along with high-dose corticosteroids.
Early addition of plasma exchange and/or intravenous immunoglobulin (400 mg/kg qd) or CD20
monoclonal antibody rituximab, ofatumumab, veltuzumab, and ocrelizumab (375 mg/m2 per week
for 4 weeks) in patients who do not respond promptly to heparin and corticosteroids.
Prognosis: Despite treatment, mortality is about 50%.
INFLAMMATORY MUSCLE DISEASES
Q. Write short note on inflammatory muscle diseases.
Common Inflammatory Muscle Diseases (Table 9.32)

Idiopathic inflammatory myopathies consist of three major types: (1)
polymyositis, (2) dermatomyositis and (3) inclusion body myositis.
Polymyositis and Dermatomyositis
Q. Write short note on polymyositis and dermatomyositis.
Idiopathic Polymyositis
Onset: Gradual. Commonly between 40 and 60 years of age.
Table 9.32: Common inflammatory muscle diseases.
Infective forms Autoimmune (Idiopathic)
Viral: Coxsackie B, influenza, Epstein-
Barr virus, HIV
Bacterial: Streptococcus,
Staphylococcus, clostridia,
mycobacteria
Fungal: Candidiasis,
coccidioidomycosis, cryptococcosis
Protozoal: Toxoplamosis
Helminthic: Trichinosis, cysticercosisGeneralized forms
Dermatomyositis
Polymyositis
Inclusion body myositis
Overlap syndromes
Eosinophilic myositis
Granulomatous myositis
Necrotizing myopathy
(paraneoplastic)Focal forms
Monomelic myositis
Eosinophilic myositis
Macrophagic
myofasciitis
Orbital myositis
Clinical manifestations
Symmetrical proximal muscle weakness:
–   Sites affected: Usually affects the lower limbs (hips and thighs) than
the upper limbs (shoulder girdle muscles). The distal muscles, facial
muscles are not usually affected.
Others: Involvement of pharyngeal, laryngeal and respiratory muscles can
lead to dysphonia and respiratory failure.
Systemic features:  Fever, weight loss and fatigue are common.
Investigation: Muscle biopsy shows fiber necrosis, regeneration and
inflammatory cell infiltrate.
Idiopathic Dermatomyositis
Q. Write short note on dermatomyositis.
Dermatomyositis characterized by polymyositis along with  characteristic
skin changes. The skin changes may occur before or after the muscle

syndrome.
Skin changes: These include
–  Gottron’s papules: Scaly, erythematous or violaceous, psoriaform
plaques occurring over the extensor surfaces of PIP and DIP joints.
–  Heliotrope rash: Violaceous discoloration of the eyelid may be seen
along with periorbital edema.
–  Shawl sign or the V sign: Occurrence of erythematous macules
distributed in a ‘shawl’ pattern over the upper back, chest and
shoulders.
–  Periungual telangiectasias: Periungual nail-fold capillaries are
enlarged and tortuous.
–  Mechanic’s hand: Fissured, scaly and hyperkeratotic hand.
Others: Ulcerative vasculitis and calcinosis (calcium deposition) of the
subcutaneous tissue seen in about 25% of cases. In the long term, muscle
fibrosis and contractures of joints occur.Increased risk of malignancy: Few patients with dermatomyositis above
60 years of age have an underlying malignancy. The most common being
ovarian and gastric carcinoma, and lymphoma.Amyopathic dermatomyositis or dermatomyositis sine myositis:
Presence of pathognomonic skin lesion without muscle involvement.
Investigation: Muscle biopsy shows necrosis of muscle (single fibers or
in groups), perifasicular atrophy, and infiltration with lymphocytes.
Table 9.33 lists the differences between dermatomyositis, polymyositis
and inclusion-body myositis.
Diagnosis
ESR and CRP:  Usually raised.
Serum autoantibody studies: Antinuclear antibodies frequently
positive.
Muscles enzymes: Raised levels of serum creatine kinase (CK),
aldolase, serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT), lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH) and serum glutamic pyruvate transaminase (SGPT).
Autoantibodies directed against cytoplasmic RNA synthetases, other
cytoplasmic proteins and RNP found in about 30% of patients. Only
antihistidyl-tRNA synthetase (anti-Jo-1antibody) is a diagnostic marker

and is found in 20% of patients with polymyositis/dermatomyositis.
Table 9.33: Differences between dermatomyositis,
polymyositis and inclusion-body myositis.
Features Dermatomyositis Polymyositis Inclusion-body
myositis
Sex F > M M = F M >> F
Age of onset Any 20 years + 50 years +
Onset Subacute/acute Chronic Chronic
Distribution of
weaknessProximal Proximal Proximal + distal +
asymmetric (typically
quadriceps + finger
flexors)
Muscle pain/swelling In acute cases No No
Skin involvement Often No No
Raynaud’s arthralgia Frequent Infrequent No
Dysphagia In severe cases Infrequent Occasional
Association with
cancerUp to 20% Probably no No
Cardiac involvement Yes No No
Interstitial lung
diseaseAssociated with anti-
JoAssociated with anti-
JoNo
Electromyography (EMG): It can confirm the presence of myopathy and
exclude neuropathy.
MRI: It can be used to detect abnormally inflamed muscle.
Needle muscle biopsy: Characteristic changes: fiber necrosis,
regeneration and lymphocytic inflammatory cell infiltrate. Open biopsy
helps in more thorough assessment.Screening for malignancy: These include CXR (chest X-ray),
mammography, pelvic/abdominal ultrasound, PET scan, urine microscopy
and circulating tumor markers.
ManagementCorticosteroids:  The treatment of choice is prednisolone (dose of 1 mg/kg daily) till patient
shows significant improvement. High-dose intravenous methylprednisolone (1 g/day for 3 days)
may be necessary in patients with respiratory or pharyngeal weakness.
Additional immunosuppressive therapy:  If no improvement with prednisolone, azathioprine (2–
3 mg/kg/day) may be added. It also has some steroid-sparing effect. Other steroid-sparing agents
include methotrexate, azathioprine, ciclosporin, cyclophosphamide mycophenolate mofetil,

tacrolimus and MMF.
Intravenous immunoglobulin: It may be effective in refractory or rapidly progressive cases.
Causes of acute and chronic arthritis are listed in Box 9.23.
Q. Write short note on causes of polyarthritis.
Box 9.23:  Causes of acute and chronic arthritis.
Acute monoarthritis
Inflammatory:  Crystal disease (e.g. gout), infectious disease, spondyloarthropathy, rheumatoid
arthritis
Mechanical/inflammatory:  Trauma, avascular necrosis
Acute polyarthritis
Infectious:  Bacterial, HIV
Non-infectious:  Rheumatoid arthritis, spondyloarthropathy, other connective tissue diseases,
crystal (gout), sarcoidosis, malignancy, leukemia, sickle cell anemia
Chronic monoarthritis
Inflammatory:  Crystal disease, infectious disease (e.g. tuberculosis, fungal), spondyloarthropathy,
rheumatoid arthritis
Non-inflammatory:  Osteoarthritis, avascular necrosis, neuropathic arthropathy, villonodular
synovitis
Chronic polyarthritis
Inflammatory:  Rheumatoid arthritis, spondyloarthropathy, other connective tissue diseases
Mechanical:  Osteoarthritis
Crystal:  Gout
Metabolic:  Infiltrative, metabolic, hypothyroidism
Malignancy
Causes of low back pain (Box 9.24).
Q. Write short note on causes of low back pain.
Box 9.24:  Causes of low back pain.
• Mechanical back pain • Prolapsed
intervertebral disc• Osteoarthritis
• Vertebral fracture • Paget’s disease of
bone• Spinal stenosis
• Spondylolysis and
spondylolisthesis• Metastases to bone • Arachnoiditis

Gastroenterology

CHAPTER
10
SYMPTOMATOLOGY AND EVALUATION OF
GASTROINTESTINAL DISEASE
Anorexia (Table 10.1)
Q. Write short note on common causes of loss of appetite (anorexia).
Vomiting
Definition: Vomiting is a complex reflex and involves both autonomic and
somatic neural pathways.
Nausea is a feeling of wanting to vomit and often precedes actual
vomiting.
Retching is a strong involuntary unproductive effort to vomit. It is
associated with contraction of abdominal muscles but without expulsion of
stomach contents through the mouth.
Mechanism of vomiting: Synchronous contraction of the diaphragm,
intercostal muscles and abdominal muscles raises intra-abdominal pressure.
This is combined with relaxation of the lower esophageal sphincter and
causes forcible ejection of contents of the stomach.
Common Causes of Nausea and Vomiting (Table 10.2)Q. Write short note on common causes of persistent vomiting and CNS
causes of vomiting.
Table 10.1: Common causes of anorexia.
Infections:  Viral fever, tuberculosis
Endocrine diseases:  Hypothyroidism, hyperparathyroidism, Addison’s disease, panhypopituitarism

Liver disease:  Hepatitis, cirrhosis
Renal disease:  Chronic renal failure
Malignancies:  Any malignant tumors, e.g. carcinoma stomach, pancreas. Leukemias and lymphomas
Psychiatric causes:  Depression, anorexia nervosa
Table 10.2: Common causes of nausea and vomiting.
Abdominal causes
Mechanical obstruction
Gastric outlet obstruction, small bowel
obstruction*
Motility disorders
Functional dyspepsia gastroesophageal reflux
disease (GERD)*
Gastroparesis*Other intra-abdominal causes
Acute appendicitis, acute cholecystitis, acute
hepatitis, acute mesenteric ischemia,
eosinophilic gastroenteritis and gastric and
duodenal ulcer disease*
Drugs
Aspirin and other nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs
Anti-diabetic agents
Anti-gout drugs
Anti-microbials:  Acyclovir, anti-tuberculosis
drugs, erythromycin, sulfonamides, tetracycline
Cancer chemotherapy:  Cisplatin, cytarabine,
dacarbazine, etoposide, 5-fluorouracil,
methotrexateCardiovascular drugs:  Antiarrhythmics,
antihypertensives, beta- blockers, calcium
channel blockers, digoxin, diuretics
Central nervous system drugs:
Antiparkinsonian drugs (levodopa and other
dopamine agonists, anticonvulsants
Others:  Theophylline
Infectious causes
Acute gastroenteritis: Viral, bacterial Nongastrointestinal (systemic) infections
Metabolic and endocrine causes
Acute intermittent porphyria, diabetes mellitus,
diabetic ketoacidosis, hyperparathyroidism and
other causes of hypercalcemia*Addison’s disease, hyperthyroidism,
hyponatremia, hypoparathyroidism, pregnancy
Central nervous system causes
Demyelinating disorders, disorders of the
autonomic system, hydrocephalus, meningitis,
migraine headaches*Intracerebral lesions with edema (projectile
vomiting):
Abscess, hemorrhage, infarction, neoplasm*
Labyrinthine disordersLabyrinthitis*
Motion sicknessMénière’s disease*
Other causes
Anxiety and depression*
Cyclic vomiting syndrome*
Ethanol abuse*Cardiac disease:
Congestive heart failure
Myocardial infarction

Functional disorders and bulima nervosa* Myocardial ischemia
* Indicates causes of persistent vomiting
Rumination Syndrome/Merycism (Box 10.1)
Box 10.1: Features of rumination syndrome.
Rumination is a functional disorder resembles vomiting but does not involve an integrated
somatovisceral response coordinated by the emetic center.
It consists of the repetitive effortless regurgitation of small amounts of recently ingested food into
the mouth followed by re-chewing and re-swallowing or expulsion.
Complications of Chronic Vomiting
Emetic injuries to the esophagus and stomach
Mild erythema to erosions and ulcerations.
Abrupt retching or vomiting episodes may produce longitudinal mucosal
and even transmural lacerations at the level of the gastroesophageal
junction. When the lacerations are associated with acute bleeding and
hematemesis, the clinical condition is described as the Mallory-Weiss
syndrome.Boerhaave’s syndrome refers to spontaneous rupture of the esophageal
wall, with free perforation and secondary mediastinitis.
Dental caries and erosions may result from chronic vomiting.
Spasm of the glottis and aspiration pneumonia
In patients with diminished consciousness, or in an older person or patient
with a depressed cough reflex, may be associated with aspiration of gastric
contents into the bronchi, resulting in acute asphyxia and a subsequent risk
of aspiration pneumonia.Fluid, electrolyte, and metabolic alterations
Hypochloremic alkalosis is usually the first metabolic abnormality to
develop and is attributable to loss of fluid and hydrogen and chloride ions.
Hypokalemia, hypernatremia and dehydration can occur.
Nutritional deficiencies
Nutritional deficiencies may result from reduced caloric intake or loss of
nutrients in the vomitus.

Q. Write short note on treatment of vomiting.
Treatment
1. Supportive measure: Correction of fluid and electrolyte balance
2. Medication:
Phenothiazines and related drugs: Prochlorperazine 5 to 10 mg thrice daily
Dopamine antagonists: Metoclopramide 10 mg 30 minutes before meals and at bedtime. Side
effects include drowsiness and extrapyramidal effects. Domperidone (10 mg thrice daily) has
no CNS side effects.
Antihistaminic agents, e.g. diphenhydramine.
Serotonin 5-HT3 receptor antagonists: Useful in chemotherapy associated emesis. Examples
ondasetron and granisetron.
Neurokinin-1(NK-1)  receptor antagonist, e.g. aprepitant (oral) and fosaprepitant (parenteral)
indicated only in chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting.
Motilin receptor agonists: Erythromycin intravenously in boluses of 200 to 400 mg every
four to five hours.
Synthetic cannabinoids: Bethanne (muscarinic receptor agonist), Nabilone and dronabinol.
Glucocorticoids: Especially in raised intracranial tension (ICT), and chemotherapy induced
emesis.
Gastric electrical stimulation  in refractory cases
Hiccough
Q. Write short note on the causes and symptomatic treatment of
hiccough.
The symptom of hiccups (hiccoughs, singultus) is an involuntary,
intermittent, spasmodic contraction of the diaphragm and intercostal muscles
and glottic closure. Its causes are listed in Table 10.3.
Table 10.3: Causes of hiccough.
Hasty ingestion of food and fluids
Hyponatremia
Uremia
Irritation of the phrenic nerve: Due to
compression by tumors, esophagitis
pericarditis, mediastinitis, surgery of thorax
and abdomenCerebrovascular accidents (especially lateral
medullary syndrome), encephalitis, brain
tumorsDiabetic ketoacidosis, renal failure,
respiratory failure and electrolyte imbalance
Local irritation of the diaphragm: Due to
gaseous distension of stomach and intestines,
subphrenic abscess, peritonitis and acute
myocardial infarctionPsychogenic
Unknown
Symptomatic treatment

Advised to drink cold water, swallowing a teaspoon of dry sugar
Apply pressure over the eyeballs
Perform Valsalva maneuver
Rebreathing into a paper bag
Drugs (Box 10.2)
Local infiltration of phrenic nerve with procaine
Acupunctur
Box 10.2: Drugs used for the treatment of hiccough.
Chlorpromazine 25–50 mg orally or intramuscularly
Domperidone 10 mg thrice daily
Metoclopramide 10 mg thrice daily
Xylocaine viscus 15 mL thrice a day
Baclofen 5–10 mg thrice a day
Nifedipine, haloperidol, phenytoin, olanzapine, nefopam and gabapentin can be used
Constipation
Q. Write short note on define and common causes of constipation.
Definition : Constipation is defined as persistent, difficult, infrequent passage
of hard stools, or seemingly incomplete defecation/evacuation. Many patients
may also complain of excessive straining or lower abdominal
fullness/discomfort.
Criteria for Functional Constipation (Box 10.3)
Risk factors: Advanced age, female gender, low level of physical activity,
low socioeconomic status, nonwhite ethnicity and use of certain medications.
Box 10.3: Rome III criteria for functional constipation.
Two or more of the following six must be present*
1. Straining during at least 25% of defecations
2. Lumpy or hard stools in at least 25% of defecations
3. Sensation of incomplete evacuation for at least 25% of defecations
4. Sensation of anorectal obstruction/blockage for at least 25% of defecations
5. Manual maneuvers to facilitate at least 25% of defecations (e.g. digital evacuation, support of the
pelvic floor)
6. Fewer than three defecations/week
*Criteria fulfilled for the previous three months with symptom onset at least six months prior to
diagnosis

Causes of Constipation (Table 10.4)
Investigations
It is neither possible nor appropriate to investigate all patients with
constipation.
Initial visit
Routine biochemistry: Serum calcium, serum glucose, and thyroid
function tests
Complete blood count
Examination of stool including occult blood
Digital rectal examination
Proctoscopy and sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy: To detect anorectal
disease or exclude carcinoma colon (in patients older than 50 years or
those with alarm situations such as blood in stool or anemia or weight loss
or new onset of symptoms.
Table 10.4: Causes of constipation.
Primary Causes of Constipation
Gastrointestinal DisordersDietary:  Lack of fiber and/or fluid intake
Motility:  Irritable bowel syndrome, slow-transit constipation
Structural:  Carcinoma colon, diverticular disease, Hirschsprung’s disease
Defecation:  Anorectal disease such as Crohn’s, fissures, hemorrhoids
Secondary Causes of Constipation
Medications
Antacids
Anticholinergic agents (e.g. antiparkinsonian drugs, antipsychotics, antispasmodics, tricyclic
antidepressants)
Anticonvulsants (e.g. carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin)
Calcium-channel blockers (e.g. verapamil)
Diuretics (e.g. furosemide)
Iron supplements
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (e.g. ibuprofen)
Mu-opioid agonists (e.g. fentanyl, loperamide, morphine)
Metabolic and Endocrinologic Disorders
Diabetes mellitus

Heavy metal poisoning (e.g. arsenic, lead, mercury)
Hypercalcemia
Hyperthyroidism
Hypokalemia
Hypothyroidism
Neurologic and Myopathic Disorders
Amyloidosis
Autonomic neuropathy
Dermatomyositis
Multiple sclerosis
Parkinsonism
Progressive systemic sclerosis
Shy-Drager syndrome
Spinal cord injury
If these investigations are normal, a 1 month trial of dietary fiber and/or
laxatives is advised.
Next visit
If symptoms persist, barium studies or CT colonography is indicated to look
for structural disease. Colonic transit studies, anorectal manometry and
defecography are performed in only in resistant cases without a structural
disease.
Q. Write short note on management of constipation.
Treatment
Regular exercise and adequate fluid intake.
Treat the underlying cause or eliminate offending medication.
Fiber supplementation:  If there is no secondary cause, increasing the fiber content of the diet and
fluid intake. A fiber supplement such as wheat bran or psyllium and mucilaginous seeds and seed
coats (e.g. ispaghula husk) with water 2 to 4 times per day.
Laxatives (Table 10.5):  They should be restricted to severe cases. Osmotic laxatives act by
increasing colonic inflow of fluid and electrolytes by osmotic activity. This softens the stool and
stimulates colonic contractility. The stimulatory laxatives act by stimulating colonic contractility
and by causing intestinal secretion. Prucalopride is effective in refractory constipation.
Table 10.5: Various laxatives.
Emollient
laxativesStimulant laxatives
(stimulate motilityOsmotic laxatives Others

and intestinal
secretion)
Docusate
salts
Mineral oil
Other
agents, e.g.
polyethylene
glycol and
lubiprostone
(a synthetic
bicyclic
fatty acid).Phenolphthalein
Bisacodyl
Anthraquinones-
senna and
dantron (only
for the
terminally ill)Docusate
sodium
Prucalopride
Castor oilMagnesium
sulfate
Lactulose/Lactitol
MacrogolsGuanylat e
cyclase-C
receptor
agonists
(linaclotide,
plecanati de)
Lubiprost one
Misopros tol
Colchicin e
Prucalopr ide
Q. Write short note on lactulose (discussed under hepatic encephalopathy on page... of
Chapter 11).
Lactulose is an osmotic laxative which consists of semisynthetic disaccharide of fructose and
lactose. It is neither digested nor absorbed in the small intestine and retains water. It is broken
down to osmotically more active products by the bacteria present in the colon.
Suppositories , e.g. bisacodyl and glycerol
Enemas: These include sodium biphosphate, arachis oil, docusate sodium, hypertonic phosphate
and sodium citrate
Chronic Blood and Mucus in the Stools
Q. Write short note on the causes of chronic blood and mucus in the
stools. Mention the investigations done in such cases.
Causes (Table 10.6)
Investigations
Stool examination
–  Macroscopy: Fresh blood/altered blood/foul smelling/bulky/floats in
water/mucus.
–  Microscopy (Table 10.7)
Proctoscopy: To detect any ulcers or tumors of rectum and hemorrhoids.
Sigmoidoscopy: To detect any ulcers/tumors in the sigmoid colon.
Colonoscopy: To visualize colon.

Barium enema: To identify any growth or filling defects, strictures, ulcers
and diverticulae.
Biopsy: Of an ulcer or growth.
Table 10.6: Causes of chronic blood and mucus in the stools.
Dysentery
–  Amebic dysentery
–  Bacillary dysentery
Inflammatory bowel disease
–  Ulcerative colitis
–  Crohn’s diseaseIntestinal tuberculosis
Carcinoma: Large bowel (rectum, sigmoid and
colon)
Diverticulitis
Mesenteric vascular disease
Necrotizing enterocolitis
Table 10.7: Microscopic components that can appear in stool.
Ova
Trophozoites
Red blood cells
Bacteria
Culture and sensitivity: Grows the organismCysts
Pus cells
Macrophages
Occult Blood in the Stool
Q. Write a short note on occult blood in the stool.
Stool may appear normal (i.e. no melena) in patients with gastroduodenal
bleeding of up to 50–100 mL/day.
Blood loss in stool of a normal individual varies from 0.5 mL/day to 1.5
mL/day. Occult blood tests begin to become positive usually when blood
loss is around 2 mL/day.Test for detection of occult blood in stool
–  Guaiac test: Gastrointestinal tract bleeding is often intermittent. Hence,
this test should be performed for several successive days. This test is
negative in a person on iron or bismuth.
–  Other tests: Fecal immunochemical tests and heme-porphyrin test.
Conditions with Occult Blood in Stool (Table 10.8)
Q. Write a short note on causes of occult blood in the stool.

Weight Loss (Table 10.9)
Q. Write short note on the common causes of weight loss.
Glossitis
Q. Write short note on the causes of glossitis.
Definition : Glossitis is defined as inflammation of the tongue.
Causes
B-complex deficiency, megaloblastic anemia (pernicious anemia), oral candidiasis, herpes, cirrhosis,
iron deficiency anemia, pellagra, scarlet fever, syphilis, chemical irritants, drug reactions,
amyloidosis, sarcoidosis, infections, and vesiculo-erosive diseases
Clinical Features
Patients may complain of lingual pain (glossodynia) or burning sensation
(glossopyrosis).
Atrophic glossitis is a sign of protein-calorie malnutrition and muscle
atrophy and is commonly found in older adults.
Median rhomboid glossitis manifests as an asymptomatic, well-defined
erythematous patch in the mid-posterior dorsum of the tongue.
Dyspepsia
Q. Write short note on the causes and differential diagnosis of
dyspepsia.
Dyspepsia is derived from the Greek words dys and pepse and literally means
‘difficult digestion’
Dyspepsia is a collective description of a variety of gastrointestinal
symptoms (Table 10.10).
Ulcer dyspepsia: Dyspeptic symptoms associated with peptic ulcer.
Non-ulcer dyspepsia (functional dyspepsia): No cause can be found.
Flatulent dyspepsia: Usually due to a functional disorder. Symptoms
include early satiety, flatulence, bloating and belching predominate.
Table 10.8: Conditions with occult blood in stool.
Upper gastrointestinal bleeding Esophageal varices, esophagitis, peptic ulcer
disease, gastritis, malignancy

Lower gastrointestinal bleeding Hemorrhoids, malignancy, diverticulitis,
inflammatory bowel disease, celiac sprue
Drugs Aspirin or steriods (rare)
Others Hookworm infestation, mesenteric vascular
disease
Table 10.9: Common causes of weight loss.
Types of weight loss
Physiological:  Due to dieting, exercise, starvation, or decreased nutritional intake (e.g. old age).
Pathological/involuntary
1. Endocrine and metabolic disorders: Diabetes mellitus, hyperthyroidism, pheochromocytoma,
Addison’s disease, panhypopituitarism
2. Gastrointestinal disorders: Malabsorption, tropical sprue, chronic pancreatitis, inflammatory
bowel disease (ulcerative colitis and Crohn disease), parasitic infestations.
3. Chronic infections: Tuberculosis, HIV, fungal infections, amebic abscess
4. Malignancy: Stomach, colon, pancreas, liver, lung, lymphoma, leukemia.
5. Psychiatric illness: Anorexia nervosa, depression, schizophrenia
6. Renal disease: Chronic renal failure, infective endocarditis.
7. Cardiac disorders: Chronic congestive heart failure
8. Respiratory disorders: Emphysema, empyema, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
9. Rheumatological: Rheumatoid arthritis
10. Idiopathic
Table 10.10: Symptoms of dyspepsia.
Postprandial fullness Bloating in the upper abdomen
Early satiation Nausea
Epigastric pain Vomiting
Epigastric burning Belching
Causes (Table 10.11)
Nonulcer Dyspepsia (Functional Dyspepsia, Nervous
Dyspepsia; Nonorganic Dyspepsia)Q. Discuss the etiology clinical features, investigations and management
of nonulcer dyspepsia (functional dyspepsia, nervous dyspepsia;
nonorganic dyspepsia).
Definition : Chronic dyspepsia in the absence of organic disease.
Second most common functional gastrointestinal disorder (after irritable

bowel syndrome).
Etiology
It is dyspepsia in the absence of organic disease and even on detailed
investigation, no cause can be found.
Etiology is poorly understood but probably due to a spectrum of mucosal,
motility and psychiatric disorders.
Symptoms are probably due to disturbances in the motor function of the
gastrointestinal tract similar to that occurring in the irritable bowel-
syndrome. Both irritable bowel syndrome and nonulcer dyspepsia often
exist together in the same patient.Helicobacter pylori  infection should be excluded, because it may be
responsible for symptoms in few patients.
Clinical Features
Usually occurs in young (<40 years of age) females.
Symptoms and subtypes described in Table 10.12.
Morning symptoms of pain and nausea on walking are characteristic.
Features suggestive of irritable bowel syndrome such as pellet-like stools
and feeling of incomplete evacuation after defecation may be observed.
History may reveal stress factors such as worries, financial problems,
employment and family affairs.
On examination, no diagnostic signs, except for inappropriate abdominal
tenderness on abdominal palpation.
All the organic causes of dyspepsia like peptic ulcer disease, drug
ingestion, depression pregnancy, alcohol abuse, etc. should be excluded.
In older patients intra-abdominal malignancy should be excluded which
may present with alarming features such as weight loss, anorexia,
dysphagia and hematemesis or melena.
Table 10.11: Causes of dyspepsia.
Luminal Gastrointestinal TractChronic gastric or intestinal ischemia
Food intolerance
Functional dyspepsia

Gastroesophageal reflux disease
Gastric or esophageal neoplasms
Gastric infections (e.g. cytomegalovirus, fungus, tuberculosis, syphilis)
Gastroparesis (e.g. diabetes mellitus, post-vagotomy, scleroderma, chronic intestinal pseudo-
obstruction, postviral, idiopathic)
Irritable bowel syndrome
Peptic ulcer disease
Parasites (e.g. Giardia lamblia, Strongyloides stercoralis)
Medications
Acarbose, aspirin, other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (including cyclooxygenase-2 selective
agents), colchicine, digitalis preparations, estrogens, ethanol, glucocorticoids, iron, levodopa, niacin,
narcotics, nitrates, orlistat, potassium chloride, quinidine, sildenafil, theophylline
Pancreaticobiliary Disorders
Biliary pain: Cholelithiasis, choledocholithiasis, sphincter of Oddi dysfunction
Chronic pancreatitis
Pancreatic neoplasms
Systemic Conditions
Adrenal insufficiency, congestive heart failure, diabetes mellitus, hyperparathyroidism, myocardial
ischemia, pregnancy, renal insufficiency, thyroid disease
Table 10.12: Rome III criteria for functional dyspepsia.
Causes of vitamin A deficiency.
Includes one or more of the following:
1.  Bothersome postprandial fullness
2.  Early satiation3.  Epigastric pain
4.  Epigastric burning
and
No evidence of structural disease (including at upper endoscopy) that is likely to explain the
symptoms.
Subgroups according to Rome III criteriaEpigastric pain syndrome (EPS):  Pain centered in the upper abdomen as the predominant
symptom.
Postprandial distress syndrome (PDS):  Unpleasant or troublesome nonpainful sensation
(discomfort) centered in the upper abdomen is the predominant symptom. This may be
accompanied by upper abdominal fullness, early satiety, bloating and nausea.
Any one of the first two criteria 1 or 2 is for EPS while any one last two criteria 3 or 4 is for PDS.
Investigations
The history often suggests the diagnosis.
Helicobacter pylori  infection should be serologically excluded in all
patients.

Exclusion of organic causes by following investigations:
–  Blood count, ESR and occult blood in stools
–  Liver function tests (to exclude alcoholism)
–  Pregnancy test
–  Barium meal
–  Ultrasound scan may detect gallstones.Indications for endoscopy in patients with chronic dyspepsia/ RED
FLAGS are listed in Box 10.4.
Box 10.4: Indications for endoscopy in patients with chronic dyspepsia/RED
FLAGS.
Age >60 years
Dysphagia/previous peptic ulcer disease, odynophagia
Clinically significant weight loss (>5% usual body weight over 6 to 12 months)
Protracted vomiting
Melena
Anemia
Palpable mass
Jaundice
Family history of stomach cancer.
Management (Fig. 10.1)
Explanation, reassurance and lifestyle changes.
Advice to avoid cigarette smoking and alcohol use.
Symptoms if associated with an identifiable cause of stress resolve with appropriate counseling.
Psychological factors influencing on gut function should be explained and may require
psychological treatment.
Idiosyncratic and restrictive diets are not beneficial, but reducing intake of fat and coffee may
help.
If endoscopy is non-contributory, empirical treatment is advised.
–  Prokinetic drugs, such as metoclopramide (10 mg 3 times daily) or domperidone (10–20 mg 3
times daily), may be given before meals for nausea, vomiting or bloating.
–  Mosapride or itopride may also be tried.
–  H2-receptor antagonists or proton-pump inhibitors if night pain or heartburn is troublesome.
–  H. pylori eradication therapy if test is positive and may be effective in some patients with
functional dyspepsia.
–  Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors may be effective in some patients.
–  Low dose tricyclic agents (e.g. amitriptyline) may be of help in up to two-thirds.
–  SSRI (selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitor) medication is tried in refractory cases

Fig. 10.1:  Causes of acute upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage.
Distinguishing Features of Nonulcer Dyspepsia and Ulcer
Dyspepsia (Table 10.13)
Table 10.13: Distinguishing features of nonulcer dyspepsia and ulcer
dyspepsia.
Characteristics Non-ulcer dyspepsia Ulcer dyspepsia
Nature of pain Not episodic Episodic (periodicity)
Duration of pain Throughout the day Occurs only on empty stomach
Relief of pain Not affected by antacids Relieved by antacids
Relation of pain with
vomitingPain is not relieved by
vomiting and patient cannot
eat afterwardsPain relieved by vomiting and patient
can eat immediately
Relation pain to food Pain provoked by food Pain relieved by food
Location of abdominal pain Diffuse referred to more
than one siteLocalized referred to epigastrium

Relation of pain to sleep Pain at night, waking the
patient from sleep is rarePain at night, waking the patient from
sleep is common
GASTROINTESTINAL BLEEDING
Q. Enumerate the etiology/causes and investigations of upper
gastrointestinal bleeding. Discuss how you will manage a case of
esophageal varices.
Q. Write short essay on causes of hematemesis.
Upper Gastrointestinal (UGI) Bleeding
It is the bleeding proximal to the duodeno-jejunal junction (ligament of
Treitz).
Etiology (Table 10.14 and Fig. 10.1)
Peptic ulcers are the most common cause of UGI bleeding (up to about 50%).
Clinical Features (Table 10.15)
Presentation: Patient usually presents with either hematemesis (vomiting of
blood or coffee-ground material) and/or melena (black, tarry stool).
Hematemesis: Color of the vomitus depends on how long the blood has
been in the stomach and the severity of bleeding.
–  Red with clots when bleeding is severe and bright red indicates rapid
and sizeable bleeding.
–  Black  (‘coffee grounds’) when less severe and bleeding is small.
Melena: It is the passage of black, tarry, foul-smelling stools containing
altered blood. The characteristic color and smell are due to the action of
digestive enzymes and bacteria on hemoglobin. It usually occurs when
more than 60 mL blood is lost and blood has been present in the upper
gastrointestinal tract for at least 14 h (and as long as 3–5 days).
Occasionally it develops due to hemorrhage from the right side of the
colon.
–  Severe/massive acute upper gastrointestinal bleeding can sometimes
cause maroon or bright red stool due to passage of frank blood per-
rectum (hematochezia).

Occasionally, presentation with symptoms of blood loss only. These
include
–  Acute loss with intravascular volume depletion : Dizziness, extreme
pallor and shock.
–  Chronic loss: With symptoms of anemia.
Differences between hemetemesis and hemoptysis is presented in Table
10.16.
Table 10.14: Various causes of upper gastrointestinal (UGI) bleeding.
Esophageal causes
Esophageal varices (e.g. due to portal hypertension) usually occur from the lower 5 cm of
esophagus.
Erosive esophagitis
Esophageal carcinoma
Mallory-Weiss syndrome
Gastroduodenal causes
Peptic ulcer (gastric and duodenal) disease
Erosive gastritis (e.g. after ingestion of NSAIDs and alcohol) or duodenitis
Stress ulcers occurring with shock, sepsis, or severe trauma
Curling ulcers  in the proximal duodenum with severe burns or trauma.
Carcinoma stomach
Gastric antral vascular ectasia (GAVE), also described as watermelon stomach, Dieulafoy’s lesion
Angiodysplasia or vascular malformations (Heydes syndrome in aortic stenosis)
Rupture of aortic aneurysm or aortic duodenal fistula following aortic graft. Cushing ulcer
associated with elevated intracranial pressure
Other cause
Coagulation defects
Cameron’s lesions: Linear erosions or ulcerations in the proximal stomach at the end of a large
hiatal hernia, near the diaphragmatic pinch
Hemobilia
Hemosuccus pancreaticus
Table 10.15: Features suggesting probable source of upper GI bleeding.
History of Probable source of bleeding
Features suggestive of peptic ulcer Peptic ulcer disease
Jaundice, pedal edema, abdominal distension,
splenomegaly, ascites, dilated abdominal veins
Features of liver cell failure, e.g. spider nevi,
palmar erythema, jaundice and gynecomastiaEsophageal varices

Alcohol or drug (NSAIDs) ingestion, trauma,
burns or sepsisGastric erosions
Heavy alcohol intake or vomiting Mallory-Weiss tear
Dysphagia and weight loss prior to bleeding
Tenderness or a massMalignant (stomach or esophageal cancer)/intra-
abdominal tumor
Table 10.16: Differences between hemetemesis and hemoptysis.
Features Hemoptysis Hematemesis
Definition Coughing out of blood Vomiting out of blood
Content and color Mixed with sputum and
bright red in colorMixed with food particles and coffee-
ground in color
Contents Frothy, associated sputum No froth, associated food particles
Associated symptoms Cough, dyspnea Nausea, vomiting, retching, abdominal
discomfort
Melena Rare Common
Reaction Alkaline (blue litmus
remains unchanged)Acidic (blue litmus remains
unchanged)Q. Write short essay on evaluation and treatment/management of upper
gastrointestinal bleeding.
History
Physical Examination: Look for
Vital signs, orthostatic hypotension
Abdominal tenderness
Skin, oral examination
Stigmata of liver disease
Rectal examination:
–  Objective description of stool/blood
–  Assess for mass, hemorrhoid.
Differences between upper and lower GI bleed are presented in Table 10.17.
Table 10.17: Differences between upper and lower GI bleed.
Features Upper GI tract bleed Lower GI tract bleed
Site of bleeding Above ligament of Treitz Below ligament of Treitz
Clinical Hematemesis or melena Hematochezia/rarely melena

presentation
Nasogastric
aspiration showsBlood Clear fluid
Bowel sounds Hyperactive Normal
BUN (blood urea
nitrogen)/creatinine
ratioIncreased Normal
Basic Investigations
Complete blood count
–  Chronic bleeding leads to anemia, but the hemoglobin concentration
and the hematocrit level may be normal after sudden, major bleeding
until hemodilution occurs.
–  Low platelet count: Suggests chronic liver disease, dilution, or
hematologic disorder.
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine: The blood urea nitrogen
level increases to greater extent than the creatinine level because of
increased intestinal absorption of urea after breakdown of blood proteins.
An elevated blood urea with normal creatinine concentration implies
severe bleeding.Liver function tests. They may show evidence of chronic liver disease.
Prothrombin time: It may be prolonged in patients with chronic liver
disease or in coagulation disorders or patients on anticoagulated therapy.
Cross-matching: Potential infusion of packed red blood cells.
Q. Write short essay on management and drugs used in upper
gastrointestinal bleeding.
Assessment of upper GIT bleed is presented in Flowchart 10.1
Flowchart 10.1:  Assessment of upper gastrointestinal bleed (UGIB)

Management
Medical resuscitation and replenishment of intravascular volume : In case of massive bleeding,
resuscitation measures should be initiated simultaneously with the initial assessment.
Intravenous access:  The first step is to gain intravenous access using at least one large-bore (14-
or 16-gauge) intravenous catheters for essentially all patients so that normal saline can be infused
as fast as necessary to maintain hemodynamic stability.
Fluid resuscitation:  Adequate resuscitation and hemodynamic stabilization is essential prior to
endoscopy( saline). Vasopressors if persistent hypotension.
Blood product transfusions:  Initiate blood transfusions if the hemoglobin is <7 g/dL to maintain
the hemoglobin at a level of ≥9 g/dL. Patients with active bleeding and a low platelet count
(<50,000/μL) should be transfused with platelets. Patients with a coagulopathy with a prolonged
prothrombin time with INR >1.5 should be transfused with fresh frozen plasma (FFP).
Initial clinical assessment:Circulatory status: Severe bleeding causes tachycardia, hypotension and oliguria. Closely observe
with hourly pulse, blood pressure, postural hypotension urine output and level of consciousness.
Evidence of liver disease: May be present in patients with decompensated cirrhosis.

Comorbidity: Such as cardiorespiratory, cerebrovascular or renal may be worsened by acute
bleeding and also increase the hazards of endoscopy and surgical operations.
Gastric lavage: This procedure has been abandoned in present day.
Procedure : Gastric lavage is performed by instilling 500 mL of ice-cold or tap water every 30–60
minutes.
Advantages  of nasogastric or orogastric tube helps to localize the site of upper GI bleeding.
Determine the type of material whether red blood or coffee-ground. Assess the rate, severity,
persistency, and recurrence of the bleeding. Clear the blood from stomach for better endoscopic
visualization prior to endoscopy. Remove blood → reduces the risk of encephalopathy in patients
with liver disease. Dilute acid-pepsin in stomach → reduces bleeding from erosions. Minimize the
risk of aspirationPrognostic score:  Rockall score is based upon age, the presence of shock, comorbidity, diagnosis,
and endoscopic stigmata of recent hemorrhage.
Endoscopy
Pre-endoscopic pharmacotherapy
For nonvariceal UGIB (upper gastrointestinal bleeding)
IV proton pump inhibitor: 80 mg bolus, 8 mg/hr drip (esmoprazole).
Rationale: Suppress acid, facilitate clot formation and stabilization.
Goal of endoscopic therapy:  To stop acute bleeding and reduce the risk of recurrent bleeding.
Early endoscopy (within 24 hours) is recommended for most patients with acute UGIB.
Achieves prompt diagnosis, provides risk stratification and hemostasis therapy in high-risk
patients.
Endoscopic hemostasis therapy
It includes (1) epinephrine injection, (2) thermal electrocoagulation, and (3) mechanical (hemoclips).
Combination therapy is superior to monotherapy.
Nonvariceal UGIB: Postendoscopy management (Box 10.5)
Box 10.5:  Postendoscopy management of nonvariceal UGIB.
Patients with ulcers requiring endoscopic therapy should receive PPI x 72 hours.
Determine H. pylori  status in all ulcer patients.
Discharge patients on PPI (once to twice daily), duration dictated by underlying etiology and
need for NSAIDs/aspirin.
In patients with cardiovascular disease on low dose aspirin: Restart as soon as bleeding has
resolved.
Management of upper GI tract bleeding is summarized in Flowchart 10.2.
Flowchart 10.2:  Management of upper GI tract bleeding.

(CV: cardiovascular prevention; NSAID: non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs; PPI: proton pump
inhibitors; H2 RA: Histamine H2-receptor antagonists)
Variceal Bleeding
Occurs in 1/3 of patients with cirrhosis. In 1/3 initial bleeding episodes are
fatal. Among survivors, 1/3 will rebleed within 6 weeks. Only 1/3 will
survive 1 year or more. Management of variceal bleed is discussed in Chapter
11.
Lower GI (LGI) Bleed

Q. Write short essay on causes of lower gastrointestinal bleeding.
LGI bleeding generally signifies bleeding from the colon or anorectum. In
patients with severe hematochezia, first consider possibility of UGIB. About
10–15% of patients with presumed LGIB are found to have upper GIB.
Etiology (Table 10.18 and Fig. 10.2)
Table 10.18: Causes of vitamin A deficiency.
Diverticulosis (main cause) Angioectasias
Hemorrhoids anal fissures, ulcer Colitis (IBD, infectious, ischemic)
Neoplasms Post-polypectomy
Dieulafoy’s lesion Radiation colitis, small bowel bleed
 Unknown causes-10%
Fig. 10.2:  Causes of lower gastrointestinal bleed (LGIB)
Management of LGI Bleed (Flowchart 10.3)
Flowchart 10.3:  Management of lower gastrointestinal bleeding.

APPROACH TO DIARRHEA
Q. Enumerate the common cause of diarrhea in the tropics.
Definition : Daily bowel movements of three or more times are considered to
be abnormal. The upper limit of stool weight is 200 g daily. Although stool

weight usually considered as a ‘scientific’ definition of diarrhea, diarrhea
should not be defined solely in terms of fecal weight.
Acute diarrhea is defined as abrupt onset of increased frequency and/or
fluidity of bowel movements.
Chronic diarrhea is defined as passage of loose stools with or without
increased stool frequency for more than 4 weeks.
Large-Volume versus Small-Volume Diarrhea
Normal rectosigmoid colon functions as a storage reservoir.
Left colonic disorders: Inflammatory or motility disorders involving the
left colon compromises this rectosigmoid reservoir capacity and results in
frequent small-volume bowel movements.Right colonic or small bowel disorders: In diarrhea due to disorders of
the right colon or small bowel and if the rectosigmoid reservoir is intact,
individual bowel movements are less frequent and larger.
Frequent, small, painful stools may point to a source in the distal colon,
whereas painless large-volume stools suggest a right colonic or small bowel
source.
Secretory versus Osmotic Diarrhea (Table 10.19)Secretory diarrhea: It results from malabsorption or secretion of
electrolytes (secretory diarrhea).
Osmotic diarrhea: It results from intestinal malabsorption of ingested
nonelectrolytes.
Osmotic diarrhea constitutes small number of cases whereas secretory
diarrhea forms the much larger number of cases.
In secretory diarrhea, sodium, potassium, and accompanying anions
account almost entirely for stool osmolality. In contrast, in osmotic
diarrhea poorly absorbable solutes within the lumen of the intestine
account for much of the osmotic activity of stool water.
Table 10.19: Secretory versus osmotic diarrhea.
Type of diarrhea Causes Examples
Secretory diarrhea Exogenous secretagogues Enterotoxins (e.g. cholera)
Endogenous secretagogues Neuroendocrine tumors (e.g. carcinoid
syndrome)

Absence of ion transporter Congenital chloridorrhea
Loss of intestinal surface
areaIntestinal resection, diffuse intestinal
mucosal disease
Intestinal ischemia Diffuse mesenteric atherosclerosis
Rapid intestinal transit Intestinal hurry following vagotomy
Osmotic diarrhea Ingestion of poorly absorbed
agentMagnesium ingestion
Loss of nutrient transporter Lactase deficiency
Watery versus Fatty versus Inflammatory Diarrhea
Watery diarrhea: It implies a defect primarily in water absorption as a
result of increased electrolyte secretion or reduced electrolyte absorption
(secretory diarrhea) or ingestion of a poorly absorbed substance (osmotic
diarrhea).Fatty diarrhea: It implies defective absorption of fat and perhaps other
nutrients in the small intestine.
Inflammatory diarrhea: It implies the presence of one of a limited
number of inflammatory or neoplastic diseases involving the
gastrointestinal tract.
Causes of Diarrhea in the Tropics (Table 10.20)
Table 10.20: Causes of diarrhea in tropics.
Gastroenteritis induced by toxin Gastroenteritis induced by changes in mucosaPerformed toxins: Staphylococcus aureus,
Bacillus cereus  
Mucosal changes without invasion: Rotavirus,
Norwalk agentEnterotoxins produced in the intestine,
Clostridium perfringens, Vibrio cholerae,
Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli,
Enterohemorrhagic E. coli, Clostridium
difficileInvasion of mucosa/inflammatory (invasion
or cytotoxin) dysentery
–  Salmonella spp, Shigella spp,
Enterohemorrhagic E. coli ,
Enteroinvasive E. coli, Campylobacter
jejuni, Yersinia enterocolitica, Entameba
histolyticaOther causes: Mushrooms, Heavy metals
(arsenic), Monosodium glutamate
Causes of Chronic Diarrhea (Table 10.21)

Q. Write short note on causes of chronic diarrhea.
Table 10.21: Causes of chronic diarrhea.
Fatty diarrhea Watery diarrhea
1. Malabsorption syndromes
Mucosal diseases (e.g. celiac disease,
Whipple’s disease)
Mesenteric ischemia
Short bowel syndrome
Small intestinal bacterial overgrowthOsmotic diarrhea
–  Carbohydrate malabsorption
–  Osmotic laxatives
Secretory diarrhea
Bacterial toxins
Congenital syndromes (e.g. congenital
chloridorrhea)
Disordered motility, regulation
–  Diabetic autonomic neuropathy
–  Irritable bowel syndrome
–  Postsympathectomy diarrhea
–  Postvagotomy diarrheaDiverticulitis
Endocrinopathies: Addison’s disease,
carcinoid syndrome, gastrinoma,
hyperthyroidism, mastocytosis, medullary
carcinoma of thyroid, pheochromocytoma,
somatostatinoma, VIPomaLaxative abuse (stimulant laxatives)
Medications and toxins2.  Maldigestion
Inadequate luminal bile acid concentration
Pancreatic exocrine insufficiency
Inflammatory diarrhea
Diverticulitis
Infectious diseases
–  Invasive bacterial infections (e.g.
tuberculosis, yersiniosis)
–  Invasive parasitic infections (e.g. amebiasis,
strongyloidosis)
–  Pseudomembranous colitis ( Clostridium
difficile infection)
–  Ulcerating viral infections (e.g.
cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex virus)
Inflammatory bowel diseases: Crohn’s
disease, ulcerative colitis
Ischemic colitis
Neoplasia: Carcinoma of colon, lymphoma
Radiation colitis
Food Poisoning (refer pages 130-2)
Approach to the Patient with Acute Diarrhea
Q. Discuss the evaluation and management of acute diarrhea.
Assessment of the Patient
Degree of dehydration
Evidence of specific cause
Necessity of any diagnostic tests

Requirement for any treatment
History (Table 10.22)
Physical Examination
Examine for signs of dehydration to assess the severity of the diarrhea.
These include examination of pulse, blood pressure (including postural
change), skin turgor, dryness of mucous membranes (e.g. mouth), mental
status and breathing.Severity of dehydration (Table 10.23)
Electrolyte imbalances: Assess muscle strength and muscle reflexes which
may be reduced in hypokalemia.
Examination of abdomen to exclude any surgical cause (e.g. intestinal
obstruction).
Laboratory Investigations
Laboratory investigations usually do not help in the management acute
diarrhea.
Total WBC count: Presence of high leukocyte count with shift to left
suggests invasive bacterial infection.
Electrolytes and acid-base status: It should be done in patients with
severe dehydration. Severe diarrhea produces metabolic acidosis.
Blood cultures: To be performed when bacteremia or a systemic infection
is suspected.
Stool examination : Grossly bloody or mucus in the stool suggests an
inflammatory process. In severe cases stool should be examined for the
presence of leukocytes, red cells and cysts or trophozoites/parasites. In
cholera V.cholerae  show the characteristic darting motility. Stool with
leukocytes consider inflammatory causes (Shigella, Salmonella,
Campylobacter, E. coli , Entamoeba and Clostridium difficile ).Stool culture
Table 10.22: Features to be noted during taking history in a patient with
acute diarrhea.
1. Duration of diarrhea
2. Travel or use of antibiotics

3. Having food outside in the recent past and time since consumption
4. Any other family member or close associated affected
5. Associated features:  Pain abdomen, fever, vomiting, tenesmus
6. Stool: Frequency of loose stools, volume, appearance of stools (e.g. rice water), presence of blood
or mucus in the stools
7. Urine output
8. Any alteration in the level of consciousness
9. Occupation of the patient
Table 10.23: Severity of dehydration.
Features Mild Moderate Severe
Urine output Decreased Decreased Markedly
decreased
Physical examination
Level of consciousness Normal Normal Depressed
Mental status Normal/irritable Lethargic Comatose
Skin Normal Cool Cool and mottled
Skin turgor Normal Reduced with skin
tentingMarkedly reduced
Mouth/oral mucosa Dry Markedly dry Parched
Eyes Normal Sunken (sunken
fontanelle in
infants)Markedly sunken
Pulse rate Normal or mild increase Tachycardia,feeble Marked
tachycardia
Blood pressure Normal Postural/orthostatic
fallHypotension and
frank shock
Respiration Normal Normal Acidotic
Investigations
Urine specific gravity <1.020 >1.020 >1.035
Blood urea Normal Normal to raised High
Systemic complications of acute diarrheal disease is presented in Table 10.24
Table 10.24: Systemic complications of acute diarrheal disease.
Complication Associated organism
Sepsis Shigella species, Nontyphoidal Salmonella
enterica, Campylobacter fetus
Hemolytic-uremic syndrome Shigella species, Shiga toxin-

producing Escherichia coli
Guillain-Barré syndrome Campylobacter jejuni
Reactive arthritis Campylobacter species, Salmonella
species, Shigella flexneri
Small Bowel versus Large Bowel Diarrhea (Table 10.25)
Table 10.25: Differences between small bowel and large bowel diarrhea.
Features Small bowel diarrhea Large bowel diarrhea
Characteristic of diarrhea Large-volume, watery
diarrheaFrequent, small volume, often painful
bowel movements
Associated clinical features Abdominal cramping,
bloating and gas formationGripping pain in lower abdomen
Fever Uncommon Present
Tenesmus Absent Present
Blood or mucus stools Not common Common
Inflammatory cells and red
blood cells in stoolsAbsent Present
Management (Flowchart 10.4)
Most of acute diarrhea is self-limited and fluid and electrolyte replacement are of most important in
all cases.
RehydrationSevere diarrhea produces dehydration especially in the very young and very old.
Toxin-induced diarrhea produces stools that are usually isotonic. Concentrations of sodium and
chloride are slightly less than that of plasma while bicarbonate concentration is double that of
plasma. The stools also contain significant amount of potassium.
In inflammatory diarrhea the electrolyte loss is of less compared to toxigenic diarrhea.
Oral rehydration solution (ORS)
Used for mild to moderate dehydration.
Intravenous fluids
Used when there is moderate-to-severe dehydration.
Usually Ringer’s lactate is administered.
In severe cases, fluids are administrated at a rate of 20 mL/kg/hour for the first 2–3 hours. If the
patient improves, reduce the rate to 10 mL/kg/hour for the next 2–4 hours.
Concurrently start oral rehydration therapy.
Flowchart 10.4:  Approach to the management of acute diarrhea

Absorbants
Kaolin absorbs the toxin and may be of use in few patients. However, it does not affect the course of
the disease.
Antimotility drugs
Used for symptomatic treatment of toxin-induced diarrhea in adults only. It should not be used in
young children and elderly.
It can be given in inflammatory diarrhea along with antibiotics. These include:
–  Opiates (e.g. morphine and codeine): They may cause respiratory depression.
–  Diphenoxylate/atropine combination: May cause respiratory depression and anticholinergic side
effects.
–  Loperamide: Dose is 2 tablets of 4 mg each initially, then 2 mg after each unformed stool, not
to exceed 16 mg/day for ≤ 2 days.
–  Bismuth subsalicylate: It acts as an antisecretory agent. Dose is 1 tablet every 30 minutes for a
total of 8 doses or 60 mL every 6 hourly.
Antisecretory agents: Racecadotril
Reduces the hypersecretion of water and electrolytes into the intestinal lumen.
Inhibits enkephalinase (an enzyme that degrades enkephalins)

Dose: 100 mg thrice daily. To be given to patients with acute, watery diarrhea only.
Contraindication: Renal insufficiency, pregnancy and breastfeeding.
Antispasmodics
Mild antispasmodics such as dicyclomine, hyoscine may be used in patients with significant
abdominal cramps.
Antibiotics: Indications
Symptomatic patients with inflammatory diarrhea (high fever, toxicity, abdominal pain).
Acute febrile dysentery illness.
Diarrhea caused by Campylobacter jejuni. Early use of erythromycin or azithromycin limits the
duration of illness.
Commonly used antibiotics: Quinolones (norfloxacin 400 mg and ciprofloxacin 500 mg both
given twice daily or levofloxacin 500 mg given once a day) for 3–5 days.
Cholera: Doxycycline in a dose of 300 mg as single dose. Alternatives include trimethoprim-
sulphamethoxazole, furazolidone and norfloxacin.
Specific Treatment once Cause Identifie
Nonspecific drug therapy for chronic diarrhea is presented in Table 10.26.
Table 10.26: Nonspecific drug therapy for chronic diarrhea.
Drug class Agent
Opiates (mu opiate receptor selective) Codeine, Diphenoxylate, Loperamide, Morphine,
Tincture of opium
Enkephalinase inhibitor (delta opiate receptor
effects)Racecadotril
Alpha-2 adrenergic agonist Clonidine
Somatostatin analog Octreotide
Bile acid-binding resin Cholestyramine, Colesevelam, Colestipol
Fiber supplements Calcium polycarbophil, Psyllium
Traveler’s Diarrhea
Q. Write short note on traveler’s diarrhea.
Traveler’s diarrhea is the leading cause of illness in travelers. Usually a short-
lived and self-limited.
Etiology
Causative agents: Various pathogens causing travelers’ diarrhea are listed
in Table 10.27. Most important pathogens are Escherichia coli  and
enteroaggregative E. coli: rotavirus and norovirus.

Source of infection: Main source of infection are food and water
contaminated with fecal matter.
Table 10.27: Various causes of traveler’s diarrhea.
Bacteria (50–75%) Viruses (0–20%) Parasites (0–
10%)
Enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli Norovirus (winter vomiting bug) Giardia lamblia 
Enteroaggregative E. coli Rotavirus Cryptosporidium 
Campylobacter jejuni Entamoeba
histolytica 
Shigella
Salmonella (non-typhoid) No pathogens (10–50%)
Clinical Features
Usually involves intercontinental travelers.
Symptoms: Abrupt in onset, watery diarrhea lasting 2–5 days, abdominal
cramps, nausea, vomiting, anorexia and fever.
Signs: Diffuse tenderness over abdomen.
Treatment
Usually self-limited and requires no treatment.
Dehydration is corrected by oral rehydration supplements.
Drugs:
–  Antidiarrheal agents and antibiotics are only rarely required.
–  If there is fever or bloody diarrhea advise norfloxacin or ciprofloxacin. Azithromycin is used in
patients who are allergic to quinolones
–  Rifaximin (a poorly absorbed rifampicin derivative) is very effective against non-invasive
bacterial pathogens.
Prevention
Drugs: Doxycycline 100 mg/day for a few weeks. Norfloxacin/ciprofloxacin/rifaximin once a day.
Probiotics may be useful
DISEASES OF THE ESOPHAGUS
Dysphagia
Q. Write short essay/note on causes and investigation (evaluation) and
management of dysphagia.

Dysphagia, from the Greek dys (difficulty, disordered) and phagia (to eat),
refers to the sensation that food is hindered in its passage from the mouth to
the stomach.
Causes of Dysphagia
Oropharyngeal dysphagia
Processes that affect the mouth, hypopharynx, and upper esophagus. The
patient often is unable to initiate a swallow and repeatedly has to attempt to
swallow. Patients frequently describe coughing or choking when they attempt
to swallow. Causes of oropharyngeal dysphagia are listed in Table 10.28.
Table 10.28: Causes of oropharyngeal dysphagia.
Neuromuscular causes Structural causes Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)
Multiple sclerosis
Muscular dystrophy
Myasthenia gravis
Parkinson’s disease
Polymyositis or dermatomyositis
Stroke
Thyroid dysfunctionCarcinoma
Infections of pharynx or neck
Osteophytes and other spinal disorders
Prior surgery or radiation therapy
Proximal esophageal web
Plummer–Vinson syndrome
Thyromegaly
Zenker’s diverticulum
Esophageal dysphagia (Table 10.29)
Table 10.29: Common causes of esophageal dysphagia.
Motility (Neuromusclar) disorders Structural (Mechanical) disorders
Primary disorders
Achalasia
Diffuse esophageal spasm
Hypertensive LES
Ineffective esophageal motility
Nutcracker (high-pressure) esophagusIntrinsic
Carcinoma and benign tumors
Diverticula
Eosinophilic esophagitis
Esophageal rings and webs (other than
Schatzki ring)
Foreign body
Lower esophageal (Schatzki) ring
Medication-induced stricture
Peptic stricture
Secondary disorders
Chagas’ diseaseExtrinsic
Mediastinal mass

Reflux-related dysmotility
Scleroderma and other rheumatologic
disordersSpinal osteophytes
Vascular compression
Differential Diagnosis of Dysphagia
Approach to the patient with dysphagia is presented in Flowchart 10.5.
Investigations
Hemoglobin and peripheral smear for anemia.
Chest radiograph detect retrosternal goiter, mediastinal lymph nodes,
aortic aneurysms, primary and secondary malignancy of lungs.
Esophagoscopy allows removal of foreign body, visualization and biopsy
of tumors, ulcers, strictures, etc.
CT scan of thorax
Biopsy from the growth, ulcer or inflammed mucosa.
Barium swallow detect tumors as filling defects or strictures (rat tail
appearance).
Esophageal motility studies (esophageal manometry).
Odynophagia
Q. Write short note on the causes for odynophagia.
Odynophagia, or painful swallowing, is specific feature for esophageal
involvement. It usually reflects an inflammatory process in the esophageal
mucosa. Its severity varies. It may be a dull retrosternal ache on swallowing
to a stabbing pain with radiation to the back so severe that the patient cannot
eat or even swallow their own saliva.
Flowchart 10.5:  Approach to the patient with dysphagia

Causes of Odynophagia (Table 10.30)
Plummer-Vinson Syndrome, (discussed on pages 568 of Chapter 8)
Q. Write short note on Plummer-Vinson Syndrome (Patterson-Brown-
Kelly syndrome) and its characteristic features/sideropenic
dysphagia.
Treatment
Iron deficiency anemia is treated with iron. It may resolve dysphagia.
Endoscopy:
–  Dysphagia may require endoscopic dilatation.
–  Follow-up endoscopy at regular intervals to detect development of carcinoma
Gastroesophageal Reflux Disease (GERD)
Q. Describe the etiopathogenesis, complications and management of
gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD).
Q. Write short essay on reflux esophagitis and its management.
Definition
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is a consequence of the failure of

the normal antireflux barrier to protect against frequent and abnormal
amounts of gastroesophageal reflux (GER; i.e. gastric contents moving
retrograde effortlessly from the stomach to the esophagus).
Spectrum of injury to the esophagus includes esophagitis, stricture,
Barrett’s esophagus, and adenocarcinoma.
Table 10.30: Causes of odynophagia.
Caustic ingestion:  Acid, alkali
Pill-induced Injury
Alendronate and other bisphosphonates
Aspirin and other NSAIDs
Iron preparations
Potassium chloride (especially slow-release form)
Tetracycline and its derivatives
Quinidine
Zidovudine
Infectious Esophagitis
Viral : Cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, herpes simplex virus, human immunodeficiency virus
Bacteria: Mycobacteria (tuberculosis or Mycobacterium avium complex)
Fungal: Candida albicans, histoplasmosis
Protozoan: Cryptosporidium, Pneumocystis
Severe Reflux Esophagitis
Esophageal Carcinoma
Pathophysiology
Normal defense mechanisms preventing reflux and reflux esophagitis
Several defense mechanisms prevent the reflux of gastric contents into the esophagus.
Antireflux barrier at the gastroesophageal junction (Fig. 10.3) : This consists of (1) lower
esophageal sphincter (LES), at the lower end of esophagus, below the diaphragm, (2) striated
muscles of the crural diaphragm, (3) phrenoesophageal ligament (4) oblique entrance of the
esophagus into the stomach (angle of His), (5) attachment of the lower esophageal sphincter (LES)
to the crural diaphragm: Intra-abdominal pressure reinforces the LES tone.Esophageal clearance mechanisms : Reflux of gastric contents into the esophagus occurs in
healthy persons and are normally cleared by esophagus in a two-step process:
–  Volume clearance by peristaltic function: After acid reflux from stomach, the esophageal
peristalsis returns the refluxed fluid to the stomach.
–  Neutralization of acid by bicarbonate in the swallowed saliva: The small amounts of residual
acid refluxed into the esophagus is neutralized by weakly alkaline (bicarbonate) contained in
swallowed saliva.
Epithelial defensive factors : The esophageal mucosa contains mainly 3 lines of defense.

1. Pre-epithelial barrier: Consisting of (1) small unstirred water layer (2) bicarbonate from
swallowed saliva and (3) secretions of submucosal glands.
2. Epithelial defense: Consisting of cell membranes and tight intercellular junctions, buffers, and
ion transporters.
3. Postepithelial defense : Consists of the blood supply to the esophagus.
Fig. 10.3: Anatomy of normal antireflux barrier at the lower esophagus
Causes of Disruption of Normal Defense Mechanisms (Fig. 10.4)
Defective anti-reflux barriers
–  Hiatus hernia (sliding type): This is characterized by sliding of the
esophagogastric junction through the diaphragm. This results in
increased exposure of the esophagus to acid and may lead to
esophagitis, Barrett’s esophagus or peptic strictures.
–  Abnormalities of lower esophageal sphincter (LES): Transient
relaxation and reduced tone of LES can result in regurgitation,
especially when intra-abdominal pressure is increased.
♦  Cigarette smoking, chocolate, alcohol, fatty foods and caffeine
causes relaxation and reduction of tone of LES.
♦  Cardiomyotomy and vagotomy reduces the efficiency of the LES.
♦  Drugs (aminophyline, β-agonists, nitrates, calcium channel blockers)
reduce the tone of LES.
–  Crural diaphragm

–  Increased the intra-abdominal pressure : It may occur during
pregnancy, obesity, ascites, weight lifting and straining.
Prolonged/delayed esophageal clearance of refluxed acid:  It may be
due to (1) impaired peristalsis, (2) reduced salivation and (3) body
position. Poor esophageal clearance leads to increased acid exposure time.
Impaired production of saliva may be observed in smokers and Sjögren’s
syndrome.Defective gastric emptying: It increases the gastric content available for
reflux. It may be due to gastric outlet obstruction, anticholinergic drugs
and fatty food.
Fig. 10.4:  Pathophysiological factors associated with the development of gastroesophageal reflux
disease (GERD).
Clinical Features
Classical triad of symptoms is (1) heartburn, (2) acid regurgitation, and (3)

epigastric pain.
Heartburn: It is the classic symptom of GERD. Patients usually complain
of a burning feeling, rising from the stomach or lower chest and radiating
toward the neck, throat, and occasionally the back. It occurs
postprandially, particularly after large meals or after ingesting spicy foods,
citrus products, fats, chocolates, and alcohol. The supine position and
bending over may exacerbate heartburn.Acid regurgitation: Effortless regurgitation of acidic fluid, especially
after meals and worsened by stooping or the supine position is highly
suggestive of GERD.Epigastric pain: Sometimes radiating through to the back.
Other symptoms
Odynophagia (painful swallowing).
Dysphagia: Dysphagia is reported by more than 30% of individuals with
GERD. Transient to solids (due to esophageal spasm) or persistent
dysphagia to solids (due to strictures).Less common symptoms associated with GERD include water brash,
burping, hiccups, nausea, and vomiting.
Iron deficiency anemia may occur due to blood loss.
Extraesophageal symptoms
Atypical chest pain which may be severe and can mimic angina.
Upper respiratory tract: Hoarseness, sore throat, sinusitis, otitis media,
chronic cough, laryngitis.
Pulmonary: The prevalence of GERD in asthmatics is estimated between
34% and 89%. Other pulmonary diseases associated with GERD include
aspiration pneumonia, interstitial pulmonary fibrosis, chronic bronchitis,
and bronchiectasis.Associated conditions: Pregnancy (reducing LES pressure due to the effects
of estrogen and progesterone and possibly mechanical factors from the gravid
uterus), scleroderma, achalasia cardia, Zollinger–Ellison syndrome.
Table 10.31: Alarm symptoms or signs of GERD.
Dysphagia
Weight lossPersistent heartburn
Odynophagia

Gastrointestinal bleeding
Nausea and vomiting, early satietyAnemia
Family history of cancer
Table 10.32: Complications of GERD.
Esophagitis
Hemorrhage and bleeding (hematemesis,
melena)
Esophageal ulceration
Esophageal strictures
Barrett’s esophagusAdenocarcinoma esophagus
Aspiration pneumonia
Iron deficiency anemia
Dental caries
Alarm symptoms or signs (Table 10.31)
Complications of GERD (Table 10.32)
Barrett’s Esophagus
Q. Write short answer on Barrett’s esophagus
Barrett’s esophagus is a pre-malignant condition , in which the normal
squamous lining of the lower esophagus is replaced by columnar mucosa
(columnar lined esophagus; CLO). The columnar mucosa may show areas of
intestinal metaplasia (with goblet cells). It is an adaptive response to chronic
gastroesophageal reflux and is often asymptomatic. The risk of esophageal
cancer depends on the severity and duration of reflux and it may be detected
when the patient presents with esophageal cancer. It is more common in men,
obese and above the age of 50. It is weakly associated with smoking but not
with alcohol intake.
Diagnosis: It needs multiple systematic biopsies which may show intestinal
metaplasia and/or dysplasia.
Management
Regular endoscopic surveillance to detect dysplasia at an early stage. Currently recommendation
are as follows:Barrett’s esophagus with intestinal metaplasia, but without dysplasia: Should undergo endoscopy
at 3–5 yearly intervals if the length of the Barrettic segment is 3 cm and at 2–3 yearly intervals if
the length is >3 cm.Low-grade dysplasia: It should be endoscoped at 6-monthly intervals.
Treatment is indicated only for symptoms of reflux or complications (e.g. stricture).
Endoscopic therapies : Such as radiofrequency ablation or photodynamic therapy, can induce
regression. However, they are used only for patients with dysplasia or intramucosal cancer.
High-grade dysplasia or intramucosal carcinoma: Treatment options are either esophagectomy or

endoscopic therapy, with a combination of endoscopic resection of any visibly abnormal areas and
radiofrequency ablation of the remaining Barrett’s mucosa, as an ‘organ-preserving’ alternative to
surgery.
Investigations (Table 10.33)
Diagnostic endoscopy should be performed in patients who fail to respond to
therapy or have alarm symptoms or signs.
Endoscopy: It is useful for the detection of
–  Erosive esophagitis which would be visualized and confirmed by
biopsy.
–  Complications: Peptic stricture and Barrett’s esophagus (confirmed by
biopsy)
Barium radiography: It has no role in the diagnosis of GERD. Barium
swallow and meal examination is useful for appreciation of
gastroesophageal anatomy and may be important in the diagnosis of hiatus
hernia.24-hour pH recording: It is the ‘gold standard’ for diagnosis of GERD.
Prolonged measurement of pH is the most accurate method for the
diagnosis of gastroesophageal reflux particularly in patients with atypical
symptoms and with normal endoscopies.Esophageal manometry: Useful to exclude achalasia and other motility
disorders.
Resting ECG and stress ECG : To rule out ischemic heart disease (IHD).
Table 10.33: Diagnostic tests for gastroesophageal reflux disease.
Tests for Reflux
Intraesophageal pH monitoring (catheter or catheter-free system)
Ambulatory impedance and pH monitoring (nonacid reflux)
Barium esophagogram
Tests to Assess Symptoms
Empirical trial of acid suppression
Intraesophageal pH monitoring with symptom analysis
Tests to Assess Esophageal Damage
Endoscopy
Wireless capsule endoscopy
Esophageal biopsy
Tests to Assess Esophageal Function

Esophageal manometry
Esophageal impedance
Q. Write short note on management/treatment of gastroesophageal
reflux disease (GERD)/reflux esophagitis.
Treatment
General measures
These are lifestyle modifications as listed in Box 10.6.
Medical treatment
Inhibition of gastric acid secretion is the cornerstone of the treatment of acute GERD.
Antacids (for details refer page 743):  Liquid antacids buffer acid and increase LESP. They are used
in the dose of 10–15 mL, 1 and 3 hours after meal and at bedtime or as needed. They relieve heart
burn in mild cases.
Histamine (H 2)-receptor antago nists (for details refer page 743):  They decrease acid secretion.
These drugs include cimetidine (800 mg bid, 400 mg qid) or ranitidine (150 mg qid), or famotidine
(20–40 mg bid) daily to be given with meals and before bed time, for at least 6 weeks (in mild cases).
Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) (for details refer page 743):  They decrease acid secretion and
gastric volume. They are superior to histamine (H 2)-receptor antagonists. These include omeprazole
(20–40 mg/day), lansoprazole (15–30 mg/day), pantoprazole (40 mg/day), esomeprazole (20–40
mg/day) and rabeprazole (10–20 mg/day). Maintenance doses may be necessary for 6–8 months.
Present evidence does not support the common practice of using metoclopramide or domperidone
10 mg thrice daily either as monotherapy or an adjunct to acid suppression therapy. Its significant
adverse effects argue against the use of this drug in GERD.H. pylori  eradication does not have any therapeutic value.
Dilatation of esophageal strictures.
Anemia is treated with oral iron or blood transfusion.
Surgical treatment
Indications:  (1) failure to respond to medical therapy, (2) patients not willing to take long-term PPIs
or intolerant to PPIs (3) patients with severe symptom, and (4) patients with regurgitation.
Surgical measures
Surgical resection of esophageal strictures.
Anti-reflux surgery:  Laparoscopic fundoplication (additional valve mechanism) yields results
comparable to continued PPI therapy
Box 10.6:  Lifestyle modifications in the treatment of GERD.
Avoid foods such as fatty food, alcohol, mint, tomato-based foods, spicy foods, coffee, tea and
acidic foods.
Avoid late night meals before retiring.
Avoid weight lifting, stooping and bending at waist.
Elevation of the head of the bed in patients with regurgitation or heartburn during night.
Weight reduction
Stop smoking, alcohol
Frequents feeds of small volume.

Hiatus Hernia
Q. Write short note on hiatus hernia.
It is the herniation of elements of the abdominal cavity (part of stomach)
through the diaphragm into the thoracic cavity.
Types (Figs. 10.5A to D)
Sliding or type I hiatus hernia: It is the most common type. In this type,
the gastroesophageal junction and the fundus of stomach slide upward
above the diaphragmatic hiatus.
Figs. 10.5A to D:  Types of hiatus hernia. (A) Normal esophagus and stomach; (B) Type I (sliding);
(C) Type II (paraesophageal/rolling); (D) Type III (mixed paraesophageal) hiatus hernia.
True paraesophageal (rolling) or type II hiatus hernia: It is
uncommon. In this type, location of gastroesophageal junction is in its
normal position, but the fundus and parts of the greater curvature of the
stomach herniate into the mediastinum alongside the esophagus.Mixed paraesophageal hernia or type III : In this type, gastroesophageal
junction and a large part of the stomach herniate into the mediastinum.
Predisposing factors: Obesity, pregnancy and ascites. Occurs in 33% of
normal adults and 50% of elderly.
Clinical Features
Majority of hiatus hernia are asymptomatic. Hiatus hernia predisposes to
gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), and hence, symptoms of GERD
may be present.
Type I: Usually asymptomatic or present with symptoms of heartburn or
acid regurgitation.
Type II and III may present with epigastric pain, chest pain, substernal

fullness, shortness of breath, nausea, or vomiting.
Investigations
Plain radiograph of the chest: Hernia may be visible as a gas bubble,
often with a fluid level behind the heart.
Barium swallow/meal : It is the best method of diagnosis and
demonstrates the presence of gastroesophageal junction in the thorax.
Endoscopy.
Management
Asymptomatic hiatus hernias do not require any treatment. Surgical repair of hernia is required in
selected cases with gastroesophageal reflux.
Symptomatic rolling hiatus hernias require surgical repair because it is potentially liable to
undergo volvulus as a dangerous complication.
Surgical treatment: (1) Repair of the diaphragmatic defect, and (2) fixing the stomach in the
abdominal cavity (fundoplication) combined with an antireflux procedure.
Achalasia of the Esophagus
Q. Write short note on achalasia cardia and its diagnosis/investigations.
Achalasia is characterized by esophageal aperistalsis and results from
progressive degeneration of ganglion cells in the myenteric plexus in the
esophageal wall, causing failure of relaxation of the hypertonic lower
esophageal sphincter in response to the swallowing wave. Failure of
propagated esophageal contraction results in progressive dilatation of the
gullet.
Cause : Unknown. Autoimmune, neurodegenerative and viral etiologies have
been suggested. Reduction in nitric oxide synthase containing neurons is
detected by immunohistochemical staining in the lower esophageal sphincter.
There is degeneration of ganglion cells within the sphincter and the body of
the esophagus. Infection with Trypanosoma cruzi  in Chagas’ disease causes a
syndrome that is clinically similar to achalasia.
Clinical FeaturesAge and gender: Occurs equally in males and females and at all ages but
is rare in childhood.
Dysphagia: It develops slowly, is initially intermittent and
characteristically for both liquids and solids from the onset (worse for

solids). Dysphagia is eased by drinking liquids, and by standing and
moving around after eating.
Episodes of chest pain : Spontaneous chest pain occurs due to esophageal
spasm which may be misdiagnosed as cardiac.
Regurgitation of food from the dilated esophagus: As the disease
progresses, dysphagia worsens and caused poor emptying of the
esophagus. This may produce nocturnal pulmonary aspiration and
aspiration pneumonia.Heartburn does not occur because the closed esophageal sphincter which
prevents gastroesophageal reflux.
Achalasia predisposes to squamous carcinoma of the esophagus.
Investigations
Chest X-ray: Shows a dilated esophagus. Sometimes fluid level may be
observed behind the heart. There is absence of fundic gas shadow.
Barium swallow: There is absence of peristalsis and often synchronous
contractions in the body of the esophagus. There is tapered narrowing of
the lower esophagus producing a ‘bird’s beak’ appearance due to failure of
the sphincter to relax.Manometry shows high-pressure, non-relaxing lower esophageal
sphincter with poor contractility of the esophageal body.
Endoscopy: It should be performed because carcinoma of the cardia can
mimic the presentation and radiological and manometric features of
achalasia (‘pseudo-achalasia’).
Management
Treatment for achalasia is palliative.
EndoscopicEndoscopic dilatation of the LES (lower esophageal sphincter)
Endoscopically directed injection of botulinum toxin  into the lower esophageal sphincter
(intersphincteric injection).
Surgical
Surgical myotomy (Heller’s operation)
Peroral endoscopic myotomy (POEM)
DISEASES OF THE STOMACH AND

DUODENUM
Q. Discuss the etiology, pathogenesis, pathology, clinsical features,
investigations and management of peptic ulcer disease or acid peptic
disease.
Peptic Ulcer Disease (PUD)
Definition
An ulcer in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract may be defined as a break in the
lining of the mucosa, with appreciable depth at endoscopy or histologic
evidence of involvement of the submucosa.
Sites of Peptic Ulcer
Any portion of the GI tract exposed to acidic gastric juices.Duodenum: More common in the first portion of the duodenum (anterior or posterior wall)
than in the stomach . Occasionally occurs at both anterior and posterior sites (‘kissing’ ulcers).
Stomach : Lesser curvature near the junction (transitional zone) of the body and antrum.
–  Proximal ulcers: Located in the body of the stomach.
–  Distal ulcers: Located in the antrum and angulus of the stomach.
Gastroesophageal junction of esophagus
Anastomotic site : Occurs in patients who have undergone a distal gastric resection. Occur at
margins of the gastroduodenal anastomosis/gastrojejunostomy (anastomotic ulcer).
Multiple ulcers : In the duodenum, stomach, and/or jejunum in Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.
At metaplastic or heterotopic gastric mucosa, e.g. Meckel diverticulum within an ileum having
ectopic gastric mucosa.
Incidence: ~12% in males and 10% in females.
Etiology
Q. Write short essay/note on risk factors for peptic ulcer disease.
Normal process in the stomach
Two opposing sets of forces keep stomach in a normal state: (1) damaging
forces and (2) defensive forces.
1. Damaging forces: Capable of inducing mucosal injury are two gastric
secretory products: (1) hydrochloric acid, and (2) pepsinogen.
2. Defensive forces is a three-level barrier composed of pre-epithelial,
epithelial, and subepithelial elements. Pre-epithelial barrier is a mucus-
bicarbonate layer of the stomach.

Surface mucus secretion : Mucin is secreted by surface foveolar cells.
Actions of mucus are: (1) Mucus layer promotes formation of an
‘unstirred’ protective layer of fluid on the mucosa. (2) Prevents the
direct contact of large food particles with the epithelium. (3) Impedes
the diffusion of ions and molecules such as pepsin.Bicarbonate secretion into mucus by surface epithelial cells →
diffuse into the unstirred mucus → buffer the hydrogen ions entering
from the luminal aspect → result in a pH gradient, ranging from 1 or 2
at the gastric luminal surface, and reaching to a neutrality of 6 to 7
along the epithelial cell surface.
Epithelial barrier: Consists of surface epithelial cells act through
several factors, such as (1) production of mucus, (2) epithelial cell
ionic transporters that maintain intracellular pH, and (3) bicarbonate
production, and (4) intracellular tight junctions. Subepithelial barrierRich gastric mucosal blood flow: Provides (1) bicarbonate
(HCO3–), which neutralizes the acid generated by parietal cell, (2)
an adequate supply of nutrients and oxygen and (3) removes toxic
metabolic by-products.
Pathogenesis of Peptic Ulcer (Fig. 10.6)
Q. Write short essay/note on Helicobacter pylori  and its role in
pathogenesis (pathophysiology) of gastric ulcer.
The imbalances between mucosal defensive forces (disruption of any of
protective mechanisms) and damaging forces (direct mucosal injury) cause
chronic gastritis and also PUD.
Direct mucosal injury/increased damage
Majority of PUD (both gastric and duodenal ulcers) can be attributed to
NSAIDs and H. pylori.
Helicobacter pylori  is a Gram-negative spiral bacteria with multiple
unipolar flagella that allow them to move freely through the gastric
mucous layer, where they remain protected from low gastric pH. It is one
of the most important, common, primary causes of PUD. It is associated
with ~85–90% of duodenal and ~65% of gastric ulcers. Helicobacter
pylori  infection remains one of the most common chronic bacterial
infections in humans more than 50% of the world’s population is infected

with the bacterium. H. pylori  also play a role in the development of gastric
and duodenal ulcer, gastritis, MALT (mucosal-associated lymphoid tissue)
lymphoma, and gastric adenocarcinoma.
–  Mode of spread: Oral-oral or feco-oral route either by kissing or
ingestion of contaminated vomitus.
Fig. 10.6: Components involved in mucosal defense and repair in normal (left side) and in acute
or chronic gastritis. Gastric mucus barrier consists of viscid mucus (which forms an unstirred
layer between the epithelium and the gastric lumen) and bicarbonate.

Fig. 10.7: Natural history of H. pylori infection.
–  Lesions produced : H. pylori  may attach to gastric epithelium causing
damage to the mucosa. Causes chronic antral gastritis with high acid
production → may progress to pangastritis → resulting multifocal
atrophic gastritis → increased risk of gastric adenocarcinoma. Natural
history of H.pylori  infection is shown in Figure 10.7.
–  Nongastric diseases and H. pylori infection: Raynaud’s, scleroderma,
idiopathic urticaria, acne rosacea, migraines, thyroiditis, and Guillain-
Barré syndrome coronary artery disease, immune thrombocytopenic
purpura.
–  Mechanism of action by H. pylori:
♦  Flagella: It makes them motile, allows them to burrow and live
beneath the mucus layer above the epithelial surface.
♦  Urease: It is produced by H. pylori  → converts urea into ammonia
(strong alkali) → raises the local gastric pH, acts on the antral G
cells → release of gastrin → hypergastrinemia → result in
hypersecretion of gastric acid.
♦  Adhesion molecule: It helps it to bind to gastric epithelial (surface

foveolar) cells.
♦  Enzymes: These include proteases and phospholipases acts on the
mucous gel → reduces the mucosal defense.
♦  Cytotoxins: Two genes namely cytotoxin-associated gene A (CagA)
and vacuolating agent (vacA) gene cause gastritis, peptic ulceration
and cancer.
♦  Cytokine induces inflammatory response: Normally H. pylori do
not invade the cells/tissues. It causes increased production of pro-
inflammatory cytokines {interleukin (IL)-1, IL-6, tumor necrosis
factor (TNF) and IL-8} by the mucosal epithelial cells → activation
of neutrophils and macrophages (inflammatory response to gastric
mucosa) → release of lysosomal enzymes, leukotrienes and reactive
oxygen species → impairs mucosal defense. The cytokines also
stimulate gastrin release → increased acid production.Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID) and aspirin: Causes
(1) direct chemical irritation of mucosa,(2) suppresses mucosal
prostaglandin synthesis, and (3) reduces the bicarbonate secretion.
Cigarette smoking impairs blood flow to the mucosa and healing of
mucosal damage.
Alcohol, radiation therapy and chemotherapy: Direct injury to mucosal
cells.
Ingestion of chemicals: Such as acids or bases cause direct injury.
Gastric hyperacidity: It is induced by H. pylori  infection, parietal cell
hyperplasia and Zollinger–Ellison syndrome.
Others: High-dose corticosteroids that suppress prostaglandin synthesis
and impair healing, other drugs (e.g. bisphosphonates, cocaine,
amphetamines), hypercalcemia psychological stress, duodenal gastric
reflux, Crohn’s disease and systemic mastocytosis.
Etiology of Acute and Stress Ulcers
Stress ulcers: They occur with shock, sepsis, or severe trauma.
Curling ulcers: They develop in the proximal duodenum with severe
burns or trauma.
Cushing ulcers: They develop in the stomach, duodenum, and esophagus
in patients with intracranial disease. Highly prone for perforation.

Clinical Features
Recurrent episodes of abdominal pain: It is the most common
presentation  and has three notable characteristics:
Localization to the epigastrium: Pain is referred to epigastrium and the
patient will be able to localize the site with one finger (pointing sign). The
characteristics of pain are:
–  Nature: Usually burning in character or gnawing discomfort.
–  Radiating pain : May radiate to the back, thorax, other parts of
abdomen.
–  Nocturnal : Pain in duodenal ulcer occurs 90 minutes to 3 hours after a
meal. May occur at night (most specific) and wakes the patient from
sleep between midnight and 3 AM), and is relieved by food, milk or
antacids.
–  Hunger pain : Pain occurs on empty stomach (painful hunger) relieved
by food or antacids.Relationship to food
–  Pain is usually relieved by food, milk, antacids, belching or vomiting
in duodenal ulcer.
–  In contrast, in few patients with gastric ulcer food may precipitate the
pain.
Periodicity (episodic pain)
–  In untreated patients, pain tends to occur in episodes. Each episode
consisting of daily pain lasting 2 to 8 weeks, separated by prolonged
asymptomatic intervals.
–  Between episodes (periods of remission) patient may be perfectly well
and may be able to eat even heavy or spicy meals without apparent
discomfort.
–  During the initial stages, the episodes tend to be of short in duration and
less frequent. Later, the episodes become longer in duration and more
frequent. More symptomatic during winter and spring. Relapses are
more common in smokers compared to non-smokers.
Other symptoms
Retrosternal burning (heartburn), water-brash (excessive salivation), loss of
appetite, acidic regurgitation into the throat and vomiting. Persistent daily

vomiting suggests gastric outlet obstruction. Fullness, bloating, anorexia,
nausea, and dyspepsia. Tarry stools or coffee-ground vomitus indicate
bleeding. Rarely, with anemia due to chronic blood loss, abrupt hematemesis,
acute perforation or gastric outlet obstruction.
Difference between gastric ulcer and duodenal ulcer (Table 10.34).
Complications (Box 10.7)
Q. Write short essay/note on complications of peptic ulcer disease.
Box 10.7: Complications of peptic ulcer.
Upper gastrointestinal bleeding (20%)
Perforation of ulcer (6–7%)
Gastric outlet obstruction 1–2% (with fluid and electrolyte imbalance), gastrocolic or duodenocolic
fistulas
Rarely malignant transformation
Rarely pancreatitis due to posterior penetration of ulcer
Table 10.34: Difference between gastric ulcer and duodenal ulcer.
Features Gastric ulcer Duodenal ulcer
Commonest site Along the lesser curvature First part of duodenum
Incidence Less common More common
Age Beyond 6th decade, M>F Between 25 to 50 years, M>F
Association with H. pylori
infectionLess common Strong association
Acid level Usually normal High
Clinical features
Relationship of pain to
anatcidsRelief of pain not consistent Prompt relief of pain
Relationship of pain to food Aggravates the pain Relieves the pain
Night pain Not observed Common
Heartburn Not common Common
Hematemesis/melena Hematemesis more common Melena more common
Vomiting Common No vomiting
Weight loss Present Absent
Anorexia and nausea More common Less common
Duration of episodes of pain Relatively longer in duration Relatively shorter in duration
Course of the illness Less remission More remission

Complication Rarely undergo malignant
changeNo malignant change
Investigations/Diagnosis
Q. Write short essay/note on diagnosis of peptic ulcer disease.
Anatomic diagnosis: Documentation of a peptic ulcer needs either a
radiographic (barium study) or an endoscopic examination.
Endoscopy (Fig. 10.8): It is most sensitive and specific for the detection
of ulcer disease of the upper GI tract. Typical location of peptic ulcer is
duodenal bulb and lesser curvature of stomach. Advantages of endoscopy
are: 1) direct visualization of mucosa (to determine if an ulcer is a source
of blood loss) and the ulcer (even lesions too small to detect by
radiographic examination), 2) useful for photographic documentation of a
mucosal defect, and 3) biopsy can be taken to rule out malignancy (about
10% of gastric ulcers are malignant) or H. pylori.Endoscopic ultrasound : It may be useful in detecting an unsuspected
submucosal component or enlarged lymph nodes (e.g. in gastric
malignancies such as lymphoma and linitis plastica).
Etiologic diagnosis: The cause of the ulcer must be established. The
major risk factor for peptic ulcers is either H. pylori  or NSAID.
Tests for Helicobacter pylori (Table 10.35)

Fig. 10.8:  Endoscopic picture of a benign gastric ulcer.
Q. Write short essay/note on investigation in Helicobacter pylori
infecion.
Table 10.35: Diagnostic tests for Helicobacter pylori (HP).
Advantages Disadvantages
NONENDOSCOPIC TESTS
Serology (qualitative or
quantitative immunoglobulin
G [IgG])Widely available,
economical. Good NPV
(negative predictive value)Poor PPV (positive predictive value) if
HP prevalence is low. Not useful after
treatment
Urea breath test (13C or
14C)Detects active infection.
Accuracy (PPV, NPV) not
affected by H. pylori
prevalence. Useful both
before and after treatmentAccuracy affected by PPI and
antibiotic use, small radiation dose
with 14C test
Stool antigen test Detects active infection.
Accuracy (PPV, NPV) not
affected by H. pylori
prevalence. Useful both
before and after treatment
(monoclonal test)Accuracy affected by PPI and
antibiotic use
ENDOSCOPIC TESTS

Microscopic examination Excellent sensitivity and
specificity, especially with
special and immune stains;
provides additional
information about gastric
mucosaExpensive (endoscopy and
histopathology costs), interobserver
variability, accuracy affected by PPI
and antibiotic use
Rapid urease test Rapid results, accurate in
patients not using PPIs or
antibiotics, no added
histopathology costRequires endoscopy, less accurate after
treatment or in patients using PPIs
Culture Specificity 100%, allows
antibiotic sensitivity testingDifficult and tedious to perform; not
widely available; expensive
Polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) assayExcellent sensitivity and
specificity, permits detection
of antibiotic resistanceNot widely available; technique not
standardized; expensiveNonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs): Diagnosis is
established based on history of drug use and symptoms of pain.
Hypersecretory syndromes: Zollinger- Ellison syndrome should be
considered in patients with multiple ulcers. Serum gastrin and gastric acid
analysis should be performed in these patients.
Box 10.8:  General measures in peptic ulcer disease.
Avoid: Cigarette smoking, aspirin and NSAIDs
Alcohol  to be avoided
No special dietary advice is necessary
Q. Write short essay/note on medical management of peptic ulcer
disease and mention the new drugs used in its treatment.
Treatment/Management
Treatment may be divided into short-term management and long-term management (intermittent,
maintenance and surgical treatment).
A.  Short-term management
General measures (Box 10.8)
Acid neutralizing/inhibitory drug
a.  Antacids:  Neutralizes the secreted acid and rarely used at present.
–  Mainly used for symptomatic relief of dyspepsia.
–  Preparation: Tablet or liquid preparations
–  Dose: 15–30 mL liquid antacid 1 and 3 hours after food and at bed time for 4–6 weeks.
–  Commonly used antacids: Combination of aluminium hydroxide and magnesium
hydroxide. Others include calcium carbonate and sodium bicarbonate.
–  Side effects

♦  Aluminium compounds causes constipation, phosphate depletion and interfere with the
absorption of digoxin and tetracycline
♦  Magnesium compounds cause diarrhea, hypocalcemia and hypermagnesemia.
♦  Calcium carbonate causes milk-alkali syndrome and sodium bicarbonate produces
systemic alkalosis.
Q. Write short essay/note on H 2 receptor blockers.
b.  Histamine H 2- receptor antagonists:
–  Drugs:  These include four agents namely cimetidine (400 mg BD or 800 mg at night),
ranitidine (150 mg BD or 300 mg at night), famotidine (20 mg BD or 40 mg at night), and
nizatidine (150 mg BD or 300 mg at night). All are equally effective.
–  Mechanism of action: Inhibit acid and pepsin secretion by blocking H 2-receptors.
Duration of treatment:
–  Duodenal ulcer:  Usually for 4 weeks. Smokers and patients with recent major complications
(e.g. hematemesis, perforation), treatment is prolonged to 6–8 weeks.
–  Gastric ulcer:  For 6 weeks, followed by endoscopy and further treatment if necessary.
Q. Write short essay/note on proton pump inhibitors with their dose.
c.  Proton Pump (H+,K+-ATPase) Inhibitors (PPIs)
These agents are substituted benzimidazole derivatives that covalently bind and irreversibly
inhibit H+, K+-ATPase.
They include omeprazole (20 mg/d), esomeprazole (20–40 mg/d), lansoprazole (15–30 mg/d),
rabeprazole (20 mg/d), and pantoprazole (40 mg/d). All have similar efficacy in the treatment
of various acid-peptic disorders.
Mechanism of action
–  PPIs are lipophilic compounds that cross the parietal cell membrane and enter the acidic
parietal cell canaliculus.
–  Upon entering the acidic parietal cell, the PPIs are protonated, and trapped within the acid
environment of the tubulovesicular and canalicular system. They become activated and
bind covalently with the H+/K+ ATPase enzyme and potently inhibit all phases of gastric
acid secretion by the proton pump.
Side effects:  Headache, diarrhea, abdominal pain and nausea. The use of PPI may predispose
to an increased risk of Clostridium difficile  infection, community acquired pneumonia, hip
fracture, and vitamin B 12 deficiency.
Advantages:  Superior healing rates, shorter healing time and faster relief of symptom
compared to H 2-blockers.
Indications (Box 10.9)
Box 10.9:  Indications for proton pump inhibitors (PPIs).
GERD and reflux esophagitis
Peptic ulcer not responding to other medical measures.
As an adjunct to anti-H.pylori treatment.
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome

d.  Cytoprotective Agents
Sucralfate:  It is a complex sucrose salt insoluble in water and becomes a viscous paste within
the stomach and duodenum. It binds to sites of active ulceration. Sucralfate acts as a
protective barrier, over the ulcer and increases the mucosal defense and repair. Standard dose
1 g qid.
Bismuth-containing preparations: Colloidal bismuth subcitrate (CBS) and bismuth
subsalicylate are used to induce healing of peptic ulcers. Side effects include black stools,
constipation, darkening of the tongue and neurotoxicity. They are commonly used as one of
the agents in an anti-H. pylori  regimen. Prostaglandin analogues:  They enhance mucosal defense and repair and useful in
preventing NSAID-induced mucosal injury. Dose (e.g. Misoprostol) is 200 µg qid.
Q. Write short essay/note on management of Helicobacter pylori  infection/ Helicobacter pylori
eradication regimens.
e.  Treatment for H. pylori  infection  (Tables 10.36 and 10.37)
Indications:  Consensus of opinion is that all patients with proven acute or chronic duodenal
ulcer and those with gastric ulcers who are H. pylori -positive should be administered drugs
against H. pylori (even without documenting the presence of bacteria).
Advantages:  It reduces the risk of recurrence of ulcer.
Type of therapy: Triple or quadruple therapy (Refer Tables 10.36 and 10.37).
B. Long-term management
1.  Intermittent treatment:  When the symptoms relapses <4 times a year, 4 weeks course of one
of the ulcer-healing agents are prescribed
Table 10.36: First-line treatment of Helicobacter pylori  infection.
Treatment regimen Durati on
PPI
(omeprazole/lansoprazole/pantaprazole/rabeprazole/esmoprazole),
clarithromycin 500 mg, amoxicillin 1000 mg (each twice daily)10–14
days
PPI, clarithromycin 500 mg, metronidazole 500 mg (each twice
daily)10–14
days
Sequential therapy PPI, amoxicillin 1000 mg (each twice daily)
for 5 days followed  by PPI, clarithromycin 500 mg, tinidazole
500 mg (each twice daily) for next 5 days.10 days
Bismuth subsalicylate 525 mg, metronidazole 500 mg,
tetracycline 500 mg (each four times daily) plus  PPI or H 2RA
(Ranitidine twice daily)10–14
days
(PPI: proton pump inhibitors; H 2RA: histamine H 2- receptor antagonists)

Table 10.37: Rescue treatment for persistent Helicobacter pylori  infection.
Regimen Duration Eradication rate
Quadruple
therapy: Bismuth
subsalicylate 525
mg, metronidazole
500 mg, tetracycline
500 mg (each four
times daily) plus PPI
or H2RA (twice
daily)14 days 70%
PPI, amoxicillin
1000 mg,
levofloxacin 250 mg
(each twice daily)10–14 days 57–91%
PPI amoxicillin
1000 mg, rifabutin
150 mg (each twice
daily)14 days 60–80%
2.  Maintenance treatmentContinuous maintenance treatment is not required after successful eradication of H. pylori .
If symptoms relapses for more than four times per year or history of complications (e.g.
repeated bleeding or perforation) require the lowest effective dose of PPI.
Long-term maintenance is with H 2-receptor antagonists (cimetidine 400 mg at night,
ranitidine 150 mg at night, famotidine 20 mg at night or nizatidine 150 mg at night).
New Treatments
Cholecystokinin 2 receptor antagonists (CCK2): Itriglumide.
Potassium competitive acid blockers (P-CABs): Revaprazan
3.  Surgical treatment
Most of peptic ulcers are cured by H. pylori  eradication therapy and by acid-suppressing
drugs. Elective surgery is reserved for the treatment of medically refractory disease
(recurrence of ulcer following surgery, gastric outlet obstruction), or urgent/emergency
surgery for the treatment of an ulcer-related complication (e.g. perforation and hemorrhage).Indications for surgery
–  Chronic non-healing gastric ulcer: Persistent ulceration despite adequate medical
therapy. The procedure of choice is partial gastrectomy with a Billroth I anastomosis, in
which the ulcer and the ulcer-bearing area of the stomach are resected.

–  Gastric outflow obstruction
–  Recurrent ulcer following gastric surgery
–  Duodenal ulcer:  Most commonly performed procedures are:
♦  Vagotomy and drainage (by pyloroplasty, gastroduodenostomy, or gastrojejunostomy)
♦  Highly selective vagotomy (which does not require a drainage procedure)
♦  Vagotomy with antrectomy.
–  As an emergency for complications namely perforation and hemorrhage
Dumping Syndrome
Q. Write a short note on dumping syndrome.
It is a series of vasomotor and GI signs and symptoms that occurs when
food reaches the small bowel too rapidly and usually develops in patients
who have undergone vagotomy and drainage (especially Billroth
procedures).
Triggering factor: It usually occurs after meals rich in simple carbohydrates
(especially sucrose) and high osmolarity. Ingestion of large amounts of
liquids may also contribute.
Phases: There are two phases of dumping namely early and late.Early dumping:
–  Time of occurrence: Occurs 15–30 minutes after meals.
–  Signs and symptoms: Consists of crampy abdominal discomfort,
nausea, diarrhea, belching (bloating), borborygmi, tachycardia,
palpitations, diaphoresis, light-headedness, and, rarely, syncope.
–  Mechanism: The signs and symptoms are due rapid emptying of
hypertonic gastric contents into the small intestine that draws the fluid
into lumen of the gut and leads to distension of small intestine. This
leads to reduced volume of plasma and acute intestinal distention.
Release of vasoactive GI hormones (vasoactive intestinal polypeptide,
neurotensin, motilin) may also play a role.Late phase of dumping:
–  Time of occurrence: Occurs 90 minutes to 3 hours after meals.
–  Signs and symptoms: Consists of vasomotor symptoms such as light-
headedness, diaphoresis/sweating, palpitations, tachycardia, and
occasionally syncope.
–  Mechanism: Possibly secondary to hypoglycemia from excessive

insulin release.
Provocative Test
After an overnight fast, a solution of 50–75 g glucose given orally.
Measure blood glucose, hematocrit, pulse rate and blood pressure at 30
minutes intervals, immediately before and up to 180 minutes after
ingestion of glucose.
Positive test: Characterized by an early (30 minutes) increase in pulse rate
(>10/minutes) or hematocrit >3% and late (120–180 minutes)
hypoglycemia.
TreatmentPatient should be asked have small, multiple (six) meals and avoid simple carbohydrates and
liquids during meals.
Antidiarrheals and anticholinergic drugs are complementary to diet.
Guar and pectin: They increase the viscosity of intraluminal food contents, thereby slowing down
gastric emptying.
Acarbose: It is a α-glucosidase inhibitor that delays digestion of ingested carbohydrates. It appears
beneficial in the treatment of the late phases of dumping.
Octreotide: It is a somatostatin analogue given subcutaneously (50 g tid), before the meal may be
used in diet- refractory cases. A long-acting octreotide may be given once every 28 days.
Gastric Outlet Obstruction
Q. Write short note differential diagnosis of gastric outlet obstruction.
Types: Obstruction may be prepyloric, pyloric or duodenal.
Causes (Box 10.10)
Consequences
Vomiting: After gastric outlet obstruction the stomach, gastric juice and
ingested fluid and food accumulate and produce vomiting. It is infrequent,
projectile, large in volume, and the vomitus contains particles of previous
meals. Severe or persistent vomiting may cause loss of acid from the stomach
and result in metabolic alkalosis.
On examination of the abdomen there may be a succussion splash.
Diagnosis
Clinical suspicion : By the nature of the vomiting. Differential diagnosis is

psychogenic vomiting which is frequent, small volume and usually noisy.
Endoscopy
Treatment
Vomiting is treated by intravenous fluid, antiemetics, and electrolyte replacement, gastric
drainage via a nasogastric tube and potent acid suppression therapy.
Endoscopic dilatation  of the pyloric region.
Treatment of the underlying cause
Box 10.10:  Causes of gastric outlet obstruction.
Obstruction due to peptic ulcer disease
–  Active ulcer with surrounding edema
–  Healing of an ulcer has been followed by scarring
Gastric malignancy
Crohn’s disease
External compression from a pancreatic carcinoma
Adult hypertrophic pyloric stenosis is very rare

DISEASES OF THE INTESTINE
Malabsorption Syndrome
Q. Discuss the classification, etiology, clinical features, investigations
(diagnosis) and management of malabsorption syndrome.
Q. Write short essay/note on investigation of a case of steatorrhea.
Definition: Malabsorption is defined as defective/diminished intestinal
absorption of one or more dietary nutrients.
Classification and Etiology (Fig. 10.9)
Q. Write short essay/note on causes of malabsorption syndrome.
Drugs causing malabsorption and systemic diseases associated with
malabsorption are presented in Table 10.38.
Clinical Features
Onset: Insidious and gradually progresses.
General features: Diarrhea, abdominal pain, distension, loss of weight,
anemia.
Symptoms and signs and relevant pathophysiology are presented in Table
10.39 and Figure 10.10.
Table 10.38: Drugs causing malabsorption and systemic diseases associated
with malabsorption.
Drug Systemic diseases
Colchicine, neomycin, methotrexate,
cholestyramine, laxativesAddison’s disease, thyrotoxicosis,
hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, collagen
vascular disease

Fig. 10.9:  Classification and causes of malabsorption
Table 10.39: Signs and symptoms of malabsorption and relevant
pathophysiology.
Symptom or sign Pathophysiology
Gastrointestinal
Diarrhea Osmotic activity of carbohydrates or short-
chain fatty acids
Secretory effect of bile acids and fatty acids
Decreased absorptive surface
Intestinal loss of conjugated bile acids
Abdominal distention, flatulence Bacterial gas production from carbohydrates in
colon, small intestinal bacterial overgrowth
Foul-smelling flatulence or stool Malabsorption of proteins or intestinal protein
loss
Pain Gaseous distention of intestine
Ascites Protein loss or malabsorption
Musculoskeletal
Tetany, muscle weakness, paresthesias Malabsorption of vitamin D, calcium,
magnesium, and phosphate
Bone pain, osteomalacia, fractures Protein, calcium, or vitamin D deficiency;
secondary hyperparathyroidism
Cutaneous and Mucosal
Easy bruisability, ecchymosis, petechiae Vitamin K deficiency and vitamin C deficiency

Glossitis, cheilosis, stomatitis Vitamin B complex, vitamin B 12, folate, or iron
deficiency
Edema Protein loss or malabsorption
Ichthyosis, acrodermatitis, scaly dermatitis Zinc and essential fatty acid deficiency
Follicular hyperkeratosis Vitamin A deficiency
Hyperpigmented dermatitis Niacin deficiency (pellagra)
Koilonychia Iron deficiency
Perifollicular hemorrhage Malabsorption of vitamin C
Other
Weight loss, hyperphagia Nutrient malabsorption
Growth and weight retardation, infantilism Nutrient malabsorption in childhood and
adolescence
Anemia Iron, folate, or vitamin B 12 deficiency
Kidney stones Increased colonic oxalate absorption
Amenorrhea, impotence, infertility Multifactorial (including protein malabsorption,
secondary hypopituitarism, anemia)
Night blindness, xerophthalmia Vitamin A deficiency
Peripheral neuropathy Vitamin B 12 or thiamine deficiency
Fatigue, weakness Calorie depletion, iron and folate deficiency,
anemia
Neurologic symptoms, ataxia Vitamin B 12, vitamin E, or folate deficiency

Fig. 10.10:  Signs and symptoms of malabsorption.
Clinical features of specific malabsorption disorders is presented in Table
10.40
Table 10.40: Clinical features of specific malabsorption disorders.
Disorder Cardinal clinical features
Adrenal insufficiency Skin darkening, hyponatremia, hyperkalemia
Amyloidosis Renal disease, nephrotic syndrome,
cardiomyopathy, neuropathy, carpal tunnel
syndrome, macroglossia, hepatosplenomegaly
Carcinoid syndrome Flushing, cardiac murmur
Celiac disease Variable symptoms: dermatitis herpetiformis,
alopecia, aphthous mouth ulcers, arthropathy,
neurologic symptoms, and (life-threatening)
malnutrition; abnormal liver function test results,
mild iron deficiency

Crohn’s disease Arthritis, aphthous mouth ulcers, episcleritis,
uveitis, pyoderma gangrenosum, erythema
nodosum, abdominal mass, fistulas, primary
sclerosing cholangitis (PSC), laboratory signs of
inflammation
Cystic fibrosis Chronic sinopulmonary disease, meconium ileus,
distal intestinal obstruction syndrome (DIOS),
elevated sweat chloride
Diabetes mellitus Long history of diabetes and diabetic
complications
Glucagonoma Migratory necrolytic erythema
Hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism Symptoms and signs of thyroid disease
Lymphoma Enlarged mesenteric or retroperitoneal lymph
nodes, abdominal mass, abdominal pain, fever
Pancreatic insufficiency History of pancreatitis, abdominal pain; or
alcoholism; large-volume fatty, oily stools
Parasitic infection History of travel to endemic areas
Primary biliary cirrhosis Jaundice, itching
Scleroderma Dysphagia, Raynaud’s phenomenon, skin
tightening
Tropical sprue History of travel to endemic area
Tuberculosis Specific history of exposure, living in or travel to
endemic area, immunosuppression, abdominal
mass or intestinal obstruction, ascites
Whipple’s disease Lymphadenopathy, fever, arthritis, cerebral
symptoms, heart murmur
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome Peptic ulcers, diarrheaInvestigations (Table 10.41 and Flowchart 10.6)
Table 10.41: Laboratory tests useful in patients with suspected
malabsorption.
Test Comment
Peripheral Blood Findings
Hematocrit, hemoglobin Decreased in iron, vitamin B 12, and folate
malabsorption or with blood loss
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin or mean
corpuscular volumeDecreased in iron malabsorption; increased in
folate and vitamin B 12 malabsorption
White blood cells, differential Decreased in vitamin B 12 and folate
malabsorption

Biochemical Tests (Serum)
Triglycerides Decreased in severe fat malabsorption
Cholesterol Decreased in bile acid malabsorption or severe
fat malabsorption
Albumin Decreased in severe malnutrition,protein-losing
enteropathy
Alkaline phosphatase Increased in calcium and vitamin D
malabsorption (severe steatorrhea); decreased in
zinc deficiency
Calcium, phosphorus, magnesium Decreased in extensive small intestinal mucosal
disease, after extensive intestinal resection, or in
vitamin D deficiency
Zinc Decreased in extensive small intestinal mucosal
disease or intestinal resection
Iron, ferritin Decreased in celiac disease, in other extensive
small intestinal mucosal diseases, and with
chronic blood loss
Other Serum Tests
Prothrombin time Prolonged in vitamin K malabsorption
Folic acid Decreased in extensive small intestinal mucosal
diseases, with anticonvulsant use, in pregnancy;
may be increased in small intestinal bacterial
overgrowth
Vitamin B 12 Decreased after gastrectomy, in pernicious
anemia, terminal ileal disease, and small
intestinal bacterial overgrowth
Endoscopy and biopsy
Stool Tests
Fat Qualitative or quantitative increase in fat
malabsorption
Elastase, chymotrypsin Decreased concentration and output in exocrine
pancreatic insufficiency
pH < 5.5 in carbohydrate
Tests for fat absorption
Quantitative test72-hour stool fat collection: Gold standard
6 g/day: Pathologic, patients with steatorrhea >20 g/day.
Qualitative tests
Sudan III stain for fat globules in stool: Detect clinically significant steatorrhea in >90% of cases.
Acid steatocrit: A gravimetric assay. Sensitivity – 100%, specificity – 95%, PPV – 90%
NIRA (near infra reflectance analysis): Equally accurate with 72 hours stool fat test. Allows

simultaneous measurement of fecal fat, nitrogen, CHO (carbohydrate)
Measurement of blood levels of fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, K); prothrombin time.
Plasma vitamin A level after 2–3 days of oral retinol: It will be lower than normal.
Tests for carbohydrate absorption
Glucose tolerance test : It reveals absence of rise in blood glucose levels.
Blood sugar level : Low
D-xylose absorption test : D-xylose is a pentose monosaccharide absorbed exclusively at the
proximal small intestine. This test is used to asses proximal small intestine mucosal function. The
procedure is as follows:
–  After overnight fast, administer 25 g D-xylose perorally.
–  Urine collected for next 5 hours and urinary excretion of D-xylose is estimated.
–  Abnormal test: <4.5 g is abnormal and suggest intestinal malabsorption (duodenal/jejunal
mucosal disorders) and excludes pancreatic cause.
Lactose tolerance test (LTT) :
–  Orally 50 g of lactose is given.
–  Blood glucose levels measured at 0, 60,120 minutes.
–  Normally, blood glucose shows a rise of >20 mg/dL.
–  Blood glucose <20 mg/l + development of symptoms favor diagnosis.Hydrogen breath test (refer page 752) : It is used for the diagnosis of lactase deficiency. 50 g
lactose given orally and breath hydrogen measured every hour for 4 hours. Normal value is <10
ppm increase above baseline.
Flowchart 10.6:  Step-wise investigation in a suspected case of malabsorption

Tests for protein absorption
Serum albumin : Low
Nitrogen in the 24-hour stool : >2.5 g.
α1-Antitrypsin content in stool : Normally no antitrypsin in stool. A 3
days collection of stools is estimated for α1-antitrypsin content.
Test for bile acid malabsorption
Selenium-homocholic acid taurine (SeHCAT) test: In this test Se-labeled
bile acid is given orally. After 7 days, total body retention is measured with a
gamma camera. Retention value of <10% is abnormal.
Tests for absorption of other substances
Serum B12 level: Reduced
Schilling test for absorption of B12: To determine the cause of
cobalamine (B12) malabsorption (refer Fig. 8.18) (discussed on pages 568-
9).
Test for bacterial overgrowth
Quantitative bacterial count from aspiration from small intestine. Normal
count is <10 U/mL (jejunum), >10 U/mL (ileum).
Breath tests: Cholyl-14 C-glycine, e.g. bacterial overgrowth. Lactose H2
for lactose intolerance, e.g. in bacterial overgrowth.
Small intestinal biopsy (duodenal or jejunal):  Lesions seen can be
classified into three:
1. Diffuse and specific, e.g. Whipple’s disease
2. Patchy and specific, e.g. Crohn’s disease, lymphoma, infectious causes.
3. Diffuse and non-specific, e.g. celiac sprue, tropical sprue, autoimmune
enteropathy.
Barium studies: Important information about the gross anatomy and
morphology of small intestine.
Treatment of Malabsorption SyndromeGeneral measures
–  Dehydration and electrolyte deficiency is treated by intravenous infusion.
–  Replacement therapy for anemia, bone disease and coagulation defects. Vitamin D, B complex,

and calcium supplements
Specific therapy depending on the cause
–  Celiac disease: Gluten-free diet.
–  Pancreatic insufficiency: Pancreatic supplements
–  Bile acid deficiency/malabsorption: Low-fat diet and cholestyramine (bile acid binder).
Celiac Disease
Q. Write short essay/note on Celiac disease (non-tropical spure/gluten-
induced enteropathy).
Definition
Celiac disease is characterized by small intestinal malabsorption of nutrients
after the ingestion of wheat gluten or related proteins from rye and barley,
villus atrophy of the small intestinal mucosa, prompt clinical and histologic
improvement following strict adherence to a gluten-free diet, and clinical and
histologic relapse when gluten is reintroduced.
Etiology
Exact etiology is not known, but environmental, immunologic, and genetic
factors play important role.
Environmental factor: Gluten is the protein present in the cereals wheat,
barley and rye. Gliadin is a component of gluten. There is a clear cut
association of the celiac disease with gliadin. Gluten restriction results in
morphologic changes within hours in patient with celiac disease.Immunologic factor: It involves both adaptive and innate immune
responses. Presence of serum antibodies such as IgA antigliadin, IgA
antiendomysial (90–95% sensitivity and specificity), and IgA anti-tTG
antibodies in patients with celiac disease. It is not known whether they
represent primary or secondary to the tissue damage.Genetic factor(s): Increased incidence of celiac disease is observed within
families but the exact mode of inheritance is unknown. All patients
express the HLA-DQ2 or HLA-DQ8 allele.
PathologySite of lesion : Biopsy from the second portion of the duodenum or
proximal jejunum (which are exposed to the highest concentrations of

dietary gluten) is diagnostic.
Microscopic changes: Characterized by increased numbers of
intraepithelial CD8+ T lymphocytes (intraepithelial lymphocytosis), crypt
hyperplasia and villous atrophy. Increased numbers of plasma cells, mast
cells, and eosinophils within the upper part of the lamina propria.
Clinical Features
Age and gender: It can manifest at any age. Usually manifests early in
childhood at about 2 years of age (after wheat is introduced into the diet), or
later in the second to fourth decades of life with a female preponderance.
Symptoms: Many patients are asymptomatic (silent). The symptoms are very
variable and often nonspecific.Symptoms due to malabsorption of multiple nutrients, with diarrhea,
steatorrhea, weight loss, and the consequences of nutrient depletion (i.e.
anemia and metabolic bone disease).Symptoms due to the depletion of a single nutrient (e.g. iron or folate
deficiency or vitamin B12 deficiency, osteomalacia, edema from protein
loss, tetany).
Associated diseases (Box 10.11)
Complications (Box 10.12)
Investigations and Diagnosis
Small-intestinal biopsy: Duodenal/jejunal biopsy is required and is
considered as ‘gold standard’ to establish a diagnosis.
Serologic tests (Box 10.13)
Tests for malabsorption of proteins, carbohydrate, fat and vitamins.
HLA typing. HLADQ2 is observed in 90–95% of patients and HLADQ8
in about 8%.
Box 10.11: Diseases associated with celiac disease.
Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (2–8%)
Thyroid disease (5%)
Primary biliary cirrhosis (3%)
Sjögren’s syndrome (3%)
IgA deficiency (2%)
Pernicious anemia

Box 10.12: Complications of celiac disease.
Gastrointestinal malignancies: An increased incidence of both gastrointestinal (e.g. Carcinoma of
the esophagus) and nongastrointestinal neoplasms as well as enteropathy associated T cell
lymphoma (EATCL)
Development of intestinal ulceration independent of lymphoma (ulcerative jejunitis), refractory
sprue and collagenous sprue
Nonresponsive celiac disease: Few patients do not improve on a strict diet
Refractory celiac disease (RCD)
Pneumococcal infections
Dermatitis herpetiformis
Osteomalacia
Box 10.13: Serologic tests in celiac disease.
Serologic tests
IgA antiendomysial antibody
IgA antitissue transglutaminase antibody (anti-tTG)
IgA antigliadin antibody
IgG antigliadin antibody
Treatment/Management of Celiac Disease
Diet: Lifelong gluten-free diet. Avoid wheat, rye, and barley. Oats not contaminated with flour are
tolerated by most patients. Rice, meat, dairy products, vegetables and fruits are safe. Completely
avoid beer and whisky obtained from malt distillation procedures. Lactose-free diet is advisable
because of secondary lactase deficiency associated with celiac disease.
Supplementation of  vitamins and minerals in cases patients with these deficiency, folic acid
supplements for women of childbearing age.
Pneumococcal vaccinations (because of splenic atrophy) once in every 5 years.
Corticosteroids: They are rarely required. Used in critically ill patients who present with acute
celiac crisis characterized by severe diarrhea, dehydration, weight loss, acidosis, hypocalcemia and
hypoproteinemia. May be used in gliadin shock after a gluten challenge.
Tropical Sprue
Q. Write short essay on tropical sprue (idiopathic tropical
malabsorption syndrome).
Definition: Tropical sprue is a condition presenting with chronic diarrhea and
malabsorption (of two or more substances) that occurs in residents or
travelers to certain, but not all tropical areas (especially India and Southeast
Asia) in the absence of other intestinal diseases or parasites.

Etiology
Etiology and pathogenesis of tropical sprue is unknown.
Role of infectious agents: Because tropical sprue responds to antibiotics,
it is possible that it may be caused by one or more infectious agents (e.g.
Klebsiella pneumoniae, Enterobacter cloacae,  or E. coli ) or a toxin
produced by these agents.
Role of folic acid deficiency: Folic acid is absorbed in the duodenum and
proximal jejunum, and most patients with tropical sprue show evidence of
folate malabsorption and depletion.
Clinical FeaturesClinical features vary in different parts of the world.
Intensity: Vary and consist of diarrhea, anorexia, abdominal distension
fatigue and weight loss.
Onset:
–  Acute: Sometimes acute with sudden severe diarrhea and accompanied
by fever. It occurs either a few days or many years after being in the
tropics.
–  Chronic phase: Onset may also be insidious, with chronic diarrhea and
evidence of nutritional deficiency. Features of megaloblastic anemia
(folic acid malabsorption) and other deficiencies, including ankle
edema, glossitis and stomatitis, are common. Remissions and relapses
may occur.
Diagnosis and Investigations
Abnormal jejunal mucosal biopsy: It shows partial villous atrophy and
mononuclear cell infiltrate in the lamina propria. The lesion is less severe
than that of celiac disease.
Stool examination
Demonstration of malabsorption
Treatment of Tropical Sprue
Broad-spectrum antibiotics: Tetracycline or oxytetracycline 1 g daily in four divided doses for
up to 6 months and produces improvement within 1–2 weeks.
Folic acid : Dose of 5 mg daily along with tetracycline is most often curative. It induces a
hematologic remission and improvement in appetite, weight gain, and also morphological changes
in small intestinal biopsy.

Correction of deficiencies : Severely ill patients require resuscitation with fluids and electrolytes
for dehydration. Nutritional deficiencies should be corrected such as vitamin B (1000 μg).
Symptomatic treatment for diarrhea.
Prognosis: Excellent. Mortality is usually due to water and electrolyte depletion
Lactose Intolerance
Q. Write short note on lactose intolerance.
Etiology
Lactose is the disaccharide present in milk and for it is digested to
monosaccharides (glucose and galactose) by the brush border lactase.
Classification : There are two types of lactase deficiency namely primary
and secondary.
–  Primary lactase deficiency: It is due to genetic deficiency or absence of
lactase and both intestinal absorption and brush border enzymes are
normal.
–  Secondary lactase deficiency: It occurs in association with both
structural and functional disorder of brush border enzymes and
transport processes. Examples, celiac disease, tropical sprue and
Crohn’s disease.Lactose intolerance develops due to the deficiency of lactase and lactose
present in the milk cannot be hydrolyzed. Hence, lactose gets fermented
by bacteria causing gastrointestinal symptoms.
Clinical FeaturesDiarrhea, abdominal pain, cramps, and/or flatus develops after ingesting
milk or milk products.
Symptoms improve on withdrawal of milk or milk products.
Investigations
Hydrogen breath test: This is used as a screening test to measure transit
time and detect bacterial overgrowth in the small intestine. Appearance of
breath hydrogen peak after oral lactulose indicates that the undigested
lactose is fermented by the colonic microflora and produces hydrogen
which can be detected in expired air.Measurement of lactase activity in a jejunal biopsy.

Treatment
Lactose free diet. Avoid milk and dairy products. However, it may lead to nutritional deficiencies,
particularly calcium deficiency.
Administration of exogenous β- galactosidase
–  Enzyme replacement therapy with microbial exogenous lactase (obtained from yeasts or fungi).
–  Enzymes supplement to milk and dairy products.
–  Use of yogurt and probiotics (source of β-galactosidase).
Whipple’s Disease
Q. Write short note on Whipple’s disease and its important clinical
features.
Whipple’s disease is a chronic, rare, multisystemic infectious bacterial
disease caused by Tropheryma whipplei  (gram-positive).
Clinical Features
Gender: More common in males than in females.
Whipple’s disease is a chronic multisystem disease associated with
diarrhea, steatorrhea, weight loss, arthralgia, and central nervous system
(CNS) and cardiac problems.Migratory arthralgias of the large joints
Dementia and other central nervous system findings (such as supranuclear
ophthalmoplegia, nystagmus, and myoclonus.
Cardiac disease (dyspnea, pericarditis, culture-negative endocarditis)
Pleuropulmonary (pleural effusion).
Investigations
Biospy: Jejunal biopsy and biopsy of other involved tissues show numerous
PAS –positive macrophages with small bacilli . In the small intestine, these
macrophages produce lymphatic blockade in the lamina propria causing
malabsorption.
Treatment : Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (double strength tablet): Dose twice a day for 1 year.
This should be preceded by a 2-week course of parenteral therapy with ceftriaxone (2 g daily) or by
meropenem
Giardiasis

Q. Write short essay/note on clinical features, diagnosis and treatment
of Giardiasis.
Giardiasis is an infection caused by flagellate Giardia lamblia (Giardia
intestinalis).
Giardiasis is found worldwide and is one of the most common parasitic
diseases in both developed and developing countries, causing intestinal
disease and diarrhea.
It mainly affects children, tourists and immunosuppressed individuals
(agammaglobulinemia).
Incubation period: 1–3 weeks
Mode of infection : By ingesting contaminated water. In cystic form, it is
viable in water for up to 3 months.
Malabsorption may develop due to loss of brush–border enzyme activities
and few patients may show flattering of villi.
Clinical Features
Range from asymptomatic carrier stage to fulminant diarrhea and
malabsorption.
After ingestion of flagellar trophozoite form, it attaches to the mucosa of
duodenum and jejunum and causes inflammation. It produces disease of
small intestine.Acute giardiasis: Starts as diarrhea, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting,
anorexia, belching, flatus, weakness and abdominal pain. Fever and blood
in stool are rare. The duration is usually >1 week.
Chronic giardiasis: May present with or without having experienced
antecedent acute episode. Diarrhea may not be a prominent symptom and
they may have increased flatus, and loose stools. It may produce
steatorrhea; malabsorption if illness is prolonged may result in marked
weight loss. Symptoms may be continuous or episodic and can persist for
years. Chronic giardiasis in children from developing countries may
develop retardation of growth.Severe disease: Giardiasis may be severe in patients with
hypogammaglobulinemia, resulting in malabsorption, weight loss, growth
retardation, and dehydration.Physical examination may reveal abdominal distension and tenderness.

Extra-intestinal manifestations: These include urticaria, anterior uveitis,
and arthritis.
Investigations/Diagnosis
Stool examination : Demonstration of protozoal parasite.
Duodenal or jejunal aspiration  by endoscopy or with a luminal capsule
gives a higher diagnostic yield.
String test: In this one end of a piece of string is passed into the
duodenum by swallowing and retrieved after an overnight fast. The fluid is
expressed from this and examined for the presence of G. lamblia
trophozoites.Biopsy: Biopsy and histological examination of jejunal mucosa may show
G. lamblia on the epithelial surface.
Stool antigen detection tests: Detection of parasite antigens in the
feces is sensitive and specific and easier to perform.
Other tests: Chronic cases may show steatorrhea, malabsorption of xylose
and vitamin B12 and lactose intolerance.
Treatment/Management
Tinidazole 40 mg/kg (2 g/day) once by mouth and repeated after 1 week.
Metronidazole  2 g daily for 3 days or metronidazole 200 mg thrice daily for 5 to 7 days is usually
curative in >90% of cases.
Nitrazoxanide 500 mg twice a day for 3 days. Other drugs include mepacrine and albendazole.
Paromomycin  is an oral aminoglycoside and is not well absorbed. It can be given to symptomatic
pregnant patients.
Refractory cases : Prolonged therapy with metronidazole 800 mg thrice daily for 3 weeks
.
Carcinoid Tumors (Neuroendocrine Tumors)
Q. Write short note on carcinoid tumors (neuroendocrine tumors) and
carcinoid syndrome.
Neuroendocrine cells are amine- and acid-producing cells located
throughout the body.
Neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) are tumors derived from the diffuse
neuroendocrine system of the GI tract.
Location of carcinoid tumors: Appendix (25%), small intestine (25%), and

rectum (15%). Stomach (5%) and lung (15% of all carcinoid tumors).
Classification of Carcinoid Tumors
According to their anatomic area of origin
Foregut (lungs, bronchi, stomach)
Midgut (small intestine, appendix, proximal large bowel
Hindgut (distal large bowel, rectum).
Ultrastructurally, they possess electron-dense neurosecretory granules which
may contain various substances. These include: 5-hydroxytryptamine
(serotonin), histamine, tachykinins, motillin, prostaglandins,
bradykinins, adrenocorticotrophic hormone, corticotrophin releasing
factor.
Carcinoid Syndrome
It is symptom complex in which systemic symptoms are produced when the
vasoactive substances are secreted by carcinoid tumors into the systemic
circulation. Carcinoid syndrome occurs in only 8–10% of patients.Midgut carcinoids (usually ileal carcinoid) with hepatic metastasis can
produce carcinoid syndrome. Because, normally liver is able to metabolize
these secretory products into inactive forms and with hepatic metastasis
the product can reach systemic circulation.Foregut (bronchial and extraintestinal) carcinoids can present with
carcinoid syndrome without hepatic metastases. This is because bioactive
products can bypass liver and can be released directly into systemic
circulation.Hindgut carcinoids seldom produce syndrome since they do not secrete
these products.
Intestinal carcinoids have an increased tendency for liver metastasis.
Clinical Features (Table 10.42)
Characterized by cutaneous flushing, involving head and neck (blush area)
associated with lacrimation, sweating, bronchospasm, colicky abdominal
pain, diarrhea, and right-sided cardiac valvular fibrosis.
Diagnosis

Diagnosed by measuring urinary or plasma serotonin or its metabolites in the
urine.
Measurement of 5–hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA): Increased (>9
mg) urinary excretion in 24-hour sample collection.
Serum chromogranin A levels are elevated in 56–100% of patients.
Serotonin level in blood and platelets is high, because it is overproduced
in 92% of patients.
Plasma neuron-specific enolase levels are increased but are less sensitive
than chromogranin A.
Others: CT, MRI, and somatostatin receptor scintigraphy, PET (positron
emission tomography) with radiolabeled 5-hydroxytryptophan may be
helpful.
Table 10.42: Clinical features of carcinoid tumors.
Intestinal obstruction by tumor Intestinal ischemia due to either mesenteric
infiltration or vasospasm
Hepatic metastases may produce pain and
jaundiceFeatures of carcinoid syndrome: Flushing
wheezing, diarrhea, etc.
Cardiac involvement (e.g. tricuspid
regurgitation, pulmonary stenosis) leading to
heart failureFacial telangiectasia
Treatment
Avoid conditions and diets that precipitate flushing and diarrhea.
Supplementation of diet with nicotinamide.
Wheezing is treated with oral bronchodilators.
Treatment of heart failure with diuretics.
Control of the diarrhea with antidiarrheal agents (e.g. loperamide and diphenoxylate). If not
controlled advise serotonin receptor antagonists (cyproheptadine, methysergide, ondansetron) to
control diarrhea.Analogues of somatostatin (e.g. octreotide, lanreotide) to control flushing.
Surgical resection of the carcinoid tumor.
Excision of liver metastases or hepatic artery embolization with or without chemotherapy.
Ischemic Colitis
Q. Write short note on ischemic colitis.
Etiology

Transient nonocclusive hypoperfusion of a segment of the colon, e.g.
systemic hypoperfusion.
Occlusion of the inferior mesenteric artery or its branches, e.g.
atherosclerotic or thrombotic occlusion.
Less common causes, e.g. hypercoagulable states (in young persons),
iatrogenic ligation of the inferior mesenteric artery (e.g. with aortic
surgery), embolism, vasculitis, and colonic obstruction (e.g. colonic
cancer).Drugs and chemicals: Medications, illicit drugs, and chemicals may also
produce chemical picture identical or similar to ischemic colitis (e.g.
digitalis, vasopressin, pseudoephedrine, amphetamines, cocaine,
estrogens, ergot alosetron, etc).
Clinical FeaturesAge: Occur in persons older than 60 years without any apparent cause.
Onset: Many cases are acute and self-limited.
Symptoms: Colicky lower abdominal pain (mostly left lower quadrant),
diarrhea, and passage of bright red blood per rectum, nausea and vomiting.
Though the blood loss is not usually enough to require transfusion, some
patients may progress to shock because of loss of blood and fluid.Physical examination : Abdominal tenderness and guarding over the
affected portion of the colon (especially left iliac fossa), and abdominal
distention fever, tachycardia.
Laboratory Findings/Investigation
Nonspecific findings such as leukocytosis and hemoconcentration.
Plain radiographs of the abdomen: It may show ‘thumbprinting’ at splenic
flexure and descending colon or may be normal.
CT scanning of abdomen: Useful to exclude other disorders.
Double contrast barium enema demonstrates involvement of splenic
flexure and descending colon. Mucosal abnormalities are thumbprinting
and ulceration.
Colonoscopy has replaced barium studies as it is more sensitive.
Sigmoidoscopy shows normal rectal mucosa and bleeding descending
from above.

Arteriography confirms the diagnosis in patients with obstructive lesions.
Treatment
For right-sided ischemic colitis: It requires visceral angiography which is needed for both
diagnosis and intra-arterial administration of vasodilators (e.g. papaverine as a 60-mg intravenous
bolus followed by an infusion of 30 to 60 mg/hour). Some patients may need urgent surgery.
Left-sided acute ischemic colitis : It accounts for most cases and most cases resolve within hours
to a few days with supportive therapy. Therapy includes volume replacement, correction of any
low-flow state, broad-spectrum antibiotics (similar to those recommended earlier for patients with
small bowel ischemia), avoidance of vasoconstrictive medications, and rarely, blood transfusion.
Surgery is required only in patients with signs and symptoms of transmural necrosis, perforation,
or massive bleeding.Conservative management: Intravenous fluids, hemodynamic stabilization, discontinuation or
avoidance of vasoconstrictive agents, bowel rest and empiric antibiotics.
Surgical treatment: Peritonitis and strictures.
Pseudomembranous Colitis
Q. Write short note on pseudomembranous colitis (antibiotic-associated
colitis).
Pseudomembranous colitis also referred to as antibiotic-associated colitis or
antibiotic-associated diarrhea, generally caused due to toxin produced by
Clostridium difficile, when the normal bacterial flora is altered or suppressed
by antibiotics.Antibiotic-associated diarrhea may (Table 10.43) also be caused by other
organisms such as Salmonella, C. perfringens type A, or Staphylococcus
aureus but only C. difficile causes pseudomembranous colitis.
In the colon, the vegetative form of C. difficile multiplies and produces
two major toxins namely toxin A (an enterotoxin) and toxin B (a
cytotoxin).
Clinical Features
Age: Pseudomembranous colitis usually develops in adults and about 80%
of cases occur in people over 65 years of age.
Patient is on antibiotics or has received antibiotics within last 8 weeks.
Clinical symptoms range from asymptomatic to severe and sometimes
life-threatening fulminant pseudomembranous colitis.Diarrhea: It is the most common manifestation.
–  Stool: Soft and unformed to watery or mucoid in consistency and has a

characteristic odor. Stools are almost never grossly bloody.
–  Frequency: Patients may have as many as 20 bowel movements/day.
–  Profuse watery diarrhea with abdominal cramps.
–  Substantial fluid and protein losses combined with fever, cramps,
hypoalbuminemia, leukocytosis, and hypotension.
Laboratory findings: Leukocytosis is common (observed in up to 50% of
patients) and is a marker of severe disease. Leukocytosis often
>15,000/mm3 white blood cells (WBCs)/L. Extremely high level
(>50,000/mm 3 indicates fulminant and potentially fatal illness.Complications: Dehydration, electrolyte disturbances, hypoalbuminemia,
toxic megacolon, bowel perforation, hypotension, renal failure,
hypotension, lactic acidosis sepsis and death.
Table 10.43: Antimicrobial agents that predispose to Clostridium difficile-
associated diarrhea and colitis.
Most frequentlyAmpicillin and amoxicillin
Cephalosporins
Clindamycin
FluoroquinolonesLess frequently
Macrolides (including erythromycin)
Other penicillins
Sulfonamides
Trimethoprim/ sulfamethoxazole
Investigations and Diagnosis
Enzyme immunoassay for C. difficile  glutamate dehydrogenase
Enzyme immunoassay for C. difficile  toxins A and B
Real-time PCR tests detect the critical gene is tcdB.
Stool culture for C. difficile
Sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy: Endoscopy is a rapid diagnostic tool in
seriously ill patients and characteristically shows erythema, white plaques
or an adherent pseudomembrane (Fig. 10.11). Biopsy can be done.
Treatment/Management
Treatment consists of (1) discontinuation of the implicated antibiotic, (2) supportive care, and (3)
avoidance of antiperistaltic agents and opiates.Withdraw/discontinue the precipitating antibiotic/antimicrobial drug and isolate the patient.
Supportive care:  Oral or intravenous rehydration
–   Mild to moderate cases:  Oral metronidazole 500 mg thrice daily for 10–14 days. Rifaximin
can be added.

–   Severe cases: Oral vancomycin 125 mg 6 hourly for 14 days.
–   Severe complicated or fulminant cases:  Vancomycin (500 mg orally or via nasogastric tube)
plus intravenous metronidazole (500 mg q8h) plus consider rectal instillation of vancomycin
(500 mg in 100 mL of normal saline as a retention enema q6–8h). Intravenous vancomycin not
effective. Newer drug fidaxomicin (200 mg twice daily) is as efficacious as vancomycin. If
ileus develops vancomycin administered by enema.
♦   Oral probiotic therapy:  Use of live non-pathogenic bacteria to re-establish the gut flora
often used in resistant or relapsed cases. Probitoics use organisms resistant to gastric acid.
However, its clinical benefits are not proved. Avoidance of antiperistaltic agents and opiates:  Antiperistaltic drugs such as loperamide or
diphenoxylate should not be administered because they can precipitate toxic megacolon.
Colectomy may be necessary in severely ill and refractory cases.
Newer treatment modalities: Fecal microbiota transplantation  (fecal enemas or infusion of
donor feces through a nasoduodenal tube)
Fig. 10.11:  Endoscopic appearance of pseudomembranous colitis
Psychosomatic Disorders of the Gastrointestinal Tract
Classification (Table 10.44)
Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS)
Q. Write short essay/note on irritable bowel syndrome, its clinical
features and management.

Definition
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a functional disorder of the
gastrointestinal tract characterized by abdominal pain or discomfort and
altered bowel habits in the absence of detectable structural, infective or
biochemical abnormalities.IBS is benign, chronic symptom complex of altered bowel habits and
abdominal pain.
Table 10.44: Classification of the functional disorders of gastrointestinal
tract.
Bad taste (cacogeusia)
Foul smell of breath (halitosis)
Functional heartburn
Non-cardiac chest pain due to esophageal
dysmotility
Functional dyspepsia
Functional bloating
AerophagiaGlobus hystericus
Unspecified excessive belching
Functional or psychogenic vomiting and
cyclic vomiting syndrome
Irritable bowel syndrome
Functional diarrhea and functional
constipation
Pathophysiology
Exact cause not known and pathogenesis of IBS is poorly understood.
However, the following factors have been proposed.
Gastrointestinal motor abnormalities: GI motility is quantitatively
different in 25–75% of IBS patients compared with healthy controls.
Patients with diarrhea as a predominant symptom exhibit rapid jejunal
contraction waves, rapid intestinal transit, an increased number of colonic
contractions (colonic transit is accelerated) and rectosigmoid motor
activity.Patients with predominant constipation have decreased orocecal transit
and a reduced number of colonic contraction waves.
Visceral hypersensitivity: IBS is associated with increased sensory
responses to visceral stimulation induced by intestinal distension. The
mechanism for visceral hypersensitivity is not known. This is more common
in females and in diarrhea-predominant IBS.
Central neural dysregulation : There is a clinical association of emotional

disorders and stress with symptom exacerbation in IBS. MRI has shown that
in response to distal colonic stimulation, the mid-cingulate cortex (brain
region concerned with attention processes and response selection) shows
greater activation in IBS patients. This cerebral dysfunction may lead to the
increased perception of visceral pain.
Abnormal psychological features: Abnormal psychiatric features are found
in up to 80% of IBS patients. These include anxiety, tension, depression,
excessive worry, somatization and neurosis.
Altered intestinal flora: Bacterial overgrowth (shown by positive lactulose
hydrogen breath test) in the small bowel has been observed in IBS patients
and may contribute to symptoms.
Abnormal serotonin pathways: Serotonin is a neurotransmitter that plays an
important role in the regulation of GI motility and visceral perception.
Post-infectious IBS : IBS may be induced by initial GI infection by
Campylobacter, Salmonella, and Shigella.
Immune activation and mucosal inflammation : Certain diet/foods may
precipitate an attack.
Clinical FeaturesAge: IBS affects all ages. Most patients present before age 45 (20 to 40
years).
Gender: More common in women compared to men (3:1).
Abdominal pain or abdominal discomfort is the most common key
symptom (prerequisite clinical feature) for the diagnosis of IBS.
Characteristics of pain:
–  Location: Pain is most typically referred to the lower abdomen (left or
right iliac fossa) or hypogastrium.
–  Aggravation: Pain and discomfort may be aggravated by emotional
stress or poor sleep, and intake of food.
–  Relief: Abdominal symptoms are relieved by defecation or passage of
flatus, but this relief may be temporary.Altered bowel habits: Most consistent clinical feature in IBS. Bowel
pattern subtypes/ variants are:
–  IBS-constipation predominant (IBS-C): These patients have spastic

colitis, and present with chronic abdominal pain and constipation.
–  IBS-diarrhea predominant (IBS-D): They present with chronic
intermittent watery diarrhea, often without abdominal pain.
–  Mixed IBS: They have features of alternating diarrhea and
constipation.
Most common alteration in the bowel habit is constipation alternating with
diarrhea.
Diarrhea: Frequent defecation, often painless, but produce low-volume
stools and rare/never at night. Diarrhea usually consists of small volumes
of loose stools. Sense of incomplete evacuation, leading to repeated
attempts at defecation in a short time span.Constipation : Pass infrequent pellet-like (ribbon-like or pencil-like)
stools usually in association with abdominal pain or proctalgia.
Stools: Usually hard with narrowed caliber. May be accompanied by
passage of large amounts of mucus.
Gas and flatulence: Abdominal distention and increased belching or
flatulence more common among female patients. Post-prandial tenesmus
is common and is due to an exaggerated gastrocolic reflex.Other symptoms: Dyspepsia, heartburn, nausea, and vomiting.
Extraintestinal symptoms: Headache, back pain, fatigue myalgia,
dyspareunia and urinary frequency are often observed.
Physical examination : Usually unremarkable, except for abdominal
tenderness (most often in the left lower quadrant) or a tender, palpable
sigmoid colon. In IBS-C, rectal examination may show paradoxical
contraction of the puborectalis muscle or decreased descent of the pelvic
floor when simulating a bowel movement.
Investigations
Aim of investigations is to exclude organic gastrointestinal diseases.
Full blood count
Stool examination : For parasites, ova, leukocytes, occult blood
Sigmoidoscopy: Usually normal. There may be difficulty in negotiating
rectosigmoid curve due to spasm. There may be marked motor activity of
bowel and may show abundant mucus.

Colonoscopy: Should be performed to exclude colorectal cancer, in older
patients and those with history of rectal bleeding.
Barium enema: Usually normal but may show spasticity of sigmoid,
exaggerated haustral markings and a tubular appearance of the descending
colon.In diarrhea-predominant patients investigations to exclude microscopic
colitis, lactose intolerance, bile acid malabsorption, celiac disease, and
thyrotoxicosis.
Diagnostic Criteria
Rome III Diagnostic criteria for irritable bowel syndrome are presented in
Table 10.45.
Table 10.45: Rome III diagnostic criteria for irritable bowel syndrome.
Recurrent abdominal pain or discomfort at least 3 days per month in the last 3 months (with symptom
onset at least 6 months prior to diagnosis) associated with two or more of the following: 
1. Improvement with defecation
2. Onset associated with a change in frequency of stool
3. Onset associated with a change in form (appearance) of stool
Symptoms that support the diagnosis of irritable bowel syndromeAbnormal stool frequency: ≤3 bowel movements per week or >3 bowel movements per day
Abnormal stool form: Lumpy/hard stool or loose/watery stool
Defecation straining
Urgency
Feeling of incomplete bowel movement
Passing mucus
Bloating or feeling of abdominal distention
Red flag signs of IBS are presented in Table 10.46.
Table 10.46: Red flag signs of IBS.
More than minimal rectal bleeding
Weight loss
Unexplained iron deficiency anemia
Nocturnal symptomsFamily history of selected organic diseases
including colorectal cancer, inflammatory
bowel disease (IBD), or celiac sprue
Fever
Treatment (Flowchart 10.7)
Patient counseling and dietary alterations

Reassurance and thorough careful explanation of the functional nature and benign prognosis of
the disorder.
Dietary modification:  Avoid obvious foods that precipitate symptoms. The role of probiotics is
not well established.
–  Many IBS patients have non-specific intolerance to foods.
–  The dietary restriction of fermentable carbohydrates popularly termed the low FODMAP
(fermentable oligosaccharides, disaccharides, monosaccharides, and polyols) diet.
–  Exclusion of gas-producing foods/foods that increase flatulence (e.g. beans, onions, celery,
carrots, raisins, bananas, apricots, prunes, brussels sprouts, wheat germ, pretzels, and bagels),
alcohol, and caffeine.
–  IBS patients should avoid foods that trigger an onset of their symptoms, consume a minimum of
high fat foods and take part in regular physical activity.
Constipations-predominant IBS
Stool-bulking agents:  High-fiber diets and bulking agents (e.g. bran or hydrophilic colloid)
increase the roughage content of the diet (increases the fecal output of bacteria) and delay colonic
transit. If symptoms persist add a bulk laxative (methylcellulose, isabgol husk, psyllium fiber
supplement, corn fiber). Osmotic laxatives (e.g. polyethylene glycol, lactulose and milk of
magnesia) or secretory stimulators (e.g. lubiprostone) may be tried, if high-fiber supplementation
fails.Prokinetic agents
–  Tegaserod is a 5-HT 4 receptor agonist and a prokinetic drug, stimulates intestinal peristalsis.
However, tegaserod has been withdrawn from the market; because of serious cardiovascular
events.
–  Cisapride and mosapride are not useful in most patients.
Antispasmodics:  If abdominal pain is not adequately relieved, synthetic anticholinergic agent
(dicyclomine 10 mg TID) or an antispasmodic (mebeverine 135 mg TID) may be given.
Antidepressant drugs: Patients with intractable symptoms may be benefited from tricyclic
antidepressant drugs such as amitriptyline (10–25 mg orally at bedtime) or desipramine (10–25 mg
orally at bedtime).Antiflatulence therapy:  Advised to eat slowly and avoid chew gum or carbonated beverage
drinks. Antibiotic rifaximin (400, three times a day) may also help in relieving bloating.
Chloride-channel activators: Lubiprostone activates chloride channels in the intestinal epithelial
cells. This in-turn induces passive movement of sodium and water into the lumen of the intestine
and improves bowel function.
Diarrhea-predominant IBSAdvised to avoid legumes and high-fiber diet.
Anti-diarrheal drugs
–  Loperamide (2-4 mg up to four times a day maximum of 12 g/day).
–  Cholesyramine resin is a bile acid-binding agent used as a second-line agent (4 g four to six
times a day).
Serotonin receptor antagonists:  Serotonin acts on 5-HT 3 receptors and increases the sensitivity
of afferent neurons of the gut. Alosetron (others drugs include ondansetron, granisetron, alosetron
and cilansetron) is a 5-HT 3 receptor antagonist reduces abdominal visceral pain, induces rectal
relaxation, increases rectal compliance, and delays colonic transit. But it is of little use because of
danger of producing ischemic colitis.
Antispasmodics : For the control of pain.

Antibiotics:  Nonabsorbable antibiotics such as rifaximin 400 mg BID for 5–6 weeks has been
tried.
Probiotics use : The Bifidobacteria, Saccharomyces boulardii and other combinations of probiotics
demonstrate some efficacy in IBS.
Asimadoline: Kappa-opioid receptor agonist has been in trials for IBS.
Flowchart 10.7:  Management of irritable bowel syndrome.
(5-HT: 5-hydoxytryptamine; TCAs: tricyclic antidepressants; SSRIs: Selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors)
Abdominal Tuberculosis
Q. Describe the etiology, pathology, clinical features, complications,
differential diagnosis, investigations and treatment of abdominal
tuberculosis.
It includes gastrointestinal tuberculosis, peritoneum, and abdominal lymph
nodes, either individually or in combinations.
Gastrointestinal Tuberculosis
Intestinal tuberculosis commonly involves ileocecal region (about 70%
of cases) probably because this region has:(1) increased rate of absorption
of fluid and electrolyte; (2) increased physiological stasis; (3) prominent

lymphoid tissue; and (4) minimal digestive activity.
Other rare regions: These include ascending colon, jejunum, sigmoid
colon, rectum, duodenum, stomach and esophagus.
Etiology
Causative agent: Mycobacterium tuberculosis human or bovine strain.
Routes of spread of intestinal tuberculosis
–  Hematogenous spread: Primary or secondary tuberculosis of lung may
spread through blood into the intestine.
–  Ingestion: Mycobacteria in sputum from active pulmonary focus may
be ingested and cause intestinal tuberculosis.
–  Direct spread: From nearby or adjacent organs.
–  Through lymphatics: From infected lymph nodes
Routes of spread of peritoneal tuberculosis: Infection may spread to
peritoneum from lymph nodes or intestinal lesions or tuberculous
salpingitis (fallopian tube) in females.
Pathology
Intestinal tuberculosis: Three types:
1. Ulcerative (60%): More often observed in malnourished adults.
Gross: Characteristics of tuberculous ulcers are: (1) multiple
superficial ulcers mainly found in the ileocecal region; (2) long axis of
ulcers is perpendicular to the long axis of the intestine (in typhoid
fever, long axis of ulcers lies parallel to the long axis of the intestine).Consequences: Fibrosis occurring during healing of ulcers produces
strictures. Rarely, endarteritis may lead to massive bleeding.
2. Hypertrophic (10%): This is a variant of secondary tuberculosis
observed in ileocecal region. More often found in relatively well-
nourished adults.Gross: The lesions are seen mainly in cecum and/or ascending colon.
These regions become thick-walled due to scarring, fibrosis and local
hypertrophy) and show mucosal ulceration.Clinically, the lesion present as a palpable and may be mistaken for
carcinoma.
3. Ulcero-hypertrophic (30%):

It represents combination of both ulcerative and hypertrophic types.
Right iliac fossa mass due to hypertrophic ileocecal region, and
involved mesenteric fat and lymph nodes.
Peritoneal Tuberculosis
Gross appearance of peritoneum: Shows multiple yellow-white
tubercles. Peritoneum is thick and hyperemic with a loss of its shiny
appearance. Omentum also thickened.Forms:
1.  Wet type: It presents with ascites.
2.  Encysted (loculated) type: It presents with a localized abdominal
swelling.
3.  Fibrotic type: It presents with abdominal masses. They consist o f
thickening of mesentery and omentum with matted bowel loops.
Adhesions may produce intestinal obstruction.
A combination of above types is also can be seen.
Solid Organ Tuberculosis
These include: (1) Spleen, (2) liver, (3) adrenal tuberculosis, and (4)
genitourinary tuberculosis.
Tuberculosis of Mesenteric Lymph Nodes
Usually observed in young adults. Involves mesenteric lymph nodes and
these nodes may become palpable as rounded mass (tabes mesenterica). May
be confused with lymphoma.
Clinical features
Usually found in young adults.
–  It may present as acute, chronic or acute on chronic condition.
–  Common symptoms: Fever, abdominal pain, anorexia, malaise, weight
loss, diarrhea, constipation, alternating constipation and diarrhea and
gastrointestinal bleeding or obstruction.
–  Abdominal pain may be either colicky (due to luminal compromise) or
dull and continuous when there is involvement of mesenteric lymph
nodes.
Physical examination of the abdomen: It is described as ‘doughy’ because

matted loops of bowel may be palpable. A well-defined, firm, mobile mass
may be found in the right lower quadrant of the abdomen. Mesenteric
lymphadenitis produces mass. Abdominal distention due to ascites.
Complications (Box 10.14)
Differential Diagnosis (Table 10.47)
Box 10.14: Complications of intestinal tuberculosis.
Intestinal hemorrhage
Subacute intestinal obstruction
Fistula formation (between skin and intestine or between loops of intestines).
Intestinal perforation
Malabsorption: Ileocecal tuberculosis is the common cause of malabsorption in India.
Table 10.47: Causes of vitamin A deficiency.
Tropical sprue Amebiasis
Intestinal worm infestations Crohn’s disease
Lymphoma Malignancy of colon
Flowchart 10.8:  Diagnostic algorithm for abdominal tuberculosis.

Investigations (Flowchart 10.8)
Hematological investigations: ESR is raised, anemia and hypoalbuminemia
Radiological investigations
Chest X-ray: May show evidence of active or old tuberculosis.
Plain X-ray of abdomen: It may reveal:
Calcified mesenteric lymph nodes
If there is intestinal obstruction : Dilated bowel loops with multiple air-fluid
levels may be seen.
If intestinal perforation: Air under diaphragm and dilated loops.Barium meal
May show hypermotility (accelerated intestinal transit)
Hypersegmentation of the barium column (‘chicken intestine’)
Precipitation, flocculation and dilution of the barium.
Luminal stenosis with smooth but stiff contours (‘hour-glass stenosis’)
Multiple strictures with segmental dilatation of bowel loops:
Stierlin sign : A defect characterized by failure of the diseased segment to

retain barium that is otherwise normally retained by adjacent uninvolved
segments. Appears as a narrowing ileum with rapid emptying into a
shortened cecum.
String sign: A thin stream of barium seen in the terminal ileum.
Note: Both Stierlin and string sign can also be seen in Crohn’s disease, and
hence, are not specific for tuberculosis.
Barium enema.
Wide gaping of ileocecal valve with narrowing of the terminal ileum
(‘Fleischner’ or ‘inverted umbrella sign’).
Fold thickening and contour irregularity or terminal ileum shrunken in size
(‘conical cecum’).
Pulled up cecum due to contraction and fibrosis of the mesocolon.
Loss of normal ileocecal angle and dilated terminal ileum, appearing
suspended from a retracted, fibrosed cecum.
Localized stenosis opposite the ileocecal valve with a rounded off smooth
cecum and a retracted fibrosed cecum.Abdominal ultrasound
Intra-abdominal fluid (free or loculated; with or without debris and septae)
Localized fluid between rapidly oriented bowel loops due to local exudation
from the inflamed bowel (interloop ascites; ‘club sandwich’ or ‘sliced bread’
sign).
Lymphadenopathy, discrete or matted with heterogeneous echotexture due to
caseation.
Uniform and concentric bowel wall thickening in the ileocecal region (versus
eccentric thickening at the mesenteric border found in Crohn’s disease and
variegated appearance of malignancy).Contrast-enhanced CT scan
Symmetric circumferential thickening of cecum and terminal ileum.
Ulceration or nodularity within the terminal ileum, along with narrowing and
proximal dilatation.Regional lymph nodes: Caseating lymph nodes with hypodense centers and
peripheral rim enhancement. Retroperitoneal nodes (periaortic and pericaval)
almost never seen in isolation, unlike lymphoma.
Mesenteric thickening: Omental thickening seen as an omental cake

appearance. Thickened peritoneum and enhancing peritoneal nodules.
Ascitic fluid of high-attenuation value.
Ascitic fluid examination lymphocytic ascites with serum-ascites
albumin gradient (SAAG) (1.1 g/dL and elevated ascites ADA level).
Biopsy of peritoneum: Punch or laparoscopic biopsy
Colonoscopy: It may show mucosal nodules and ulcers in colon and is
used for taking biopsy from the edge of ulcers.
Biopsy from other organs involved : Liver, lymph node
Treatment
Antitubercular treatment similar to treatment of pulmonary tuberculosis.
Surgery
Strictureplasty for strictures that reduce the lumen by 50% or more and that cause proximal
dilation.
Resection of segment having multiple strictures.
Ulcers in Intestine
Q. Write short note on ulcers in intestine.
Conditions causing ulcers in intestine are presented in Table 10.48.
Table 10.48: Conditions causing ulcers in intestine.
Predominantly small
intestinePredominantly large
intestineBoth small and large intestine
Enteric/typhoid fever
Tuberculosis
Zollinger-Ellison
syndrome
Mesenteric artery
occlusionAmebiasis
Ulcerative colitis
Gram-negative bacillary
dysentery
Ischemic colitisCrohn’s disease
Malignant ulcers
INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE (IBD)
Q. Describe the etiology, pathology, clinical features, investigations and
management of inflammatory bowel diseases (ulcerative colitis and
Crohn disease).

Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is an immune-mediated chronic intestinal
condition. It results from inappropriate mucosal immune activation.
These include several conditions:
3. Others (uncommon) non-specific inflammatory bowel disease:
Indeterminate colitis (15% patients with IBD) microscopic ulcerative,
microscopic lymphocytic and microscopic collagenous colitis.
Etiology and Pathogenesis of IBD
Genetic Factors
Genetic predisposition/susceptibility contributes to IBD.
1. Familial:
Crohn disease: Genetic factors play a prominent role. The
concordance rate for monozygotic twins is about 50%.
Ulcerative colitis: Genetic factors are less prominent than in Crohn
disease. The concordance of monozygotic twins is only 16%.
Concordance for dizygotic twins for both Crohn disease and ulcerative
colitis is less than 10%.2. Susceptibility Genes:
Genes associated with innate immunity and autophagy (e.g.
NOD2/CARD15, ATG16L1, and IRGM): Actions of NOD2/CARD15
protein are: (1) prevents the entry of microbes into the wall of the
intestine; (2) regulates innate immune responses; and (3) prevents
excessive immune response by luminal microbes.
Environmental Factors
Include both the local microenvironment (intestinal microflora) and the
nutritional environment.
1. Intestinal microflora/microbiota:
Hygiene hypothesis: The gut lumen  contains abundant commensal
bacteria and its composition within individuals remains stable for
several years. This intestinal microflora can be modified by diet and
disease. IBD is associated with an alteration in the bacterial flora.
Improved food storage conditions and decreased food

contamination: It has reduced frequency of enteric infections, with
‘clean’ environment in the intestinal lumen → the immune system
may not be exposed to microorganisms (pathogenic or non-
pathogenic) → inadequate development of regulatory processes to
limit mucosal immune responses.
2. Smoking
CD patients are more likely to be smokers, and smoking exacerbates CD. In
contrast, an increased risk of UC is observed in non- or ex-smokers.
Host Factors
These include epithelial defects, impaired mucosal barrier, abnormal
intestinal defensins, and immune dysregulation.
Psychosocial Factors
It can contribute to worsening of symptoms in IBD. Major life events (e.g.
illness or death in the family, divorce or separation) are associated with an
increase in symptoms such as pain, bowel dysfunction, and bleeding.
Ulcerative ColitisDefinition
Ulcerative colitis is a severe-ulcerating inflammatory disease. It is limited to
large intestine (the colon and rectum). It is characterized clinically by
recurrent attacks (exacerbations and remissions) of bloody diarrhea.
Pathologically, the inflammatory response is found only in the mucosa and
submucosa of the intestinal wall and shows chronic destruction of crypts.
Pathology
Site (Fig. 10.12): Ulcerative colitis primarily involves the colonic mucosa.
Usually involves the rectum  (involved in 95% of cases) and extends
proximally for a variable distance in a continuous fashion to involve part or
the entire colon. Skip lesions are not seen in UC.Pancolitis: If entire colon is involved by the disease, then it is termed
pancolitis.
Left-sided colitis: When disease involves only the left-side of colon.
Extensive colitis: When disease involves colon up to the hepatic flexure.
Proctitis/proctosigmoiditis: When the disease is limited to the rectum

alone, then it is known as ulcerative proctitis. When the process involves
rectum and sigmoid colon, then it is termed ulcerative proctosigmoiditis.
Backwash ileitis: The small intestine is normal. However, in severe cases
of pancolitis mild mucosal inflammation of the distal ileum may be
present and is termed as backwash ileitis .
Microscopy
Chronic inflammatory infiltrates: Lymphocytes, plasma cells, and
macrophages in the lamina propria. The density of plasma cells is more
in the basilar region of the lamina propria (basal plasmacytosis) and
extends into the muscularis mucosae.Changes in the crypt: These include cryptitis, crypt abscesses,
destruction of crypts and distortion of crypt architecture. Chronic UC
may show epithelial dysplasia.
Toxic megacolon : In severe cases (fulminant disease-toxic megacolon),
inflammation may damage the muscularis propria and disturb
neuromuscular function and leads to colonic dilation and toxic
megacolon  that can undergo perforation. The colon is dilated, walls are
thin, and with denuded mucosa and colon may rupture.
Fig. 10.12: Patterns of distribution in ulcerative colitis.
Clinical Features of UC
Q. Write short essay/note on clinical features of ulcerative colitis.
Major symptoms of UC: The first attack is usually the most severe and the
disease is later characterized by relapses and remissions.

Diarrhea: Colonic motility is altered due to inflammation. When the
disease is severe, patients develop diarrhea and passes liquid stool
containing blood, mucus, pus, and fecal matter. Diarrhea is often nocturnal
and/or postprandial.Rectal bleeding: Patients with proctitis usually pass fresh blood. When
the disease extends beyond the rectum, blood is usually mixed with stool
or grossly bloody diarrhea may be noted.Tenesmus or urgency with a feeling of incomplete evacuation.
Passage of mucus
Crampy abdominal pain : Severe pain is not a prominent symptom, but
some patients with active disease may present with vague lower
abdominal discomfort or mild central abdominal cramping. Severe
cramping and abdominal pain can develop when the attack is severe.Others: These include anorexia, nausea, vomiting, malaise, fever, and
weight loss. There may be symptoms and signs of dehydration and
anemia. In severe cases, the patient is toxic with fever, tachycardia and
signs of peritoneal inflammation.
Severity of symptoms: It reflects the extent of disease and the intensity of
inflammation.
Duration of symptoms: Although UC can present acutely, symptoms are
usually present for weeks to months.
Exacerbations and remissions: They are characteristic features. Relapses
are provoked by emotional stress, intercurrent infection, gastroenteritis,
antibiotics or NSAID therapy.Q. Write short note/essay on extraintestinal manifestations of ulcerative
colitis.
Extraintestinal manifestations (Refer Table 10.57 and Fig. 10.14.)
Risk of carcinoma colon: The incidence is high, especially in patients with
total colitis, disease of more than 10 years duration and early age of onset.
Signs:
Tenderness on palpation directly over the colon, especially in the left iliac
fossa.
Signs of proctitis include tender anal canal and blood on rectal

examination.
Signs of toxic megacolon: It is a serious complication and its signs include
severe pain and bleeding, and signs of peritonitis, if there is associated
perforation.
Investigations
Q. Write short essay/note on investigation of ulcerative colitis.
They are required for confirmation of the diagnosis, know the distribution
and activity, and identify complications.
Laboratory findings
Anemia: Decrease in hemoglobin may be due to blood loss or
malabsorption (nutritional deficiencies) of iron, folic acid or vitamin B12.
It may be associated with raised platelet count.
Raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) and acute-phase reactants
[C-reactive protein (CRP)], are nonspecific serum inflammatory markers
and are observed during exacerbations. They are sometimes used to
monitor the activity of disease.Total WBC count: Moderate leukocytosis is observed in active disease,
but a marked leukocytosis suggests an abscess or another suppurative
complication.Hypoalbuminemia: Reduced serum albumin concentration may be due to
protein-losing enteropathy, inflammatory disease or malnutrition (poor
nutrition).Stool examination
–  Stool microscopy and culture: To exclude infective pathology and C.
difficle  toxin.
Blood cultures in patients with septicemia.
Serological tests: These are supportive and not used independently as
markers for diagnose IBD.
–   Antisaccharomyces cerevisiae antibodies (ASCA): These are
antibodies to yeast. They are observed in 40–70% of patients with
Crohn disease and in less than 15% of patients with ulcerative colitis.
Presence of raised ASCA immunoglobulin A (IgA) and IgG titers is
highly specific for Crohn’s disease.

–  Perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (pANCA): They
are detected in 10–20% of colon-predominant Crohn disease, and in
55–70% of patients with ulcerative colitis.
–  Anti-goblet cell autoantibodies: Found in 30–40% cases of ulcerative
colitis and Crohn disease.
Other Tests:
–  Fecal lactoferrin: It is a very sensitive and specific marker for detecting
intestinal inflammation.
–  Fecal calprotectin : Its levels correlate with inflammation and helpful in
predicting relapses.
Endoscopy
Endoscopy with mucosal biopsy is the gold standard investigation for
ulcerative colitis.
Colonoscopy: For mild-to-moderate disease and patient not having an acute
flare, colonoscopy is preferable to flexible sigmoidoscopy because it can
assess the disease extent and activity. Colonoscopy helps in assessing the
extent and activity of ulcerative colitis.
Sigmoidoscopy:During early phase of the mild disease: (1) Uniform continuous
involvement of the mucosa; (2) diffuse mucosal erythema/hyperemia, (3)
loss of the normal mucosal vascular pattern, granularity, and edema, and
(4) exudate of mucus, pus and blood on the mucosa.As the disease becomes severe: Mucosa becomes more friable, bleeds
easily on touch, and may ulcerate. Pseudo-polyps represent epithelial
regeneration and may develop after recurrent attacks in patients with long-
standing disease.
Biopsy
Histological changes develop more slowly than clinical features. Biopsies
help in diagnosis and to know the disease extent. Rectal biopsy shows
mucosal inflammation and histological abnormalities are most severe in the
distal colon and rectum.
Chromoendoscopy: Used for diagnosis of dysplasia in patients with long-
standing UC.

Radiological features
Plain abdominal X-ray: Useful to exclude toxic dilatation of colon.
Barium enema in ulcerative colitis:
–  Earliest change in UC: Fine mucosal granularity
–  Later, the mucosa shows thickening and superficial ulcers. Deep ulcers
appear as ‘collar-button’ ulcers, which indicate that the ulcer has
penetrated the mucosa.
–  Haustral folds may be normal in initial phase of the disease, but later
become edematous and thickened.
–  Long-standing disease may show loss of haustration, pseudopolyps,
narrowing and shortening of the colon.
CT scan : It is not so helpful when compared to endoscopy and barium
enema in UC. CT scanning shows: mild mural thickening (<1.5 cm),
inhomogeneous wall density, no thickening of small bowel, increased
perirectal and presacral fat and target appearance of the rectum.
Biochemical abnormalitiesElectrolyte abnormalities
Abnormal liver function tests
Q. Write short essay/note on management of ulcerative colitis.
Treatment (Flowchart 10.9) of Ulcerative Colitis
Whenever possible, IBD should be approached by a multidisciplinary team consisting of physicians,
surgeons, radiologists, and dietitians. IBDs are life-long conditions and have psychosocial
implications. Truelove and Witts’ severity index of ulcerative colitis is presented in Table 10.49.
Medical Management of UC
Aims of medical therapy (Box 10.15)
5-Aminosalicylate (5-ASA) agents (Table 10.49):
–  Acts as a topical anti-inflammatory within the lumen of the intestine.
–  Controls acute exacerbation, maintains remission and prevent relapses in UC. Maintenance
therapy may decrease the risk of colorectal cancer.
–  Available as oral tablets or topical (enema/suppository) preparation (for rectal and sigmoid
disease).
–  These agents include 5-aminosalicylic acid (5-ASA) or mesalazine alone, or combination of 5-
ASA with a carrier which releases 5-ASA after splitting by bacteria in colon (sulfasalazine,
olsalazine, balsalazide).
–  Sulfasalazine is the most frequently used agent for mild-to-moderate ulcerative colitis.
Sulfasalazine is the combination of a sulfapyridine (acting as a ‘carrier’ that allows 5-ASA to
be delivered into the colon) with 5-ASA (active agent). Side effects include: nausea, dyspepsia,

hair loss, headache, worsening diarrhea, and hypersensitivity reactions.
–  Sulfa-free aminosalicylate preparations (Table 10.50): They deliver higher amounts of the
active ingredient of sulfasalazine (5-ASA, mesalamine) to the site of active disease in the
bowel and have limited systemic toxicity
Box 10.15:  Aims of medical therapy in ulcerative colitis.
Treat acute attacks and reduce inflammation.
Prevent relapses and maintain clinical remission.
Detect carcinoma at an early stage.
Select patients for surgery.
Flowchart 10.9:  Algorithm for treatment of ulcerative colitis.
(5-ASA: 5-aminosalicylate agents; TNF: tumor necrosis factor)
Corticosteroids
Oral or parenteral corticosteroids are beneficial in inducing remission in moderate-to-severe
ulcerative colitis.
They have no role in maintaining remissions. During clinical remission, steroids should be tapered
according to the clinical activity.
Table 10.49: Various oral 5-ASA (5-Aminosalicylate agents) preparations
used in ulcerative colitis.
Preparation Dosage
Azo-bond 
Sulfasalazine 3–6 g (acute) 2–4 g (maintenance)

Olsalazine 1–3 g
Balsalazide 6.75–9 g
Delayed-release 
Mesalamine 2.4–4.8 g (acute)
1.6–4.8 g (maintenance)
Controlled-release 
Mesalamine 2–4 g (acute)1.5–4 g (maintenance)
Delayed and Extended-release 
Mesalamine 1.5 g (maintenance)
Table 10.50: Truelove and Witts’ severity index of ulcerative colitis.
Features Mild Moderate Severe
Bowel movements
(number per day)Fewer than 4 4–6 6 or
more
plus at
least
one of
the
features
of
systemic
upset
(marked
with *
below)
Blood in stools No more than small
amounts of bloodBetween
mild and
severeVisible
blood
Pyrexia (temperature
greater than 37.8°C) *No No Yes
Pulse rate greater than 90
bpm *No No Yes

Anemia * No No Yes
Erythrocyte
sedimentation rate
(mm/hour) *30 or below 30 or
belowAbove
30
Local TreatmentTopical applications of steroid are also beneficial for distal colitis and as an adjunct in patients
with involvement of rectal involvement associated with involvement of proximal colon.
Hydrocortisone or prednisolone enemas, suppositories or foam may control active disease.
Budesonide-MMX uses colonic release technology to extend the application of budesonide
throughout the colon.Duration of treatment:  3–6 weeks.
Systemic Treatment
Oral:  Active UC that is unresponsive to 5-ASA therapy is treated with oral prednisone at doses of
40–60 mg/day for 3–6 weeks.
Parenteral:
–  Intravenous:  Hydrocortisone 300 mg/day or methylprednisolone, 40–60 mg/day are given as a
constant infusion in severe cases.
–  Intramuscular or subcutaneous injection:  Long-acting corticotrophin is used in the treatment
of relapses.
Tapering of dose: Steroids once started are gradually tapered and withdrawn, normally at a rate of
no more than 5 mg/week.
Antibiotics
No role in the treatment of active or quiescent UC.
Immune Modulators
Indications:
Patients who remain symptomatic despite 5-ASA therapy.
Patients who have moderate-to-severe ulcerative colitis.
Drugs
1. Azathioprine and 6-mercaptopurine (6-MP):
Usefulness are as follows:
–  Patients who require two or more corticosteroid courses within a year.
–  Relapse of disease as the dose of prednisolone is reduced below 15 mg.
–  Relapse within 6 weeks of stopping corticosteroid.Dosage: Azathioprine 2 to 3 mg/kg/day and 6-mercaptopurine 1.5 mg/kg/day
Table 10.51: Indications for surgery in ulcerative colitis.
Intractable/extensive
colitisToxic megacolon Colonic
perforation
Severe colonic
hemorrhageColon cancer
prophylaxisColon
dysplasia/cancer

Frequent relapses Chronic damage to
bowel-strictures 
Disadvantage: Slow clinical response and may not be evident for as long as 12 weeks.
Side effects: These include allergic reactions, pancreatitis, myelosuppression, infections,
hepatotoxicity, and malignancy (lymphoma).
2. Methotrexate: It is a folic acid antagonist useful in patients who do not respond to azathioprine.
3. Cyclosporine (CSA):  It inhibits both the cellular and humoral immune systems. CSA blocks the
production of IL-2 by T-helper cells. CSA prevents activation of T cells by inhibiting calcineurin
and indirectly inhibits B cell function by blocking helper T cells.
4. Tacrolimus:  It is a macrolide antibiotic with immunomodulatory properties similar to CSA.
5. Infiximab:  anti-tumor necrosis factor (anti-TNF) therapy can prevent or reduce rates of
colectomy.
General supportive measures
Parenteral nutrition: It is necessary in seriously ill patients and parenteral broad-spectrum
antibiotics may be required in septicemia.
Correction of dehydration and electrolyte imbalance.
Antispasmodic medications and antidiarrheal (loperamide) for mild diarrhea (to be avoided in
severe colitis).
Surgical management (Table 10.51)
Surgery involves removal of the entire colon (colectomy) and rectum and is a curative procedure.
It is indicated UC does not responded adequately to medical therapy. Emergency colectomy may
be necessary for toxic megacolon.Elective surgical procedure is either panproctocolectomy with ileostomy, or proctocolectomy with
ileal-anal pouch anastomosis.
Follow-up
Extensive colitis of more than 10 years duration; Colonoscopy with multiple biopsies is
recommended every three years to assess for dysplasia or malignant changes.
UC for more than 20 years: Colonoscopy is recommended every 2 years. Biopsies from entire
colon and samples from suspicious areas. If the biopsy shows high-grade dysplasia, total
colectomy is performed
Crohn’s Disease
Q. Discuss the etiology, pathology, clinical features, investigations and
management of Crohn’s disease.
Q. Write short note on Crohn’s disease.
Etiology and Pathogenesis
Refer etiology and pathogenesis of IBD (pages 762-3).
Pathology

Gross
Site (Fig. 10.13): It can involve any area of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract
from mouth to anus. Unlike UC, rectum is spared in CD. Most commonly
involved sites are:
–  Terminal ileum and right side of colon (40–55%)
–  Small intestine/bowel disease alone (30–40%): Terminal ileum alone or
ileum and jejunum.
–  Colon alone (15–25%)
Fig. 10.13: Patterns of distribution in Crohn’s disease.
Number of lesions: Usually, the lesions are multiple.
Skip lesions: The intestinal involvement is discontinuous in which
inflamed segments of intestine are sharply demarcated/ separated by
apparently normal  intervening bowel/ intestine in between.
Intestinal wall : The involved intestinal wall shows fibrotic thickening
and is rubbery and appears like a hosepipe and produces a characteristic
radiological sign known as the ‘string sign’.
Transmural inflammation: Inflammation involves all layers of the bowel
wall.
Mucosal lesions : The earliest lesion is the aphthous ulcer  which
becomes deeper, transmural, and discrete. Multiple lesions may coalesce
longitudinally to form linear or serpentine (snake-like) ulcers and
produces characteristic ‘cobblestone’ appearance. Later the ulcer becomes
deeper and form linear clefts or fissures. Similar to UC, pseudopolyps
may also form in CD.External surface: The fat may encircle around the antimesenteric serosal
surface producing a pattern known as creeping fat .
Adhesion and fistulae: Involved loops of bowel are often adherent to
each other. Fissures frequently develop between mucosal folds. They may

extend deeply to become fistula tracts or sites of perforation. These
fistulas may also penetrate from the bowel into other organs, including the
bladder, uterus, vagina, and skin.
Microscopic features
Chronic inflammation by lymphocytes, plasma cells, and
macrophages.
Mucosal ulcerations: Which are small, superficial (aphthous ulcers).
Crypt abscesses: Clusters of neutrophils within a crypt and are often
associated with crypt destruction.
Noncaseating granulomas.
Clinical Features of Crohn’s Disease
Symptoms due to involvement of small intestine or ileum and right colon
(ileocolitis). CD present with one of two patterns of disease: (1) penetrating
fistulous pattern or (2) fibrostenotic obstructing pattern. The clinical
manifestations depend on the site of disease.Crohn’s disease is a chronic disease with exacerbations and remissions.
Major symptoms include abdominal pain (typically in the right lower
quadrant), diarrhea and weight loss (due to malabsorption and patients
avoid food because eating provokes pain).Ileal Crohn’s disease may cause subacute or acute intestinal obstruction
and patients present with recurrent episodes of colicky abdominal pain,
abdominal distention, nausea, vomiting and excessive borborygmi.Sparing of rectum and the presence of perianal disease is observed in
about 30% of patients in the form of fistulas, abscesses, fissures, and skin
tags. It presents with pain, discharge and fever (if there is an abscess).
Physical examination
Signs depend on the location and severity of the disease process.
Abdominal tenderness in the right lower quadrant (classical), accompanied
by fullness, guarding or a mass depending on the severity of inflammation.
Palpable mass per abdomen and rectally reflects adherent loops of
intestine and abscess.
Features of malabsorption such as weight loss and anemia (iron, folic acid
and vitamin B12 malabsorption).

Sodium, potassium, water, magnesium and zinc deficiency may develop
due to chronic diarrhea.
Stool usually does not show frank blood, mucus or pus unless colon is
involved.
Oral ulcers
Investigations
Anemia: Anemia may result from chronic disease, blood loss or
nutritional deficiencies of iron, folate, or vitamin B12. It may be
normochromic normocytic or macrocytic or hypochromic anemia
depending on the deficiency/cause.Leukocytosis: Modestly raised leukocyte count indicates active disease,
but a marked leukocytosis suggests an abscess or other suppurative
complication.Raised ESR (erythrocyte sedimentation rate) and C-reactive protein:
They are nonspecific serum inflammatory markers and may be used to
monitor the activity of disease.Abnormal liver function tests.
Hypoproteinemia/hypoalbuminemia: Indication of malnutrition.
Malabsorption: Ileal disease results in malabsorption of vitamin B12
(reduced serum vitamin B12 level) and Schilling test is done to determine
the malabsorption of vitamin B12.
Serologic markers: They are supportive but may not independently used
for the diagnose IBD.
–  Anti –Saccharomyces cerevisiae  antibodies (ASCA): These are
antibodies to yeast, are present in 40–70% of patients with Crohn’s
disease (positive in only 10–15% cases of ulcerative colitis).
–  Perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (pANCA): They
are present in 20% of patients with CD (colon-predominant disease),
and in 55% of patients with ulcerative colitis.
–  Antigoblet cell autoantibodies in 30–40% cases of Crohn’s disease.
–  Antiglycan antibodies in about 40–50% cases (e.g. antilaminaribioside,
antimannobioside antibodies).Stool examination : Stool microscopy and culture to exclude infectious

causes of diarrhea.
Sigmoidoscopy and colonoscopy in Crohn disease:
–  Segmental inflammation with normal mucosa between (skip lesions).
–  Discrete, aphthous or deep ulcers and occasionally connected to one
another, forming longitudinal stellate, serpiginous, and linear ulcers.
–  Perianal disease (fissures, fistulas and skin tags) or sparing of the
rectum.
–  Strictures are common.
–  Biopsy of involved region (e.g. colonic mucosa, ileal mucosa, anal skin
tags and perianal inflammatory lesions) shows typical non-caseating
granulomatous inflammation (tuberculosis must be excluded) and
infiltration by lymphocytes and plasma cell.
–  Wireless capsule endoscopy (WCE) allows direct visualization and
identification of inflammation in the entire small bowel mucosa.
However, it should be avoided in the presence of small bowel
strictures. Radiological Findings in Crohn’s disease
Barium meal follow thorough and barium enema
Early radiographic findings in the small bowel:
–  Thickened folds and aphthous ulcerations.
–  Cobblestone appearance of mucosa resulting from longitudinal and
transverse ulcerations.
More advanced disease:
–  Transmural inflammation leads to decreased luminal diameter and
limited distensibility.
–  Rigidity of involved segments and multiple strictures.
–  As ulcers progress deeper, they can lead to fistula formation.
Radiographic ‘string sign’ is due to long areas of transmural
inflammation and fibrosis, producing narrowing of lumen of involved
small intestine.
–  Segmental nature of CD: It results in wide gaps of normal or dilated
bowel between involved segments (skip lesions).
–  Inflammatory masses and abscesses may be found.

–  Fistulous tracts
High-resolution ultrasound and spiral CT scanning
It helps in defining thickness of the bowel wall and intra-abdominal
abscesses.
Radionuclide scan
Using gallium-labeled polymorphs or indium-labeled leukocytes identify
intestinal and colonic disease and localize extraintestinal abscesses.
Treatment (Flowchart 10.10)
Medical Management of Crohn’s Disease
General ConsiderationsStop cigarette smoking.
Diarrhea can be controlled with loperamide, codeine phosphate or co-phenotrope.
Long-standing diarrhea may be due to bile acid malabsorption and is treated with bile salt
sequestrants (e.g. cholestyramine).
Anemia: Due to vitamin B 12, folic acid or iron deficiency, should be treated accordingly.
Induction and Maintenance of Remission
Glucocorticosteroids : Used to induce remission in moderate and severe Crohn’s disease. Oral
prednisolone 30–60 mg/day, which is gradually tapered and withdrawn. Mild-to-moderate
ileocecal, CD should be treated by controlled-release steroids such as budesonide (9 mg by mouth
once a day).
Flowchart 10.10:  Treatment approach to Crohn’s disease.
Aminosalicylates:  5-ASA (e.g. mesalazine 4 g/day or sulfasalazine 3 to 6 g/day) as maintenance
in mild-to-moderate ileocolonic disease. However, they are not effective for maintaining
remission.

Antibiotics:  Ciprofloxacin and metronidazole 400 mg are used in abscess and perineal Crohn’s
disease.
Nutritional therapy: Dietary antigens may stimulate the immune response in the intestinal
mucosa. Bowel rest and total parenteral nutrition (TPN) are effective in inducing remission but are
not effective as maintenance therapy. Enteral diets with a low fat and a low linoleic acid content
(not palatable) may induce remission are similar to steroids.Immunosuppressive agents:  Azathioprine (AZA) and its metabolite 6-mercaptopurine (6MP)
and newer drugs (e.g. mycophenolate mofetil) suppresses the proliferation of T- and B-
lymphocytes. They are effective in inducing and maintaining remission and have steroid-sparing
properties.Biologic therapy:  Anti-TNF therapy is reserved for moderate-to-severe Crohn disease that failed
to respond to other therapies (infliximab, adalimumab) and in CD with refractory perianal and
enterocutaneous fistulas.
Maintenance of Remission
Aminosalicylates
Azathioprine, 6MP, mycophenolate mofetil
Surgical Management (Table 10.52)
Table 10.52: Indications for surgery in CD.
Small intestine Colon and rectum
Stricture and obstruction not
responding to medical therapy
Severe hemorrhage
Refractory fistula
AbscessIntractable/fulminant disease
Perianal disease not responding
to medical therapy
Refractory fistula
Colonic obstruction/perforation
Colon dysplasia/cancer
Small intestine:  Strictures can be widened (stricturoplasty)/minimal resection and anastomosis.
Colorectal:
–  Subtotal colectomy and ileorectal anastomosis, if rectum is spared.
–  Pancolectomy with ileostomy, if whole colon and rectum are involved
Assessment of severity of Crohn’s disease is presented in Table 10.5
Table 10.53: Severity of Crohn’s disease.
Mild–moderate Moderate–severe Severe/fulminant
CDAI 150–220 CDAI 220–450 CDAI >450
Ambulatory Able to tolerate
oral alimentation without
manifestations ofFailed to respond to
treatment for mild–moderate
disease or Has morePersistent symptoms despite treatment
with corticosteroids/biologics as
outpatients or Has high fevers,

dehydration
Systemic toxicity (high
fevers, rigors, and
prostration) Abdominal
tenderness
Painful mass
Intestinal obstruction, or
>10% weight lossprominent symptoms of
fever, significant weight
loss, abdominal pain or
tenderness, intermittent
nausea or vomiting (without
obstructive findings), or
significant anemiapersistent vomiting, intestinal
obstruction, significant peritoneal
signs, cachexia, or abscess
(CDAI: Crohn’ disease activity index)
Toxic MegacolonQ. Give a brief account of toxic dilatation of colon (toxic megacolon).
Definition : Toxic megacolon is defined as a transverse or right colon with a
diameter of greater than 6 cm, with loss of haustration.
Causes
Ulcerative colitis: One of the most significant complications of UC. It can
be triggered by electrolyte abnormalities, narcotics, antidiarrheal
(diphenoxylate, loperamide) antispasmodics medications (reduce
gastrointestinal motility) and barium enema.Other rare causes: (1) Diarrheas are due to Clostridium difficile, (2)
Campylobacter jejuni  gastroenteritis, (3) Shigellosis, (4) Chagas’
megacolon and (5) amebic colitis.
Clinical Features
Features of severe colitis.
High fever, tachycardia, dehydration, electrolyte imbalance and
leukocytosis.
Physical examination : Patient is toxic and ill, postural hypotension,
colonic dilatation, abdominal tenderness over the involved colon, and
absent or hypoactive bowel sounds.
Plain radiograph of abdomen: Shows colonic dilatation with transverse
colonic diameter greater than 6 cm. Air may be observed in the wall of the
colon.
TreatmentMedical therapy: About 50% of cases will resolve with medical therapy alone.
–  Nil mouth, and nasogastric suction

–  Intravenous fluids to replace water and electrolyte abnormalities
–  Broad-spectrum antibiotics (e.g. ampicillin-sulbactam) plus metronidazole.
Urgent colectomy may be necessary when there is no improvement with medical therapy
Complications
Perforation is the most dangerous of the local complications.
Complications of Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Q. Write short note on the complications of inflammatory bowel
disease.
It may be local and systemic (extraintestinal).
Local Complications (Tables 10.54 and 10.55)
Table 10.54: Local complications of Crohn’s disease.
Fistula formation:  It may develop between loops of intestine and surrounding structures such as
urinary bladder, vagina, and abdominal or perianal skin. Perforations and peritoneal abscesses are
common.
Stricture formation:  May produce intestinal obstruction.
Iron-deficiency anemia with colonic disease.
Malabsorption: Extensive involvement of the small intestine may result in loss of protein and
hypoalbuminemia, generalized nutrient malabsorption, or malabsorption of vitamin B 12
and bile salts.
Fibrosing strictures  in the terminal ileum are common.
Acute complications:  Perforation abscesses and hemorrhage.
Development of carcinoma is rare. Risk of carcinoma colon is increased in patients with long-
standing colonic disease.
Gallstones and urinary oxalate stones.
Systemic secondary amyloidosis  rare.
Table 10.55: Local complications of UC
Toxic megacolon: In fulminant cases, the inflammation and inflammatory mediators can damage
the muscularis propria and disturb neuromuscular function. This may lead to colonic dilation and
toxic megacolon, which may lead to perforation.
Colorectal Cancer:  Long-standing ulcerative colitis may develop colorectal cancer than the
general population.

Hemorrhage leading to blood loss.
Electrolyte disturbances due to diarrhea.
Table 10.56: Conditions that mimic inflammatory bowel disease (ulcerative
or Crohn’s colitis).
Infective
Bacterial:  Salmonella, Shigella , pseudomembranous colitis, Campylobacter jejuni , gonococcal
proctitis, Chlamydia proctitis E. coli  O157
Viral:  Herpes simplex proctitis, cytomegalovirus
Protozoal:  Amoebiasis
Noninfective
Ischemic colitis, collagenous colitis, radiation proctitis, Behçet’s disease, diverticulitis, carcinoma
colon, NSAIDs
Conditions that mimic inflammatory bowel disease (ulcerative or Crohn’s
colitis) are presented in Table 10.56.
Extraintestinal Manifestations (Table 10.57 and Fig. 10.14)
Q. Write short note/essay on extraintestinal manifestations of
inflammatory bowel disease.
Table 10.57: Extraintestinal manifestations of IBD.
Complication Crohn’s disease Ulcerative colitis
Ocular: Uveitis, scleritis, episcleritis + +
Arthropathy: Pauciarticular,
polyarticular, ankylosing spondylitis+ +
Skin: Erythema nodosum, pyoderma
gangrenosum+ +
Primary sclerosing cholangitis + +
Thromboembolic disease + +
Renal: Nephrolithiasis + +
Bone: Osteomalacia, osteoporosis + –
Oral ulcers + –
Vitamin B 12 deficiency + –

Fig. 10.14: Systemic complications of inflammatory bowel disease.
Differences between Ulcerative Colitis and Crohn’s Disease of
the Colon (Table 10.58)
Q. Write short note on the differences between ulcerative colitis and
Crohn’s disease of the colon.
Table 10.58: Differences between ulcerative colitis and Crohn’s disease of
the colon.
Characteristics Ulcerative colitis Crohn’s disease
Pathological features
Involvement of bowel Continuous involvement Segmental involvement (skip lesions)
Inflammation Restricted to mucosa and
submucosaTransmural
Non-caseating granulomas Absent Common

Crypt abscess Common Uncommon
Goblet cell depletion Seen Absent
Strictures, fissures and
fistulaeUncommon Common
Mesenteric and lymph nodal
involvementAbsent Common
Clinical features
Rectal bleeding Common Uncommon
Abdominal pain Less common More common
Abdominal masses May be palpable Not usually palpable
Fistulae, fissures and
perianal skin tagsUncommon Common and characteristic
Small bowel involvement Uncommon Common
Rectal and colonic
involvementCommon Rare
Recurrence after surgery Not common Common
Toxic dilatation Relatively common Uncommon
PROBIOTICS AND PREBIOTICS
Q. Discuss briefly about probiotics and prebiotics.
Probiotics
Definition : Probiotics are defined as live microorganisms which are
beneficial to its host. Throughout their journey in the digestive tract, they
need to be intact, so they can reach the intestines where they act to give their
beneficial effects to the body.
Nature
Bacteria: Probiotics are usually bacterial components of the normal
intestinal flora of human beings (e.g. lactobacilli  and Bifidobacterium
infantis). They produce lactate and short-chain fatty acids (e.g. acetate and
butyrate) as end products of metabolism.
Yeast: Saccaromyces boulardii is yeast.
Preparation
Yogurt: It is commonly used probiotic in which is milk fermented by
bacteria that convert lactose into lactic acid.

Freeze-dried bacteria: Probiotics are also available as freeze-dried
bacteria (in capsule, tablet or powder form). Their composition varies and
most of them contain Lactobacillus acidophilus often with bifidobacteria.
Other strains include Bacillus coagulans, L. Paracasei , L. johnsonii .
Limitations: Problems with quality control and formulation restrict the
clinical availability of some probiotics.
UsesMalnutrition : Helps in normalizing the nutritional status of malnourished
children. WHO suggested the use of yogurt in nutritional recovery.
Lactose intolerance : Yogurt is preferred.
Prevention and treatment of antibiotic-associated diarrhea: Probiotics
containing Saccharomyces boulardii yeast) may be useful to some extent.
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) and colitis
Improve immune function/immunity
Necrotizing enterocolitis in neonates
Speed treatment of certain intestinal infections
Prevent and treat eczema in children
Prevent or reduce the severity of colds and flu
Prevent and treat vaginal yeast infections and urinary tract infections
Reduce bladder cancer recurrence: Probably reduces the development of
carcinoma of colon.
Prebiotics
Definition
Prebiotics are referred to as a dietary fiber or carbohydrates that act as the
food of probiotics. This is why it triggers bacterial growth and activity in the
intestinal microflora. Therefore, it promotes good health of the host.Chemical substances (usually oligosaccharides) which beneficially
nourishes and acts as a fertilizer to promote growth of the host’s intrinsic
probiotic bacteria. They encourage their growth.Prebiotics are special form of dietary fiber.
Prebiotics are not digested (non-digestible) by the small intestine and non
metabolized by non-probiotic gut flora such as Bacteroides spp and
Escherichia coli  present in the host.

Synthetic prebiotics are oligosaccharides containing fructose or galactose,
known as fructose oligosaccharides (FOS) and galactose oligosaccharides
(GOS), respectively. Lactulose is also a prebiotic.
These oligosaccharides are enriched with the combination of inulin.
They may be added to foods, or combined with a probiotic.
Box 10.16:  Potential uses of prebiotics.
Relief of constipation
Reduce intestinal pH.
Restore intestinal bacterial balance
Increase in the absorption of calcium and magnesium
Effect on blood cholesterol level
Reduction of fasting glucose level in type 2 diabetes patients
Reduce risk on colorectal cancer
Effects on the immune system
Better intestinal flora in infants
–  Lactulose: Useful in hepatic encephalopathy.
–  Prevention of osteoporosis: Prebiotics may increase calcium absorption.
–  Chronic constipation.
Potential Uses of Prebiotics (Box 10.16)
Synbiotics
Synbiotics refer to the combination of the prebiotics and probiotics within
a single product.
Prebiotics are targeted to act on the large intestines while the probiotics
are most effective in doing its role in the small intestine.
The two agents have been said to act synergistically. So, the term
synbiotics is used.
MISCELLANEOUS
Q. Write short note on Gardner’s syndrome.
Gardner’s Syndrome
Condition in which familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is associated
with predominant extraintestinal manifestations.
Autosomal dominant disorder

Adenomatous polyps: Numerous in colon and few in the stomach and
duodenum.
Extraintestinal lesions:  These include:
–  Osteomas of mandible, skull, and long bones
–  Epidermal cysts, desmoid tumors, thyroid tumors, etc.
Treatment:  Prophylactic total colectomy.
Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome
Q. Write short note on Peutz-Jeghers syndrome.
It is a rare autosomal dominant syndrome.
Median age of presentation is 11 years
It is characterized by:
–  Multiple GI hamartomatous polyps: Involves the entire GIT but are
most common in the small intestine. Usually, present in the dozens.
–  Mucocutaneous hyperpigmentation: The melanotic pigmentation is
seen in the mouth, buccal mucosa and genitalia region.
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome is associated with an increased risk of several
malignancies. These include cancers of the colon, pancreas, breast, lung,
ovaries, uterus, and testicles.
Genetics: Inactivation (loss-of-function mutations) of the STK11/LKB1
gene (tumor suppressor gene) detected in about 70% of affected families.
The hamartomas are not preneoplastic precursor lesions.
Clinical presentation : Abdominal pain, rectal bleeding, anemia, intestinal
obstruction, intussusception.
Diagnosis and treatment: Intraoperative enteroscopy (IOE) and remove
all small intestinal polyps by double balloon enteroscopy (DBE).
Indications, Contraindications and Complications of Upper
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (Table 10.59)
Q. Write short note on indications, contraindications and complications
of upper gastrointestinal endoscopy.
Table 10.59: Indications, contraindications and complications of upper

gastrointestinal endoscopy.
Diagnostic indications
Upper gastrointestinal bleeding: Past or
present; acute or chronic
Patients with splenomegaly or suspected
chronic liver disease: For presence and
grading of esophagogastric varicesUpper abdominal distress that persists despite
an appropriate trial of therapy
Dysphagia or odynophagia
Esophageal reflux symptoms that are
persistent or recurrent despite appropriate
therapyPersistent nausea and vomiting of unknown
cause
Surveillance for malignancy, abnormal CT
scan or barium meal
Gastric or esophageal ulcers
Familial adenomatous polyposis
Adenomatous gastric polyps
Barrett’s esophagus
Occult gastrointestinal bleeding
After caustic ingestion to assess for acute
injury
Dyspepsia over 55 years of age or with alarm
symptoms
Atypical chest pain
Weight loss
Duodenal biopsies in the investigation of
malabsorption and to confirm a diagnosis of
celiac disease prior to commencement of
gluten-free dietTherapeutic indicationsTreatment of bleeding lesions
Sclerotherapy or banding of varices
Removal of foreign bodies
Removal of selected polypoid lesions or
superficial neoplasms
Placement of feeding or drainage tubes
Dilation of stenotic lesions
Palliative treatment of stenosing neoplasms
Drainage of pancreatic pseudocysts
Contraindications
Absolute contraindications
–  Severe shock
–  Possible visceral perforation
Relative contraindications  (can be
performed by experienced hands)
–  Recent myocardial infarction, unstable
angina, cardiac arrhythmia
–  Severe respiratory disease
–  Atlantoaxial subluxation
Complications
Cardiorespiratory depression due to sedation
Aspiration pneumonia
Perforation
Indications for Colonoscopy (Table 10.60)
Q. Write short note on indications for colonoscopy.
Protein-losing Enteropathy
Q. Write short note on protein-losing enteropathy.
It is characterized by excessive loss of protein into the gut lumen, sufficient
to cause hypoproteinemia.
Causes (Table 10.61): Most common in diseases with mucosal ulceration.

Clinical features: Peripheral edema and hypoproteinemia.
Table 10.60: Indications for colonoscopy.
Diagnostic
Unexplained rectal bleeding
Unexplained lower gastrointestinal symptoms
and signs, such as recent onset constipation or
feeling of incomplete evacuation, especially in
the elderlyPolyp and cancer screening or follow-up
Inflammatory bowel disease
Stricture or colonic narrowing (with and
without inflammatory bowel disease)
Diverticular disease
Infectious colitis
Radiation colitis
Ischemic colitis
Endometriosis
Pneumatosis cystoides intestinalisTherapeutic
Polypectomy
Foreign body removal
Dilation of strictures in colon or terminal
ileum
Therapeutic: Hemostasis
Tumor resection (palliative)
Colonic decompression (volvulus and pseudo-
obstruction)
Investigations: Liver function tests are normal liver function and no
proteinuria. Diagnosis can be confirmed by measuring fecal clearance of α1-
antitrypsin or 51 Cr-labeled albumin after intravenous injection. Other
investigations depend on the underlying cause.
Treatment  of the underlying disorder, with nutritional support and measures to control peripheral
edema.
Causes of Generalized Abdominal Distension (Box 10.17)
Q. Write short note on causes of abdominal distension.
Box 10.17:  Causes of abdominal distension (7Fs).
Fat, Fluid (ascites), Flatus (obstruction/ileus), Fetus (pregnancy), Feces (constipation), Full bladder,
Fatal neoplasm (organomegaly)
Causes of Oral Ulceration
Q. Write short note on causes of oral ulceration and aphthous ulcer.
Aphthous Ulceration

Aphthous ulcers are superficial and painful ulcers which can develop in any
part of the mouth. Recurrent ulcers are common in women prior to
menstruation. The cause is unknown. Other causes of oral ulceration are
presented in Table 10.62.
Table 10.61: Causes of protein-losing enteropathy.
With erosions or ulceration of mucosa: Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis, cancer of esophagus,
stomach or colon, radiation damage, lymphoma
Without erosions or ulceration of mucosa: Ménétrier’s disease, Celiac disease, bacterial
overgrowth, eosinophilic gastroenteritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, tropical sprue
With obstruction of lymphatics: Intestinal lymphangiectasia, lymphoma, Whipple’s disease,
constrictive pericarditis
Table 10.62: Causes of oral ulcers.
Aphthous:  Idiopathic Infection, premenstrual Gastrointestinal diseases:  Crohn’s disease,
Celiac disease
Infection: Fungal (candidiasis), viral (herpes
simplex, HIV), bacterial (e.g. syphilis,
tuberculosis)Dermatological conditions:  Lichen planus,
dermatitis herpetiformis
Drugs:  Nicorandil, NSAIDs (non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs), methotrexate,
cytotoxic drugs, Stevens–Johnson syndromeSystemic diseases: Systemic lupus
erythematosus, Behçet’s syndrome, vitamin
deficiencies
Neoplasia:  Carcinoma, leukemia, Kaposi’s
sarcomaTraumaticulcers

Hepatobiliary System

CHAPTER
11
FUNCTIONS OF LIVER
Q. Enumerate important functions of liver.
Important functions of liver are listed in Box 11.1.
Box 11.1: Important functions of liver.
Protein metabolism and urea formation
Carbohydrate metabolism: Including gluconeogenesis, glycogenolysis and glycogenesis
Lipid metabolism
Bilirubin formation from hemoglobin degradation
Metabolism of vitamin and mineral
Hormone metabolism
Drug and alcohol metabolism
Cholesterol metabolism
Bile acid formation and bile secretion
Synthesis of plasma proteins including coagulation factors
Immunological function: Removal of gut endotoxins and foreign antigens
Maintaining core body temperature
Maintain pH balance and correction of lactic acidosis
LIVER FUNCTION TESTS
Q. Write short essay on liver function tests and their significance in
jaundice.
Liver Biochemistry
No single test alone can be used to assess liver function.
Serum Bilirubin

Normal values of total serum bilirubin are between 0.3 and 1.3 mg/dL,
with 95% of a normal population falling between 0.2 and 0.9 mg/dL
(almost all unconjugated). Bilirubin is a degradation product of
hemoglobin and hem-containing proteins. Bilirubin metabolism is
summarized in Figure 11.1.
Fig. 11.1:  Bilirubin metabolism
Total serum bilirubin = Conjugated (direct) + unconjugated (indirect)
bilirubin.

–   Unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia: It is characterized by a serum
bilirubin level less than 6 mg/dL and absence of bilirubinuria. The
other liver function tests are normal, e.g. hemolytic anemia, ineffective
erythropoiesis and Gilbert’s syndrome.
–   Conjugated hyperbilirubinemia: It is characterized by higher levels
of bilirubin and bilirubinuria. The other liver function tests are often
abnormal, e.g. parenchymal liver diseases and biliary tract
obstructions.
The presence of conjunctival icterus suggests a total serum bilirubin level
of at least 3.0 mg/dL level below which is called anicteric jaundice, but does
not allow differentiation between conjugated and unconjugated
hyperbilirubinemia. Tea or cola-colored urine may indicate the presence of
bilirubinuria and thus conjugated hyperbilirubinemia. Fluctuating
hyperbilirubinemia is observed in gallstones, carcinoma of ampulla of Vater,
chronic hepatitis, hemolytic anemias and Gilbert’s syndrome.
Serum EnzymesEnzymes that reflect damage to hepatocytes-aminotransferases
(transaminases)
These enzymes are present in hepatocytes and leak into the blood with
liver cell damage. These include two enzymes namely (1) aspartate
aminotransferase (AST/SGOT) and (2) alanine aminotransferase
(ALT/SGPT).Normal value of serum transaminases ranges from 10–40 U/L.
Elevation of these serum enzymes reflects damage to hepatocytes and is
useful for differentiating hepatocellular jaundice from obstructive
jaundice.
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST, formerly called SGOT)
It exists as two different isoenzymes: Mitochondrial (80%) and
cytoplasmic (20%) form.
AST is found in high concentration also in heart, muscle, kidney and
brain.
Causes of raised levels: Hepatic necrosis, myocardial infarction,
muscle injury and congestive cardiac failure. Raised mitochondrial
AST is seen in extensive tissue necrosis during myocardial infarction and

acute and chronic liver diseases.
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT, formerly called SGPT)
It is a cytosol enzyme found in higher concentration in the liver than in
other tissues (e.g. kidney, heart muscle).
ALT is a more specific indicator of liver injury.
Various causes of elevated serum aminotransferases are listed in Table
11.1.
AST: ALT ratio
Most acute hepatocellular disorders are associated with ALT is higher than
or equal to the AST.
AST to ALT ratio >2:1 is suggestive, while a ratio >3:1 is highly
suggestive of alcoholic liver disease. A low level of ALT in the serum in
alcoholic patients is due to an alcohol-induced deficiency of pyridoxal
phosphate (coenzyme required for synthesis of ALT).AST to ALT ratio is typically less than 1 in patients with chronic viral
hepatitis and nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD).
Table 11.1: Causes of elevated serum aminotransferases.
Chronic, Mild Elevations, ALT > AST (<150 U/L)
Hepatic Causes
α1-antitrypsin deficiency
Autoimmune hepatitis
Chronic viral hepatitis (B, C, and D)
Hemochromatosis
Medications and toxins
Steatosis and steatohepatitis
Wilson disease
Nonhepatic Causes
Celiac disease
Hyperthyroidism
Severe, Acute Elevations, ALT > AST (>1000 U/L)
Hepatic Causes
Acute bile duct obstruction
Acute Budd-Chiari syndrome
Acute viral hepatitis
Autoimmune hepatitis

Hepatic artery ligation
Ischemic hepatitis (prolonged hypotension or acute heart failure)
Medications/toxins (e.g. Amanita phalloides) or drug (e.g. paracetamol) induced liver injury
Wilson disease
Severe, Acute Elevations, AST > ALT (>1000 U/L or >20–25 times normal)
Hepatic Cause
Medications or toxins in a patient with underlying alcoholic liver injury
Nonhepatic Cause
Acute rhabdomyolysis
Chronic, Mild Elevations, AST > ALT (<150 U/L, <5 times normal)
Hepatic Causes
Alcohol-related liver injury (AST : ALT > 2 : 1)
Cirrhosis
Nonhepatic Causes
Hypothyroidism
Myopathy
Strenuous exercise
(ALT: alanine aminotransferase; AST: aspartate aminotransferase)
Enzymes that reflect cholestasis
These include three enzymes: (1) alkaline phosphatase, (2) 5’-nucleotidase,
and (3) ϒ-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT).
Q. Write short answer on causes/diseases with elevated/very high serum
alkaline phosphatase.
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
Sources: ALP is present in liver (canalicular and sinusoidal membranes of
the liver) and many other tissues (e.g. bone, kidney, intestine, leukocytes
and placenta).
–   Simultaneous elevation of other liver enzymes such as γ-glutamyl
transpeptidase (GGT) or 5’-nucleotidase assist in establishing the
origin of ALP from liver.Normal serum level: 3–13 KA units (80–240 IU/L).
Significance (Box 11.2):
–   Raised  levels of liver-derived alkaline phosphatase are not totally
specific for cholestasis.
–   A low serum alkaline phosphatase level may occur in patients with

Wilson disease, especially those presenting with fulminant hepatitis
and hemolysis, possibly because of reduced activity of the enzyme
owing to displacement of the co-factor zinc by copper.
Box 11.2: Significance of raised serum ALP levels.
Less than 2 ½ folds:  Hepatocellular jaundice
Markedly raised  (more than 4 times)
Obstructive (cholestatic) jaundice: Both in intrahepatic or extrahepatic obstruction
Infiltrative liver diseases, e.g. cancer, metastases, amyloidosis tuberculosis, lymphoma, sarcoidosis
Bone lesions with rapid bone turnover, e.g. Paget’s disease
Intrahepatic cholestasis, e.g. primary biliary cholangitis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, drug-
induced cholestasis.
ϒ-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT)
GGT is a microsomal enzyme present in liver and other tissues (renal
tubules, pancreas and intestine).
Significance:
–   The primary use of serum GGT levels is to identify the source of an
isolated elevation in the serum alkaline phosphatase level; GGT is not
elevated in bone disease.
–   Screening test for alcoholism : If the ALP is normal, a raised serum
GGT is a good guide to alcohol intake of more than 60 g alcohol/day.
Causes of elevated GGT levels (Box 11.3).
Box 11.3: Causes of elevated GGT levels.
Biliary obstruction
Alcoholism
Liver parenchymal damage
Nonalcoholic fatty liver
Drugs: Phenytoin, barbiturates, and some drugs used in highly active antiretroviral therapy,
including non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors and the protease inhibitor abacavir.
Others: Chronic obstructive lung disease, diabetes mellitus, hyperthyroidism, obesity and renal
failure.
5-nucleotidase
It is another microsomal enzyme similar significance as that of GGT.
The 5′NT level is not increased in bone disease and is primarily increased in
hepatobiliary disease.

Lactic dehydrogenase (LDH)
It is not useful in diagnosis of liver diseases; because of it has other sources
in body tissues. Moderate elevations are seen in ischemic hepatitis and
hepatic metastasis. ALT/LDH ratio >1.5 suggests ischemic hepatitis while
ratio <1.5 is seen with paracetamol toxicity.
Tests that measure synthetic function of the liver
Plasma proteins
Serum albuminIt is synthesized exclusively in liver and used as a marker of synthetic
function.
Normal serum albumin level: 4–5.5 g/100 mL and albumin has a half
life of around 20 days.
Significance
Low levels: Serum albumin is an excellent marker of hepatic synthetic
function . Hypoalbuminemia is observed in chronic liver diseases such as
cirrhosis and chronic hepatitis and usually reflects severe liver damage and
decreased albumin synthesis. A falling serum albumin level in liver
disease is a bad prognostic sign.
Apart from chronic liver disease, it may be observed in chronic
inflammation, sepsis, expanded plasma volume and renal or
gastrointestinal loss.
Serum globulinsThey constitute a group of proteins made up of ϒ-globulins
(immunoglobulins) synthesized by B lymphocytes and α and β globulins
synthesized primarily by hepatocytes.Normal serum globulin level: 1.5–3.5 g/100 mL.
Significance: ϒ-globulins are increased in chronic liver disease (e.g.
chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis). Increase in the concentration of specific
isotypes of ϒ-globulins (immunoglobulins) are helpful in the recognition
of certain chronic liver diseases (Table 11.2).Cirrhosis: Plasma protein shows decrease in albumin and increase in ϒ-
globulin.

Table 11.2: Specific types of elevated immunoglobulin and its associated
conditions.
Specific type of immunoglobulin Condition in which it is raised
IgG Chronic hepatitis, autoimmune hepatitis (AIH)
and cryptogenic cirrhosis
IgA Alcoholic liver disease
IgM Primary biliary cholangitis
Coagulation factors
Liver produces all the coagulation factors except factor VIII.
Vitamin K is required for the activation of coagulation factors II, VII, IX,
and X.
The coagulation factors have short half-life time. Thus, measurement of
the clotting factors is the single best measure of hepatic synthetic
function  and useful in both the diagnosis and assessing the prognosis of
acute parenchymal liver disease.
Prothrombin time:
–   Prothrombin time depends on factors I, II, V, VII and X.
–   Normal value is 11–12.5 seconds.
–   Prothrombin time collectively measures factors II, V, VII, and X.
–   Causes of prolonged prothrombin time is listed in Box 11.4.Unlike the serum albumin, the prothrombin time allows an assessment o f
current hepatic synthetic function; factor VII has the shortest serum half-
life (six hours) of all the clotting factors.
Box 11.4: Causes of prolonged prothrombin time.
Severe liver damage:  Acute hepatitis (e.g. Viral hepatitis),cirrhosis
Deficiency of vitamin K
–   Obstructive jaundice that reduces vitamin K absorption
–   Fat malabsorption
–   Poor intake
–   Antibiotic therapy which produces destruction of vitamin K-producing commensals.Disseminated intravascular coagulation .
Drugs and toxins:  Warfarin, rivaroxaban, apixaban, edoxaban, dabigatran, viper envenomation,
anticoagulant rodenticide poisoning.
Ceruloplasmin

It is an acute phase reactant synthesized by the liver.
In the blood, it binds to copper and acts as a major carrier for copper.
Normal plasma level: 20–60 mg/dL
Causes of elevated levels: Infections, liver diseases, obstructive jaundice,
rheumatoid arthritis and pregnancy.
Causes of decreased levels: Wilson’s disease (due to decreased rate of
synthesis), neonates, Menke’s disease, kwashiorkor, marasmus, protein-
losing enteropathy and copper deficiency.
CholesterolIt is synthesized in the liver. Advanced liver disease may be associated
with very low cholesterol. However, primary biliary cholangitis may be
associated with markedly raised cholesterol. Similarly a low urea level
also indicates severe liver dysfunction.
Liver functions tests and their significance are summarized in Table 11.3.
Serum autoantibodiesAntimitochondrial antibody (AMA): Antinuclear, smooth muscle (actin),
liver/kidney microsomal antibodies, antinuclear cytoplasmic antibodies
(ANCA).
Urine Tests
Bilirubin in the Urine
Normally, bilirubin cannot be detected in urine.
In unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia, urine does not contain bilirubin
(acholuric jaundice). Thus, absence of bilirubin in the urine in a
jaundiced patient suggests unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia.
In conjugated hyperbilirubinemia, urine contains bilirubin. Thus,
bilirubinuria in a jaundiced patient points to conjugated
hyperbilirubinemia (hepatobiliary disease).Urinary bilirubin is detected by Fouchet’s test.
Urine Urobilinogen
Urobilinogen is normally present in urine in trace amounts (1–2
mg/dL) and is insufficient to cause a significant positive reaction.

Table 11.3: Summary of main liver function tests and its
significance.
Test Function determined/assessed
Serum bilirubin Transport
Serum enzymes
Serum aminotransferases (ALT and AST)
Serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
ϒ-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT)Hepatocellular damage
Biliary tract obstruction
Enzyme induction
Plasma proteins Synthesis
Prothrombin time Synthesis
Causes of increased urobilinogen in urine (Box 11.5)
Box 11.5: Causes of increased urobilinogen in urine.
Hemolytic anemias  (without bilirubin in urine)
–   Thalassemia
–   Sickle-cell anemia
–   Hereditary spherocytosis
Liver diseases (bilirubinuria present)
–   Pre-icteric phase of infective hepatitis
–   Drugs or toxic hepatitis
–   Cirrhosis
Cause of absent urobilinogen: In obstructive jaundice (bilirubinuria
present), bilirubin does not reach the intestine and so is not converted into
urobilinogen.
Urinary urobilinogen is detected by Ehrlich’s aldehyde test.
a-Fetoprotein (AFP)
Q. Write a short note on a-fetoprotein (discussed in detail in Chapter
17).
α-fetoprotein is normally produced by fetal liver cells and its levels falls to
low levels after birth
Causes of elevated levels of α-fetoprotein are:
–   Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
–   Carcinomas of stomach, pancreas, gallbladder, bile ducts and

lungs
–   Teratomas
DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES
Endoscopic Retrograde Cholangiopancreatography (ERCP)
Q. Write short note on endoscopic retrograde
cholangiopancreatography (ERCP).
ERCP is a technique used to outline the biliary and pancreatic ducts.
Procedure
An endoscope is passed into the second part of the duodenum and
cannulation of the ampulla. Contrast is injected into the biliary tree and the
patient is screened radiologically. Figure 11.2 shows ERCP with stone in the
common bile duct.
Fig. 11.2:  ERCP shows stone in the common bile duct (CBD).
Uses of ERCP (Table 11.4)

Table 11.4: Uses of ERCP.
Diagnostic procedure Therapeutic procedure
Evaluation of acute/chronic pancreatitis Removal of common bile duct stones
Evaluation of patient with obstructive jaundice Sphincterotomy
Cholangitis Dilatation of benign strictures
Biopsy for periampullary carcinoma Placement of nasobiliary catheters and biliary
stents
 Brachytherapy for cholangiocarcinoma
Complications
The complication rate in diagnostic ERCP is 2–3%. Complications include
pancreatitis, cholangitis, bleeding and duodenal perforation.
Magnetic Resonance Cholangiopancreatography (MRCP)
Q. Write short note on magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography
(MRCP).
MRCP is a noninvasive technique largely replacing diagnostic (but not
therapeutic) ERCP.
Technique
A heavily T2-weighted sequence enhances visualization of the water-filled
biliary (intrahepatic ducts) and pancreatic ducts (extrahepatic ducts). It
produces high-quality images of ductal anatomy.
Advantages of MRCP over ERCP (Box 11.6)
Indications
Diagnosis of bile duct obstruction and pancreatic duct abnormalities, e.g.
choledocholithiasis, malignant obstruction of bile and pancreatic ducts,
congenital anomalies and chronic pancreatitis.Unsuccessful ERCP or a contraindication to ERCP (as in patients with
cardiorespiratory compromise, renal failure).
Box 11.6: Advantages of MRCP over ERCP.
No need for contrast media or ionizing radiation
Images can be acquired faster
Less operator dependent

No risk of pancreatitis.
Endoscopic Ultrasound (EUS)
Q. Write a short note on endoscopic ultrasound (EUS).
Procedure
In EUS, a small high-frequency ultrasound probe is placed on the tip of an
endoscope and placed by direct vision into the duodenum.
Advantages
Gradually replacing diagnostic ERCP
Close proximity of the ultrasound probe to the pancreas and biliary tree
allows high-resolution ultrasound imaging.
Accurate staging of small, potentially operable, pancreatic tumors (e.g.
neuroendocrine tumors) can be done.
Less-invasive method for bile duct imaging.
Uses
Diagnostic
Imaging pancreatic and biliary diseases, e.g. choledocholithiasis,
pancreatic and biliary cancers, and cystic lesions of the pancreas.
Ampullary carcinoma: To know the local extension of tumor and regional
lymph node metastasis that cannot be evaluated by ERCP.
Performing fine needle aspiration under EUS guidance from suspicious
lesions for confirmation of malignancy.
Therapeutic
Increasingly used for guided interventions:
–   To reduce pain in patients with unresectable pancreatic carcinoma, for
injecting bupivacaine and alcohol into the celiac ganglia.
–   Endoscopic management of pancreatic pseudocysts.
Disadvantages
Cost is high
High degree of training required.

LIVER BIOPSY
Q. Write short note on the indications, significance and complications of
liver biopsy.
Percutaneous liver biopsy is an invasive procedure that can be performed
with or without radiographic guidance.
Indications for Liver Biopsy (Table 11.5)
Table 11.5: Indications for liver biopsy.
Liver disease
–   Cirrhosis of liver: Assess the type, etiology and activity of the disease process
–   Tumors: Primary (HCC) or secondary
–   Chronic hepatitis: Assess the severity and stage of liver damage, and evaluation of the course
–   Unexplained hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, jaundice
–   Some cases of jaundice
–   Hepatocellular disease of uncertain cause
–   Occasionally in acute hepatitis
–   Diagnosis of granulomatous diseases like tuberculosis, leprosy and sarcoidosis
–   Storage and metabolic disorders, e.g. amyloidosis, glycogen storage disorders,
hemochromatosis and Wilson’s disease.
–   After liver transplantation: To assess for rejection and the presence and intensity of disease
recurrencePyrexia of unknown origin (when associated with hepatomegaly).
–   Miliary tuberculosis     – Brucellosis
–   Cholangitis                   – Malignancy
Staging of lymphoma
Contraindications of Liver Biopsy (Box 11.7)
Q. Write short note on contraindications of liver biopsy.
Complications of Liver Biopsy (Box 11.8)
Q. Write short note on complications of liver biopsy.
JAUNDICE

Q. List the causes of jaundice. How will you arrive at the etiology of
jaundice? Give the points of differentiation in clinical features and
investigations.
Definition
Jaundice (icterus) is defined as yellowish pigmentation  of skin, mucus
membranes and sclera due to increased levels of bilirubin  in the blood.
The scleral involvement is because of its rich elastic tissue that has special
affinity for bilirubin.
Normal serum bilirubin level: In normal adult ranges from 0.3 to 1.2
mg/dL.
Jaundice is clinically detected when the serum bilirubin level is above
2.0 to 2.5 mg/dL. With severe disease, the levels may be as high as 30 to
40 mg/dL.
Latent jaundice is the term used when serum bilirubin is more than 1.2
mg/dL but less than 2.5 mg/dL.
Carotenemia is characterized by yellowish pigmentation of skin by
carotene but not of sclera. Qinacrine consumption also causes yellowish
discoloration of skin and mucous membranes.
Box 11.7: Contraindications of liver biopsy.
Congenital coagulation disorders, e.g. hemophilia A and B
Prolonged prothrombin time: More than 3 seconds over control (In such cases transjugular biopsy
can be tried)
Obstructive jaundice with evidence of dilatation of intra- hepatic biliary radicles. Liver biopsy may
cause leakage of bile from liver into the peritoneum causing severe and fatal biliary peritonitis
Severe jaundice
Massive ascites
Hepatobiliary infections
Patients with severe cough where diaphragm movements cannot be controlled
Uncooperative patients
Box 11.8: Complications of liver biopsy.
Pleurisy, perihepatitis
Hemorrhage
Intrahepatic hematoma

Biliary peritonitis
Hemobilia
Arteriovenous fistula
Infection
Other organ perforation
Carcinoid crisis
Classification of Jaundice
Q. Write short note on causes of indirect/unconjugated
hyperbilirubinemia.
Jaundice can be classified in two ways:
1. Based on the underlying cause (Box 11.9):
Predominantly unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia
Predominantly conjugated hyperbilirubinemia.
2. Based on pathological mechanism (Table 11.6):
Hemolytic (prehepatic) jaundice
Hepatocellular jaundice (hepatic)
Obstructive jaundice (posthepatic).
Hemolytic Jaundice
Q. Write short note on prehepatic jaundice.
Increased destruction of red blood cells or their precursors causes
increased production of bilirubin.
Unconjugated bilirubin accumulates in the plasma and results in
jaundice.
Jaundice is usually mild (Fig. 11.3), because normal liver can easily
handle the increased bilirubin production.

Fig. 11.3:  Conjunctiva showing mild jaundice in hemolytic anemia.
Box 11.9: Classification of jaundice.
Predominantly Unconjugated Hyperbilirubinemia
1. Increased production of bilirubin
Hemolytic anemias
Resorption of blood from internal hemorrhage (e.g. GI bleeding, hematomas)
Ineffective erythropoiesis (e.g. pernicious anemia, thalassemia)
2. Reduced hepatic uptake
Drug that interference with membrane carrier systems
Diffuse liver disease (hepatitis, cirrhosis)
Some cases of Gilbert syndrome
3. Impaired bilirubin conjugation
Physiologic jaundice of the newborn
Crigler-Najjar syndrome types I and II
Gilbert syndrome
Diffuse liver disease (e.g. hepatitis, cirrhosis)
Predominantly Conjugated Hyperbilirubinemia
1. Decreased hepatocellular excretion
Deficiency of canalicular membrane transporters
–   Dubin-Johnson syndrome
–   Rotor syndrome
Liver damage or toxicity (e.g. hepatitis)
2. Impaired intra/extrahepatic bile flow
Inflammatory destruction of bile ducts (e.g. primary biliary cholangitis)
Gallstones
Carcinoma: Carcinoma head of pancreas, periampullary carcinoma, carcinoma of bile duct
Q. How do you clinically differentiate hemolytic jaundice,

hepatocellular jaundice and obstructive (cholestatic) jaundice?
Table 11.6: Classification of jaundice based on the pathological mechanism.
Hemolytic jaundice
Intracorpuscular defects
Hereditary: Spherocytosis, sickle cell disease,
thalassemia, G6PD deficiency
Acquired: Vitamin B 12 and folate deficiencyExtracorpuscular defects
Autoimmune and alloimmune hemolytic
anemias
Fragmentation syndromes, e.g. prosthetic
heart valves
Drugs, e.g. sulfasalazine and dapsone
Infections of RBCs, e.g. malaria
Hepatocellular jaundice
Viral hepatitis
Alcoholic hepatitis
Chronic hepatitis
Cirrhosis—any type
InfiltrationsIschemic liver
Drug-induced hepatitis: Chlorpromazine,
imipramine, INH, rifampicin, erythromycin,
amitriptyline, halothane, methyldopa
Cholestatic (obstructive) jaundice
Intrahepatic (small duct obstruction)Primary biliary cholangitis
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
Alcohol
Drugs
Viral hepatitis
Cirrhosis
Chronic hepatitis
Secondaries in liver
Severe bacterial infections
Inherited cholestatic liver disease
PregnancyExtrahepatic (large duct obstruction)
Gallstones in the common bile duct (CBD)
Parasitic: Helminths in the CBD
Carcinoma
–   Head of pancreas
–   Ampulla of Vater
–   Bile duct (cholangiocarcinoma)
–   Liver metastasesStricture of bile ducts
Sclerosing cholangitis
Chronic pancreatitis
Clinical features
Depends on the cause of anemia.
Pallor due to anemia
Mild jaundice without any signs of liver disease.
Hepatosplenomegaly due to increased activity of reticuloendothelial
system.
Gallstones and leg ulcers may be seen depending on the cause of anemia.
Dark stools due to increased stercobilinogen in stool.

Urine turns dark yellow on standing. This is due to increased
urobilinogen being converted to urobilin in urine.
Investigations
Show features of hemolysis
Predominantly unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia. Serum bilirubin is
raised (less than 6 mg %).
No bilirubin in urine, because the unconjugated bilirubin is not water-
soluble and cannot pass into the urine; hence the term ‘acholuric
jaundice’.
Urinary urobilinogen is increased (more than 4 mg/24 hours).
Other liver function tests (e.g. serum ALP, transferases and albumin) are
normal however LDH is increased.
Hepatocellular Jaundice
Hepatocellular jaundice occurs as a consequence of parenchymal liver
disease which leads to an inability of the liver to transport bilirubin across
the hepatocyte into the bile.
Defect in bilirubin transport across the hepatocyte may occur at any point
between the uptake of unconjugated bilirubin into the hepatocyte and
transport of conjugated bilirubin into biliary canaliculi.In hepatocellular jaundice (Fig. 11.4), both unconjugated and
conjugated bilirubin level rises in the blood.
Fig. 11.4:  Deep jaundice in viral hepatitis.

Fig. 11.5:  Causes of obstructive jaundice.
Investigations
Raised transaminases (AST, ALT): Acute jaundice with AST >1000 U/L
is highly suggestive of an infectious cause (e.g. hepatitis A, B), drugs
(e.g. paracetamol) or hepatic ischemia.
Imaging
Liver biopsy
Cholestatic (Obstructive/Surgical) Jaundice
Q. Write short note on causes and features of obstructive jaundice.
Cholestasis means failure of bile flow. Its cause may be anywhere
between hepatocyte and duodenum (Fig. 11.5).
Cholestatic jaundice is usually a ‘surgical jaundice’ meaning a cause that
requires surgical intervention.
Cholestasis can be intrahepatic or extrahepatic.

Consequences of cholestasis:
–   Retention of bile acids and bilirubin  in the liver and blood.
–   Deficiency of bile acids in the intestine.
Clinical features (Boxes 11.10 and 11.11)
Investigations
Serum findings
Serum bilirubin markedly raised  and is predominantly conjugated
hyperbilirubinemia.
Serum ALP markedly raised  (3–4 times that of normal).
Minimal biochemical changes of liver parenchymal damage.
Antimitochondrial antibody (in primary biliary cholangitis).
Box 11.10: Symptoms of cholestasis.
Jaundice (gradually progressive or fluctuating)
Pruritus (as bile salts saponify the fat surrounding the free nerve endings)
Pale or clay-colored stools
Dark urine (increased conjugated bilirubin)
Bradycardia
Other symptoms depending on the cause
–   Fever with chills and rigors (cholangitis)
–   Weight loss (malabsorption)
–   Bleeding tendency (vitamin K deficiency)
–   Bone pains (calcium and vitamin D deficiency)
–   Abdominal pain (gallstones).
Box 11.11: Signs of cholestasis.
Deep jaundice with a greenish hue
Scratch marks
Xanthelasmas  on eyelids and xanthomas over tendons due to lipid deposit
Other signs depending on the cause
–   Palpable gallbladder observed in carcinoma head of pancreas
–   Large hard irregular liver (malignancy)
–   Late features: Secondary biliary cirrhosis and signs of liver cell failure
Urine findings

Bilirubin present.
Urobilinogen absent.
Clinical features useful in differentiating different types of jaundice are listed
in Table 11.7.
Table 11.7: Clinical features useful in differentiating different types of
jaundice.
Feature Hemolytic (prehepatic) Hepatocellular
(intrahepatic)Obstructive
(posthepatic)
Jaundice
Color
DepthLemon yellow
MildOrange yellow
VariableGreenish yellow
Deep
Pruritus - Variable +
Bleeding tendency - + + (late)
Anemia + - -
Splenomegaly + Variable Absent (may develop
later when cirrhosis
develops)
Palpable gallbladder - - May be present
Features of
hepatocellular failure- + (early) + (late)
Conjugated bilirubin Absent Raised Raised
AST or ALT Normal Increased Normal
ALP Normal Normal Raised
Urine bilirubin Absent Present Present
Urine urobilinogen Present Present Absent
CONGENITAL NONHEMOLYTIC
HYPERBILIRUBINEMIASQ. Write short note/essay on congenital nonhemolytic
hyperbilirubinemias.
Q. List the causes of congenital hyperbilirubinemias.
Q. Write short note on causes of congenital hyperbilirubinemia.
Various congenital nonhemolytic hyperbilirubinemias are listed in Table
11.8.

Table 11.8: Congenital nonhemolytic hyperbilirubinemias.
Hereditary disorder Mode of inheritance Defects in bilirubin
metabolismCharacteristics
Unconjugated Hyperbilirubinemia
Crigler-Najjar
syndrome type IAutosomal recessive Absent UGT1A1
activityFatal
Crigler-Najjar
syndrome type IIAutosomal dominant
with variable
penetranceDecreased UGT1A1
activityUsually mild
Gilbert syndrome Autosomal dominant Decreased UGT1A1
activityHarmless
Conjugated Hyperbilirubinemia
Dubin-Johnson
syndromeAutosomal recessive Impaired biliary
excretion of bilirubin
glucuronidesLiver with pigmented
granules in cytoplasm.
Harmless
Rotor syndrome Autosomal recessive Decreased hepatic
uptake
Decreased biliary
excretionHarmless
(UGT: uridine diphosphate-glucuronyltransferase)
Gilbert Syndrome
Relatively common, harmless, inherited hyperbilirubinemia with no clinical
consequences has also been called “constitutional hepatic dysfunction” and
“familial nonhemolytic jaundice”.Etiology
Caused by mutations in the UGT1 gene that leads to inadequate
synthesis of the UGT1A1 enzyme (activity is about 30% of normal)
resulting in unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia.
Autosomal dominant mode of inheritance.
Clinical Features
More common in males.
Usually asymptomatic and jaundice is incidentally detected on a routine
check.
Mild, chronic unconjugated fluctuating hyperbilirubinemia not
associated with other liver functional derangements.
Characterized by recurrent episodes of jaundice and may be triggered by,

among other things, dehydration, fasting, inter-current disease,
menstruation, and overexertion.
Physical examination is normal, except for mild jaundice.
Investigation
Unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia (less than 6 mg%). A raised bilirubin
level during fasting is the most common diagnostic tool.
Urine: Urobilinogen is increased and bilirubinuria is absent.
Peripheral smear, reticulocyte count and serum haptoglobin: Normal.
Treatment:  Usually no treatment is required.
Glucuronosyl-transferase activity may be increased by administering phenobarbital 60 mg BD.
Crigler-Najjar Syndrome
Crigler-Najjar Syndrome Type I
Rare, autosomal recessive disorder.
Etiology
Due to complete absence of hepatic UGT1A1 (uridine diphosphate-
glucuronosyl-transferase).
Features
Characterized by chronic, severe, unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia that
produce severe jaundice, icterus and death  secondary to kernicterus
within 18 months of birth.
Treatment
Phenobarbital  (which induces microsomal enzymes including UGT), has no effect.
Treatment includes daily phototherapy and liver transplantation. Plasmapheresis, calcium
phosphate, tin-protoporphyrin and orlistat have been tried. Hepatocyte transplantation and gene
therapy are being tried.
Crigler-Najjar Syndrome Type II (Arias Syndrome)
Less severe, nonfatal disorder and also known as Arias syndrome.
Autosomal recessive inheritance in most cases.
Partial deficiency of UGT1A1 enzyme (<10% of normal).
Jaundice is milder than type I (serum bilirubin <20 mg/dL) and does not

develop kernicterus.
Treatment:  Treatment includes ultraviolet light therapy and liver transplantation. Phenobarbital
treatment can improve bilirubin glucuronidation by inducing hypertrophy of the hepatocellular
endoplasmic reticulum.
Dubin-Johnson Syndrome
Etiology
Benign autosomal recessive disorder.
Due to the complete absence of this multidrug resistance protein 2
(MRP2) which is required for secretion of conjugated bilirubin from the
hepatocytes into canaliculi. This leads to defect in hepatocellular excretion
of bilirubin glucuronides across the biliary canalicular membrane.
Clinical Features
Chronic or recurrent conjugated hyperbilirubinemia, generally after
puberty.
Degree of hyperbilirubinemia may be increased by intercurrent illness,
oral contraceptives and pregnancy.
Investigations
Conjugated hyperbilirubinemia (usually 2–5 mg/dL).
Bromosulphthalein (BSP) clearance test shows impaired clearance with
reflux into blood at 90 minutes.
Bilirubinuria
Gallbladder is usually not visualized on oral cholecystography.
Liver biopsy shows dark pigment in centrilobular hepatocytes. This is
due to coarse melanin-like pigmented granules within the enlarged
lysosomes present in the cytoplasm of hepatocytes. Pigment are composed
of polymers of epinephrine metabolites.
No treatment is required in most cases. Patients have a normal life expectancy.
Rotor Syndrome
Rare form of asymptomatic conjugated hyperbilirubinemia.
Inherited as an autosomal recessive  trait.

Due to many defects such as hepatocellular uptake, intracellular binding
and excretion of bilirubin pigments.
Clinical presentation is with mild jaundice.
Investigations
Conjugated hyperbilirubinemia
Bilirubinuria.
BSP clearance test shows impaired clearance but there is no reflux back
into blood.
Gallbladder is visualized on oral cholecystography.
Liver is morphologically normal.
Charcot’s Triad
Q. Write short note on Charcot’s triad.
It consists of following in the presence of stones in bile ducts:
Pain in the right hypochondrium.
Intermittent or persistent jaundice.
Fever with chills and rigors due to acute cholangitis.
Courvoisier’s Law
Q. Describe Courvoisier’s law.
In obstruction of common bile duct due to a stone, the gallbladder as a rule is
impalpable (no distension). This is because; the gallbladder is usually already
shriveled, fibrotic, and nondistensible and hence will not be palpable.
In obstruction from other causes (e.g. carcinoma head of pancreas)
distension of the gallbladder is common and hence gallbladder may be
palpable.
Exceptions of Courvoisier’s lawDouble impaction: Stones, simultaneously occluding the cystic duct and
the distal common bile duct (CBD).
Pancreatic calculus obstructing the ampulla of Vater
Oriental cholangiohepatitis
Periampullary carcinoma in patients with cholecystectomy
Mirizzi syndrome.

VIRAL HEPATITIS
Q. Describe the etiology, epidemiology, pathogenesis, clinical features
and treatment of viral hepatitis.
Q. Write short note on the diagnosis, prevention and management of
acute viral hepatitis.
Q. Briefly describe anicteric hepatitis.
Q. How do you approach to a case of fever with jaundice in a young
male? Mention the management.
Etiology
Q. List the viruses causing acute hepatitis.
Various causes of acute hepatitis and types and causes of viral hepatitis are
listed in Box 11.12 and Table 11.9 respectively.
Box 11.12: Causes of acute hepatitis.
Viral hepatitis (Table 11.9)
Other infections: Leptospirosis, malaria, dengue, brucellosis
Alcohol
Drugs: Paracetamol, isoniazid (INH), rifampicin, halothane
Ischemic hepatitis
Toxins: Amanita, carbon tetrachloride, yellow phosphorous
Pregnancy
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
Wilson’s disease
Table 11.9: Types of viral hepatitis.
Hepatitis caused by common (hepatotropic)
virusesHepatitis caused by other viruses
(nonhepatotrophic)
Type of hepatitis Causative agent
Hepatitis A Cytomegalovirus
Hepatitis B Epstein-Barr virus
Hepatitis C Herpes simplex virus
Delta hepatitis Yellow fever virus

Hepatitis E Adenovirus, varicella zoster virus
Hepatitis A
Q. Discuss the clinical features, investigations and management of
hepatitis A infection.
Etiology
Caused by hepatitis A virus (HAV) which is a nonenveloped, 27 nm, RNA
virus belonging to the picornavirus group.
Hepatitis A is the most common type of viral hepatitis often occurs in
epidemics.
Most commonly affects children and young adults.
Overcrowding and poor sanitation facilitates the spread.
Source of Infection
Only source of infection is acutely infected person.
Virus replicates in the liver, excreted in bile and then excreted in
stool/feces of infected persons for about 2 weeks before the onset of
symptoms and then for a further 2 weeks or so.
Mode of Spread
Fecal-oral route (either via person-to-person contact or consumption of
contaminated food or water). In outbreaks it spreads through water, milk and
shell fish.
Incubation Period
15–45 days (average 28 days).
There is no carrier state.
Clinical features are discussed together on page 752 of Chapter 11.
Extrahepatic Manifestations
Less frequent in acute HAV infection than in acute HBV infection. Most
commonly quickly fading rash (14%) and arthralgias (11%) and uncommonly
myocarditis, thrombocytopenia, aplastic anemia, red cell aplasia,
leukocytoclastic vasculitis, glomerulonephritis, and arthritis, in which

immune-complex disease is believed to play a pathogenic role.
Prevention and Prophylaxis
Maintaining good hygiene and improving social conditions. HAV is
resistant to chlorination but is killed by boiling water for 10 minutes.
Active immunization: A formaldehyde-inactivated HAV vaccine
(contains the single HAV antigen) for active immunization and can be
used in individuals above the age of 2 years. It probably provides lifelong
immunity.Passive immunization: Normal human immunoglobulin (0.02 mL/kg IM)
made from pooled human plasma is used if exposure to HAV is <2 weeks
and can protect from HAV infection for 3 months. HAV vaccine should
also be administered.
Hepatitis B
Q. What are the common causes of viral hepatitis? Discuss the clinical
features, complications and management of hepatitis B infection.
Etiology
Caused by hepatitis B virus (HBV) which is a hepatotropic DNA virus
belonging to the family Hepadnaviridae.
Structure and genome of HBV
Complete infective virion (HBV virion) is called as Dane particle. It is
spherical 42 nm particle and double-layered comprising an inner core or
nucleocapsid (27 nm) surrounded by an outer envelope of surface protein
(HBsAg).
Viral genome: It consists of partially double-stranded circular DNA and
has four genes.
–   HBsAg (S gene): HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen  is a product of
S gene which is secreted into the blood in large amounts. HBsAg is
immunogenic.
–   HBcAg (C  gene): The C gene produces two antigenically different
products:
♦  Hepatitis B core antigen (HBcAg) : Remains intracellular within
the hepatocytes and do not circulate in the serum. Hence, not

detectable in the serum of patients.
♦  Hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg): Is secreted into serum and is a
surrogate (substitute) marker for high levels of viral
replication . It is essential for the establishment of persistent
infection.
–   HBV polymerase (P  gene): A polymerase (Pol ) is a product of P
gene and DNA polymerase enzyme is needed for virus replication.
–   HBxAg (X  gene): HBx protein  is necessary for virus infectivity and
has been implicated in the pathogenesis of liver cancer in HBV
infection.
Source of infection: Human suffering from hepatitis (acute/chronic) or
carriers is the only source of infection. HBV is 100 times as infectious as
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and 10 times as infectious as hepatitis
C virus (HCV).
Mode of Transmission
Q. Write short note on mode of transmission of hepatitis B (serum
hepatitis).
1. Vertical/congenital transmission: From mother [who is carrier for HBV
(90% HbeAg +ve, 30% HbeAg –ve)] to child may occur in utero, during
parturition or soon after birth. It not transmitted by breastfeeding.2. Horizontal transmission: Is the dominant mode  of transmission.
Parenteral: It is the major route of transmission but occasionally non-
parenteral.
–   By percutaneous and mucous membrane exposure to infectious
body fluids, through minor cuts/abrasions in the skin or mucous
membranes. In children it can be transmitted through minor
abrasions or close contact with other children. HBV can survive for
long periods on household articles, e.g. toys, toothbrushes and may
transmit the infection.
–   Intravenous route: Through transfusion of unscreened infected
blood or blood products. This mode of spread is rare now, because
of routine screening of all blood donors for HBV and HCV.
Intravenous drug abuse with sharing of needles and syringes,
tattooing and acupuncture are other ways of developing infection.

Close personal contact: Nonparenteral route of transmission include
spread through body fluids (virus can be found in these fluids) like
saliva, urine, semen and vaginal secretions. However, this requires
close personal contact, unprotected heterosexual or homosexual
intercourse.
Incubation period: 30–180 days (mean, 8–12 weeks)
Chronic carrier state can develop with HBV infection (1–20%).
Prevention and Prophylaxis
Q. Write short on prevention and prophylaxis of HBV.
Avoiding risk factors:
–   Not to share needles
–   Having safe sex
–   Transfuse safe blood and blood products
–   Enforced strict standard safety precautions in laboratories and hospitals
to avoid accidental needle punctures and contact with infected body
fluids.Active immunization: By using recombinant vaccines (containing
HBsAg). It is advised in following individuals:
–   Children: In India, non-percutaneous routes of transmission are quite
prevalent and active immunization using vaccine is recommended in
all children.
–   High-risk groups: For example, health care personnel, hemodialysis
patients, injection drug users, hemophiliacs and sexual contacts of
HBsAg carriers.Dosage regimen: Three injections are given into the deltoid muscle at 0, 1
and 6 months. Dose is 10 ug for children under 10 years and 20 ug in
children above 10 years. More frequent and larger doses are required in
individuals over 50 years of age or clinically ill and/or
immunocompromised (including HIV infection or AIDS). Side-effects are
very few.Combined prophylaxis: This consists of vaccination and
immunoglobulin. It should be given to individuals with:
–   Accidental needle-stick injury, gross personal contamination with

infected blood and exposure to infected blood in the presence of cuts
and grazes.
–   All newborn babies of HBsAg-positive mothers.
–   Regular sexual partners of HBsAg-positive patients, who have been
found to be HBV-negative.
–   Dosage: For adults a dose 0.05–0.07 mL/kg body weight hepatitis B
immunoglobulin (HBIG) (200 IU to newborns) and the vaccine (IM)
given at another site.
Treatment:  Pegylated interferon alpha, lamivudine, adefovir, entecavir, telbivudine, or tenofovir
may be used as initial therapy but lamivudine and telbivudine are not preferred because of high rates
of resistance.
Hepatitis C
Q. Write short note on hepatitis C.
Etiology
Previously called blood-borne non-A, non-B hepatitis.
It is a small , enveloped , single-stranded RNA virus belonging to the
family Flaviviridae.
A characteristic feature is emergence of an endogenous, newly mutated
strain. Because of this genomic instability and antigenic variability,
producing an effective HCV vaccine is difficult.
HCV has six genotypes and in India, most prevalent is HCV 3.
Mode of spread: HCV is not transmitted by breastfeeding.
–   Mainly by the parenteral route (transfusion of blood and blood
products, and in drug addicts) as a blood-borne infection.
–   Sexual contact (low chances of transmission)
–   Perinatal/vertical transmission
Incubation period: 15–160 days (mean, 7 weeks)
Nearly 80% infected individuals develop chronic hepatitis.
Hepatitis D (Delta Hepatitis)
Q. Write short note/essay on etiology and epidemiology of delta
hepatitis.

Etiology
Caused by hepatitis D virus (HDV or delta virus), which is a
defective/incomplete RNA virus and belongs to the Deltaviridae family.
The RNA genome is covered by an outer coat/shell of HBsAg.
It has no independent existence and requires HBV for its replication and
expression.
Because HDV is dependent on HBV, the duration of HDV infection is
determined by the duration of HBV infection. It causes delta hepatitis
with two clinical patterns.
–   Acute coinfection: It develops when individual is exposed
simultaneously to serum containing both HDV and HBV. The HBV
infection first becomes established and the HBsAg is necessary for
development of complete HDV virions.
–   Superinfection: It occurs when an individual is already infected with
HBV (chronic carrier of HBV) is exposed to a new dose HDV.Mode of spread: Parenteral route and sexual contact.
Fulminant hepatitis can follow both patterns of infection but is more
common after co-infection.
Hepatitis E
Q. Write short note/essay on transmission, clinical features and
management of hepatitis E infection.
It was previously called epidemic or enterically transmitted non-A, non-B
hepatitis.
Etiology
HEV is an unenveloped, single-stranded RNA virus in the Hepevirus
genus.
Viral particles are 32 to 34 nm in diameter.
Hepatitis E occurs primarily in young to middle-aged adults.
Source of infection: HEV is a zoonotic disease with animal reservoirs,
such as monkeys, cats, pigs, rodents and dogs. Virions are shed in stool
during the acute illness.
Mode of transmission: An enterically transmitted, water-borne
infection. Common after contamination of water supplies as after monsoon

flooding.
Incubation period: 14–60 days (mean, 5–6 weeks).
Outcome of Infection
HEV infection is responsible for more than 30–60% of cases of sporadic
acute hepatitis (clinically very similar to hepatitis A) in India. It produces
self-limiting acute hepatitis.
It does not cause chronic liver disease.
High mortality rate (about 20%) among pregnant women .
Prevention and Control
Good sanitation and hygiene similar to hepatitis A.
Vaccine has been developed and used successfully in China.
Clinical Feature of Viral Hepatitis
Q. Write short note/essay on clinical features of acute hepatitis/hepatitis
A /hepatitis B.
Acute viral hepatitis is the sudden onset of significant aminotransferase
elevation due to diffuse necroinflammatory liver injury.
Acute viral hepatitis can be caused by any one of four hepatotropic viruses.
Its clinical features can be divided into four phases:
Incubation Period
Acute viral hepatitis develops after an incubation period that varies according
to the type of virus (Table 11.10).
Symptomatic Preicteric Phase
Usually last for a 1–2 weeks before the onset of jaundice.
Prodromal symptoms of acute viral hepatitis are systemic and variable.
Constitutional symptoms are nonspecific and include anorexia, nausea
and vomiting, poor appetite, fatigue, malaise, headache, distaste for
cigarettes, etc. A low-grade, fever is more often present in hepatitis A and
E than in hepatitis B or C. Hepatitis B may occasionally present with a
serum sickness–like immunological syndrome consisting of rashes (e.g.
urticaria or a maculopapular rash) and polyarthritis affecting small joints.

Upper vague abdominal pain  due to stretching of liver capsule.
Dark urine (conjugated hyperbilirubinemia) and clay-colored stools (due
to cholestasis) may be noticed by the patient.
Symptomatic Icteric Phase
With the onset of clinical jaundice, the constitutional prodromal symptoms
usually diminish.
Liver becomes enlarged and tender. Pruritis may develop due to bile salt
retention.
Splenomegaly and cervical lymphadenopathy may be observed in about
10–20% of patients.
Dark urine and pale stool.
Recovery (Convalescence) Phase
Constitutional symptoms disappear and appetite improves, jaundice
decreases, stools and urine become normal, and liver size decreases.
Duration of this phase is variable, ranging 2–12 weeks. Usually more
prolonged in acute hepatitis B and C.
Complete clinical and biochemical recovery is observed within 1–2
months after the onset in hepatitis A and E and 3–4 months after the onset
in hepatitis B and C.
Fulminant Hepatitis
It can develop in hepatitis B, D and E. It is uncommon with hepatitis C and
rare in hepatitis A. With hepatitis E, fulminant hepatitis occurs in nearly 20%
cases in pregnant females.
Summary of various hepatotropic viruses are presented in Table 11.10.
Table 11.10: Summary of various hepatotropic viruses.
Feature HAV HBV HCV HDV HEV
Incubation
period in days
(range)30 (15–45) 90 (30–180) 50 (15–
160)90 (30–180) 40 (14–
60)
Onset Acute Insidious or acute Insidious Insidious or acute Acute
Age group
affectedChildren, young
adultsYoung adults, babies,
toddlersAdults,
but any
ageAny age (similar
to HBV)Young
adults

Mode of
transmissionFecal-oral Parenteral, sexual
contact, perinatalParenteral,
sexual
contact,
perinatalParenteral Fecal-
oral
Clinical
Severity Mild Occasionally severe Moderate Occasionally
severeMild
 Never 10% 80% 5% with
coinfection;
≤70% for
superinfectionNever
Carrier state None 1–30% 1.5–3.2% Variable None
Progression to
cancerNone + (Neonatal
infection)+ ± None
Prognosis Good Worse Moderate Good in acute
and poor in
chronicGood
Prophylaxis Immunoglobulin
Inactivated
vaccineHepatitis B
immunoglobulin,
recombinant vaccineNone HBV vaccine
(none for HBV
carriers)Vaccine
InvestigationsUrine
–   Bilirubinuria (in early stages), and increased urinary urobilinogen
slight microscopic hematuria and mild proteinuria.
Hematological tests
–   Leukopenia with a relative lymphocytosis.
–   Prothrombin time (PT) is prolonged in severe cases signifies extensive
hepatocellular damage. This is one of the best indices of prognosis.
–   Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) is raised .
Biochemical investigations:
–   Aminotransferases (AST, ALT): Raised  and maximum levels are
observed during the prodromal phase (400–4000 IU/L). They
progressively decline during icteric and recovery phase.
–   Bilirubin: Both conjugated and unconjugated bilirubin levels are
equally raised.
–   Alkaline phosphatase: It may be raised but usually less than two
times the normal.
–   Serum protein: Normal

–   Blood glucose: It may be low.
Serological tests: During prodromal phase, low titers of antismooth
muscle antibody, rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibody and heterophil
antibody may be observed.
Serological Markers for Viral Hepatitis
Q. Write short note on investigations in hepatitis A.
Hepatitis A
Q. Write short note/essay on the laboratory findings in hepatitis A.
IgM anti-HAV ( IgM antibody against HAV ): Appears in blood at the
onset of symptoms and is a reliable marker of acute infection .
IgG anti-HAV: IgM anti-HAV is followed by the appearance of IgG anti-
HAV. It represents recovery phase and immunity phase. It persists for
years and provides a lifelong immunity against reinfection by HAV.Aminotransferase: Raised  ranging from 10 to 100 times the upper limit
of the reference range.
Hepatitis B (Figs. 11.6 and 11.7)
Q. Write short note on HBsAg/Australia antigen/hepatitis B surface
antigen.

Fig. 11.6:  Sequence of serologic markers in acute hepatitis with resolution caused by HBV.

Fig. 11.7: Sequence of serologic markers in chronic hepatitis caused by HBV.
Hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg)
HBsAg: It is the first virologic marker which appears in serum before the
onset of symptoms (late in the incubation period or prodromal phase of
hepatitis B). It a reliable marker of infection. It peaks during the disease
and becomes undetectable within 3–6 months.
HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen  is a product of S gene which is
secreted into the blood in large amounts.
HBsAg is immunogenic. It is located in the capsular material of the virus.
HBsAg is also named Australia antigen , because of its first detection in
Australian aborigine.
Significance:
–   Present in the serum in both acute and chronic hepatitis B; indicates an

infectious state . Loss of HBsAg plus the development of anti-HBs
denotes recovery.
–   Persistence of HBsAg beyond 6 months suggests a chronic hepatitis B
infection. In such cases anti-HBc remains positive while anti-HBs is
negative.
–   A negative test for HBsAg indicates HBV infection very unlikely, but
does not exclude it.
Identified by hemagglutination and radioimmunoassay methods.
Anti-HBs
It is antibody to HBsAg and appears after the disappearance of HBsAg.
Significance: Anti-HBs is a protective antibody and may persist for life
providing protection.
Anti-HBc
HBcAg is not found in the serum. But its antibody, IgM anti-HBc appears in
serum a week or two after the appearance of HBsAg. After about 6 months,
the IgM anti-HBc antibody is replaced by IgG anti-HBc. Its significance are:
IgM anti-HBc is the earliest antibody marker and indicates recent
infection (first six months).
IgG anti-HBC indicates remote infection  (beyond 6 months). Its
presence indicates previous infection with HBV even when all the other
viral markers are not detectable.
HBeAg
It is detected transiently, early in the course.
Their persistence  6 weeks after the onset of symptoms indicates
infectivity and probable development of chronic hepatitis B .
Their absence is a favorable serologic finding.
Anti-HBe is present in the serum in the recovery phase.
HBV-DNA, and DNA polymerase: These appear in serum soon after
HBsAg.
Significance: Usually not helpful in the diagnosis of hepatitis B, but may
be valuable in assessing prognosis. They indicate active viral replication.
Interpretations of serological findings and its significance in HBV are

summarized in Table 11.11.
HBV viral DNA (HBV DNA): Most accurate marker of virus replication.
Table 11.11: Interpretation of serological findings and its significance in
HBV.
Antigens Antibodies Interpretation
HBsAg HBeAg Anti-HBc Anti-
HBsAnti-
HBe 
– – – – – Susceptible
– – – + – Immunity to HBV caused by
previous exposure or vaccination
+ + IgM +ve and IgG –ve – – Acute hepatitis B, highly
infectious
High titer in acute hepatitis B and
low titer in chronic hepatitis B
– – IgM –ve and IgG +ve + + Resolved acute hepatitis B,
seroconversion, low infectivity
+ + IgM –ve and IgG +ve – – Chronic infection  or carrier
state, high infectivity
+ – IgG +ve – +/– Chronic infection  or carrier
state, low infectivity
– – – + – HBV vaccination
– – + – – Interpretation unclear*
HBV DNA: (i) indicative of active viral replication, (ii) detected in both serum and liver and (iii) its
levels indicate response to treatment
*May be most commonly resolved infection, resolving acute infection, false +ve anti-HBc (thus
susceptible) or chronic infection (low level).
Complications of Acute Viral Hepatitis (Table 11.12)Q. Write short note on complications of acute viral hepatitis.
Hepatitis C
Anti-HCV: Appears after infection; disappears after recovery; persists in
chronic hepatitis C.
HCV-RNA: Appears after exposure.
Anti-HCV (antibodies against HCV) does not confer immunity.
Hepatitis D (delta hepatitis)
HDV RNA: Detectable in the blood and liver before and in the early days
of acute disease.

Anti-HDV: IgM anti-HDV-most reliable indicator of recent HDV
exposure.
Hepatitis E
Before the onset of clinical illness, HEV RNA and HEV virions can be
detected in stool and serum.
After the onset of clinical illness, serum aminotransferases rises and
elevated IgM anti-HEV titers also occur simultaneously. After recovery
the IgM is replaced with a persistent IgG anti-HEV titre.
Table 11.12: Complications of acute viral hepatitis.
Hepatic complications Extrahepatic complications
Fulminant hepatic failure Aplastic anemia
Cholestatic viral hepatitis Renal failure
Relapsing hepatitis Polyarteritis nodosa
Posthepatitis syndrome Henoch-Schonlein purpura
Chronic hepatitis Myocarditis
Cirrhosis Transverse myelitis
Hepatocellular carcinoma Peripheral neuropathy
Table 11.13: Poor prognostic features of viral hepatitis.
Laboratory findings Other features
Marked increase in AST and ALT level Liver not enlarged
Serum bilirubin >20 mg/dL Renal failure
Prolongation prothrombin time by more than 5
seconds than controlRecurring attacks of hypoglycemia
Low serum albumin HBV, HCV or HDV infection
Poor prognostic features of viral hepatitis are listed in Table 11.13.
Treatment
General Measures
Avoid drugs which are metabolized in the liver, e.g. sedatives and narcotics.
Avoid alcohol  during the acute illness.
No specific dietary modifications are required.
Elective surgery should be avoided during acute viral hepatitis, as there is a risk of postoperative
liver failure.
Liver transplantation performed for complications of cirrhosis resulting from chronic hepatitis B
and C infection.
Hepatitis A

Q. Write short note on treatment of hepatitis A infection.
No specific treatment.
Rest and dietary measures are not helpful.
Supportive symptomatic treatment.
Corticosteroids do not have benefit.
Hepatitis B
Q. Write short note on treatment of hepatitis B infection.
Therapeutic goal
Prevent the progression to end stage liver disease, HCC and death with improvement in quality of
life.
Clearance of HBV DNA.
Absence of HBeAg and HBAg and appearance of antibody.
Normalization of liver enzymes and histology.
Acute Hepatitis B
In previously healthy adults, recovery occurs in ~99%; therefore, antiviral therapy is not required.
Mainly symptomatic.
Monitor HBV markers.
Entecavir (ETV) or tenofovir (TDF) to be given when HbeAg persists beyond 12 weeks, and in
patients who are very ill.
Box 11.13:  Indications for therapy in chronic hepatitis B.
Patients with moderate to severe active necroinflammation and/or fibrosis in the liver biopsy
Presence of cirrhosis
Immunotolerant patients
Chronic Hepatitis B
Indications for therapy (Box 11.13)
Antiviral agents:
–   First line: Most commonly used include interferon, entecavir and tenofovir.
–   Second line: Telbivudine, adefovir and lamivudine.
Postexposure Prophylaxis to Prevent Hepatitis B Virus Infection (Described in detail in Chapter
5).
Hepatitis C
Goals of treatment of HCV:  (1) Eradication of virus, (2) reduce progression of disease, (3)
histological improvement and (4) decrease frequency of HCC.
Interferon- ∝ is used in acute hepatitis C to prevent chronic disease.
HCV: Progression of fibrosis determines the prognosis and liver biopsy is the gold standard to
assess fibrosis.
Hepatitis D
Active liver disease (raised ALT levels and/or inflammation on biopsy) is treated with peginterferon
∝-٢a and adefovir for ٢١  months.

Transfusion Associated Hepatitis (TAH)
Q. Write short essay on transfusion associated hepatitis.
These include HCV and/or HBV (discussed above).
CHRONIC HEPATITIS
Q. Discuss the classification, etiology, pathology, clinical features,
complications, prevention and management of chronic
hepatitis/chronic hepatitis B infection.
Q. Write short essay on chronic active hepatitis.
Definition
Chronic hepatitis is defined as symptomatic, biochemical, or serologic
evidence of hepatic disease for more than 6 months. Microscopically, there
should be inflammation and necrosis in the liver.
Classification
Older classification: Previously chronic hepatitis was classified
Milder forms: (i) Chronic persistent hepatitis (CPH) and (ii) Chronic
lobular hepatitis (CLH)
Severe forms: Chronic active hepatitis (CAH).
However, this classification is not very helpful in determining the prognosis.
Present classification: In order to assess response to therapy and prognosis,
present classification is based on combination of three factors (Box 11.14).
Box 11.14: Basis of present classification of chronic hepatitis.
Etiology:  Cause of hepatitis
Grade:  Histologic activity
Stage:  Degree of progression
Classification Based on the Causes of Chronic Hepatitis (Table
11.14)
Table 11.14: Classification based on the causes of chronic hepatitis.

A. Chronic viral hepatitis
Chronic hepatitis B
Chronic hepatitis B + hepatitis D
Chronic hepatitis CB. Drug-induced chronic hepatitis
Methyldopa
Isoniazid
Ketoconazole
Nitrofurantoin
C. Autoimmune hepatitis D. Hereditary: Wilson’s disease
E. Unknown cause, or cryptogenic chronic
hepatitisF. Others: Inflammatory bowel disease
(ulcerative colitis) and rarely alcohol
Classification Based on the Grade of Chronic Hepatitis
Grade is a histological assessment of inflammation and necrosis observed on
the liver biopsy. It indicates severity of liver disease. The histological
features assessed are interface hepatitis, bridging necrosis, interlobular
necrosis, degree of portal inflammation and fibrosis.
This is also known as histologic activity index (HAI) or Knodell-Ishak
score. Other staging systems include Scheuer score and Metavir score.
Classification Based on Stage of Chronic HepatitisIndicates level of progression of disease.
Based on the degree or extent of fibrosis (Box 11.15).
Autoimmune Hepatitis (AIH)
Q. Write short note on clinical features and treatment of autoimmune
hepatitis.
Autoimmune hepatitis is a chronic and progressive (unresolving) hepatitis
of unknown cause. No features are absolutely diagnostic and is associated
with circulating autoantibodies and hypergammaglobulinemia.
Box 11.15: Staging of chronic hepatitis based on degree of fibrosis.
Degree of fibrosis Stage
No fibrosis 0
Mild portal fibrosis in some areas 1
Moderate portal fibrosis in most areas 2
Bridging fibrosis—few (portal to portal) 3
Bridging fibrosis—many (portal to portal and portal to central) 4
Incomplete cirrhosis 5

Cirrhosis 6
Clinical Features
May be asymptomatic or present with fatigue  (most common),
anorexia, jaundice, myalgia and diarrhea.
Acute hepatitis: In about 30% of cases, it may present as acute hepatitis
similar to viral hepatitis, which do not resolve with time.
Fulminant hepatic failure (FHF) or asymptomatic elevation of serum
ALT .
Cirrhosis: In about 25% patients.
Jaundice  may be mild to moderate and is found in 69% of patients.
Box 11.16: Classification of autoimmune hepatitis based on immunological
markers.
Based on the differences in immunological markers AIH is divided into:
Type 1 AIH  is characterized by anti-smooth muscle antibodies  (SMAs) and antinuclear
antibodies (ANA), or both. Most commonly seen in females and associated with extra- hepatic
immunologic diseases like autoimmune thyroiditis, Graves’ disease, ulcerative colitis, rheumatoid
arthritis, Coombs-positive hemolytic anemia, etc.
Type 2 AIH  is characterized by antibodies to liver/kidney microsome type 1 (anti-LKM1).
Most affected persons are children.
Type 3 AIH: Presence of antibodies to soluble liver antigen/liver pancreas (anti-SLP/LP).
Investigations
Biochemical findings
Serum aminotransferases: High and more than 10 times during relapses.
Serum bilirubin: Mildly raised usually less than 6 mg/dL.
Serum alkaline phosphatase: Mildly raised.
Serum γ-globulins: High. Hypergammaglobulinemia is polyclonal; the
IgG fraction predominates.
Serum albumin: Low.
Serum α l-antitrypsin, serum ceruloplasmin, iron and ferritin levels:
Normal.
Autoantibodies
Classification of autoimmune hepatitis based on immunological markers and

autoantibodies is presented in Box 11.16.
Other tests
HBsAg and other viral markers: Negative.
Prothrombin time: Prolonged.
Liver biopsy
Treatment
Initially, prednisolone 30 mg given orally daily for 2 weeks,  followed by gradually tapering the
dose as the liver function improves and then a maintenance dose of 10–15 mg daily. Maintenance
dose to be given for at least 2 years after LFT has become normal.
Azathioprine in the dose of 1–2 mg/kg daily to be added as a steroid-sparing agent and in some
patients as sole long-term maintenance therapy or if maintenance dose of prednisolone is more
than 10 mg/day.Other immunosuppressive agents:  Mycophenolate, cyclosporine and tacrolimus are used in
resistant cases when there is no response to above treatment.
Duration of treatment:  Lifelong in most cases.
Liver transplantation: It is performed if treatment fails.
Chronic Hepatitis B
Q. Write short note on complications of HBV infection.
Chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection occurs following an acute HBV
infection (may be subclinical) and occurs in about 1–10% of patients.
HBV infection is considered as chronic when the HBsAg (hepatitis B
surface antigen) persists for more than 6 months.
May progress to cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma.
Risk of chronic hepatitis: Depends on:
–   Age at which the contact of acute infection: Chronic hepatitis occurs
more commonly with neonatal (90%) or childhood  (20–50% below
the age of 5 years) infection rather than in adult life (<10%).
–   Immune status: In immunocompetent adults, the incidence of acute
hepatitis is high while chronic infection is rare (1–2% of cases).
Other conditions where incidence of chronic hepatitis B infection is high are
given in Table 11.15.
Table 11.15: Conditions associated with chronic hepatitis B state.
Down syndrome Polyarteritis nodosa

Lepromatous leprosy Patients on chronic hemodialysis
Leukemias Needle using drug addicts
Hodgkin lymphoma HIV infection
Phases of Chronic HBV Infection
Chronic HBV infection is a dynamic process and occurs in three major
phases: (1) immune tolerant, (2) immune-active and (3) inactive carrier
phases.
1. Immune-tolerant phase:  Characteristic features are:
Asymptomatic  and frequent in children . Infection during birth or in early childhood develop
prolonged immune-tolerant phase, and disease progresses even after the disappearance of
HBeAg in some of these patients.
Active viral replication  in liver but little or no evidence of disease activity.
HBsAg and HBeAg positive and very high levels of serum HBV DNA.
Normal liver function tests.
Liver biopsy shows no inflammation or fibrosis.
May lasts for decades. Therefore, lifelong monitoring is necessary.
2. Immune-active phase (chronic hepatitis): Most patients with immune-tolerant phase progress to
the immune-active phase.
Vigorous immune response.
Criteria for chronic HBV active hepatitis are:
Liver biopsy shows chronic hepatitis  with moderate or severe necroinflammation and fibrosis.
Evidence of active HBV replication: High levels of HBV DNA and HBeAg.
Persistent or intermittent elevation of serum aminotransferases (ALT/AST).
3. Carrier phase with low replication : Incidence varies. Most patients with chronic HBV infection
will eventually enter inactive carrier phase.
Criteria for carrier phase:
–   Serological findings:
♦   HBsAg positive in the serum >6 months.
♦   HBeAg negative and HBe antibody positive (seroconversion from HBeAg to HBeAb).
♦   Undetectable or low levels (below 400 iu/L) of HBV DNA in the serum.
♦   Normal aminotransferase (ALT) levels.
–   Liver biopsy does not show any significant hepatitis.Low risk for hepatocellular carcinoma.
Liver abnormalities generally do not progress to more severe disease.
Disease may be re-activated by severe immunosuppression (e.g. during chemotherapy for
cancer or with bone marrow transplantation).
Individuals infected during adults or adolescents usually become inactive carriers after they
clear HBeAg.
4. Chronic HBeAg negative state:
Patients harbor HBV variants with mutations that prevent production or have low HBeAg.

HBV DNA levels high, liver enzymes are raised and presence of active histological activity.
Late phase in the natural history of chronic HBV and often seen in older patients with
advanced disease.
HBV genotype C infection (prevalent in India) have an increased of
developing cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma.
Clinical Features
Asymptomatic or may develop severe end-stage liver disease.
Symptoms: Fatigue, malaise and anorexia, persistent or intermittent
jaundice.
During end-stage liver disease: Symptoms due to complications of
cirrhosis occur.
Extrahepatic manifestations: Arthralgias, arthritis, vasculitis,
glomerulonephritis and polyarthritis nodosa.
Mild hepatomegaly
Long-standing cases may develop hepatocellular carcinoma.
Investigations
Biochemical investigations:
Serum aminotransferase: Mildly elevated  but may be as high as 1000
units. ALT (SGPT) tends to be more raised than compared to AST
(SGOT). Once cirrhosis develops AST levels exceeds ALT.
Serum bilirubin: May be normal or raised up to 10 mg/dL.
Serum proteins: Hypoalbuminemia in severe cases and
hyperglobulinemia.
Prothrombin time: Prolonged
Serological markers (Box 11.17)
Box 11.17: Serological markers of chronic hepatitis B.
Positive HBsAg
Positive IgG anti-HBc, negative IgM anti-HBc
Positive HBe antigen or rarely, positive anti-HBe
Positive HBV-DNA
Treatment for Chronic Hepatitis B (Flowchart 11.1)

Criteria: Three criteria are used namely (1) serum levels of HBV DNA, (2) serum levels of ALT
and (3) histological grade and stage.
Serum HBV-DNA above 2000 iu/mL (about >10,000 copies/mL).
Serum ALT level greater than two times normal.
Moderate to severe active necroinflammation and/or fibrosis in the liver biopsy
Box 11.18:  Aim of treatment of chronic hepatitis B.
Seroconversion of HBeAg when present to anti-HBe. When HBeAg disappears, remission is
usually attained for several years.
Reduction of HBV DNA to 400 iu/L or less.
Achieve normal levels of serum ALT.
Histological improvement in inflammation and fibrosis in the liver biopsy.
Patients usually remain HBsAg positive, but loss of serum HBsAg indicates a good response.
In presence of cirrhosis (compensated or decompensated) oral antiviral agents are recommended,
but liver transplantation may be necessary. Immunotolerant patients, usually young with normal ALT
and high HBV DNA levels, without evidence of liver disease do not need therapy, but be regularly
followed-up.
Aim of treatment (Box 11.18)
Box 11.19:  Drugs used for chronic hepatitis B.
Peginterferon in combination with other agents:
–   Lamivudine plus peginterferon
–   Entecavir plus peginterferon
–   Tenofovir plus peginterferon
–   Adefovir plus peginterferon
–   Telbivudine plus peginterferonLamivudine plus adefovir dipivoxil
Tenofovir disoproxil plus entecavir
Tenofovir disoproxil plus emtricitabine
Antiviral agents: Most commonly used drugs (Box 11.19) are:
Pegylated α-2a interferon
–   Response (defined as loss of HBeAg and HBV-DNA) occurs in 25–40% of cases.
–   Dose: 180 μg once a week subcutaneously and produces response after 48 weeks of treatment.
–   Side effects:  Acute flu-like symptoms, malaise, headache, depression, reversible hair loss, bone
marrow depression, thrombocytopenia and infection.
–   Patients with HIV respond poorly and it should not be given to patient with cirrhosis.Entecavir:  A cyclopentyl guanosine analog that is a very effective and quickly reduces HBV DNA
by 48 weeks.
Tenofovir:  It is a cytosine nucleoside analog which is also very effective and has a similar potency
to entecavir. It is used for HIV patients with HBV infection.
Lamivudine:  It is well tolerated. However, rate of development of viral resistance (80%) is high
and itself may cause hepatitis. Hence, lamivudine monotherapy is no longer recommended.

Dosage is 100 mg/day given orally once a day until HBeAg becomes negative.
Adefovir dipivoxil: A nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitor. It may be used in patients who
develop resistance to lamivudine.
Telbivudine:  An L-nucleoside that may cause elevation of CPK.
Prognosis
Development of chronic hepatitis depends on the age at which infection is
acquired.
Development of cirrhosis is associated with a poor prognosis.
Hepatocellular carcinoma is one of the most common carcinomas in HBV-
endemic areas.
Flowchart 11.1: Treatment algorithm for HBeAg positive chronic hepatitis B.
(HBeAg: hepatitis B ’e’ antigen; HBV DNA: hepatitis B DNA; ALT: alanine transaminase; ULN:
upper limit normal
Chronic Hepatitis C
Q. Write short note on complications of HCV.
Chronic hepatitis occurs in the majority  (70–85%) of individuals
infected by HCV and is the hallmark of HCV infection.
Cirrhosis develops over 5–20 years in 20–30% of patients, while
hepatocellular carcinoma also develops in several patients especially with
cirrhosis.

Factors that accelerate progression  to advanced liver disease includes:
Alcohol consumption, coinfection with HIV or HBV, and older age at
the time of acquiring the infection.
Clinical Features
Usually asymptomatic. Detected following a routine biochemical test
when mild elevations in the aminotransferases (usually ALT) are detected.
Clinical features when present are similar to chronic hepatitis B. Most
common being fatigue and jaundice being rare.
Extrahepatic features (Table 11.16).
Investigations
HCV antibody in the serum detected in more than 95% cases.
HCV RNA detectable in all patient.
Liver biopsy is performed if active treatment is being considered. The
histological changes are highly variable. Most commonly shows features
of chronic hepatitis, often with lymphoid follicles in the portal tracts,
and fatty change.Other laboratory features are similar to those seen in chronic hepatitis B.
Extrahepatic Manifestations of Hepatitis B and Hepatitis C
Virus Infection (Table 11.16)
Table 11.16: Extrahepatic manifestations of B and hepatitis C virus
infection.
Hepatitis B virus infection
Polyarteritis nodosa Glomerulonephritis
Cryoglobulinemia Serum sickness-like symptoms
Papular acrodermatitis (in children) Aplastic anemia
Hepatitis C virus infection
Proven Associations
Autoimmune thyroiditis
B-cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma
Diabetes mellitus
Lichen planus
Mixed cryoglobulinemia
Monoclonal gammopathies
Porphyria cutanea tardaPossible Associations
Chronic polyarthritis
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Non-cryoglobulinemic nephropathies
Sicca syndrome
Carcinoma of thyroid
Renal cell carcinoma
Vitiligo

Glomerulonephritis Cutaneous necrotizing vasculitis
Treatment of Chronic Hepatitis C (Tables 11.17 and 11.18)
Indications for treatment :
–   Chronic hepatitis on liver histology with HCV-RNA in the serum  and raised serum
aminotransferases for more than 6 months.
–   Chronic hepatitis with persistently normal aminotransferases.
–   Cirrhosis, fibrosis  or moderate inflammation on liver biopsy (biopsy not mandatory).
Aim of treatment:  To eliminate the HCV RNA from the serum in order to prevent:
–   Progression of active liver disease.
–   Development of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Liver transplant: For patients with decompensated cirrhosis
Table 11.17: Drugs for the treatment of chronic hepatitis C.
Interferons and Pegylated Interferons
IFN alfa-2b and IFN alfa-2a
Interferons and Ribavirin
Direct-Acting Antiviral Agents (DAAs) NS5B targeting polymerase inhibitors
Nucleotide: Sofosbuvir
Non-nucleotide: Dasabuvir
NS3/4 targeting protease inhibitors
Boceprevir, Telaprevir, Simeprevir,
Pratiprevir, GrazoprevirNS5A targeting agents
Ledipasvir, Declatasvir, Ombitasvir, Elbasvir,
Velpatasvir
Table 11.18: Antivirals for HCV infection in treatment-naive patients.
Genotype Regimen Duration of regimen
1 Simeprevir/P/R 24–48 weeks
 Sofosbuvir/P/R 12 weeks
 Sofosbuvir/simeprevir 12 weeks
 Ombitasvir/paritaprevir/dasabuvir/R/r 12–24 weeks
 Sofosbuvir/ledipasvir 12–24 weeks
2 Sofosbuvir/R 12 weeks
3 Sofosbuvir/R 24 weeks
4 Sofosbuvir/P/R 12 weeks
(HCV: hepatitis C virus; IFN: interferon; P: pegylated interferon-alfa 2a or 2b; R: ribavirin; r: ritonavir)
ACUTE LIVER FAILURE
Q. Define fulminant hepatic failure. Discuss the causes, pathology,

clinical features, investigations, complications and management of
fulminate hepatic failure.
Q. Enumerate the precipitating causes of hepatic coma in a case of
chronic liver disease. Discuss the diagnosis and treatment of hepatic
coma.
Definition
Acute liver failure is defined as the rapid progressive deterioration in liver
function, specifically coagulopathy and mental status changes
(encephalopathy) in a patient without known prior liver disease.
Classification of Acute Liver Failure
Acute liver failure is subclassified into hyperacute, acute and subacute,
depending on the interval between onset of jaundice and encephalopathy.
1. Hyperacute hepatic failure: If encephalopathy develops within 7 days, it
is called hyperacute hepatic failure  and has better prognosis than acute
hepatic failure.
2. Fulminant hepatic failure:In this, encephalopathy develops within 4
weeks (8–28 days) from onset of symptoms in a patient with a previously
normal liver.3. Subacute hepatic failure:If hepatic failure develops at a slower pace (4–
12 weeks), it is called subacute or subfulminant hepatic failure.
Fulminant Hepatic Failure (FHF)
It is defined as severe hepatic failure (insufficiency) in which encephalopathy
develops within 4 weeks (8–28 days) from onset of symptoms in a patient
with a previously normal liver.
Etiology: FHF is a rare but often life-threatening condition the various causes
are listed in Table 11.19.
Table 11.19: Important causes of fulminant hepatic failure.
A. Viruses: HAV and HAB. Occasionally, HCV and others
B. Non-infectious causes
1.  Drugs: Important examples include:Analgesics (e.g. paracetamol)
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors

Antituberculosis (e.g. isoniazid)
Antiepileptic (e.g. valproate)
Halogenated anesthetics
‘Social’ drugs (e.g. ‘Ecstasy’)
2.  Toxins: Amanita phalloides (mushroom) poisoning
3.  Miscellaneous
Wilson’s disease
HELLP syndrome
Eclampsia, preeclampsia
Acute fatty liver of pregnancy
Reye’s syndrome
Autoimmune hepatitis
Budd-Chiari syndrome
Shock, ischemic hepatitis
4.  Unknown
Clinical Features
1. General features:
Jaundice, weakness, nausea and vomiting.
Pain in the right hypochondrium.
Small liver and liver dullness absent on percussion.
Ascites and edema develop later.
2. Features of hepatic encephalopathy:
Mental state: It varies from mild drowsiness, confusion and
disorientation (grades I and II) to unresponsive coma (grade IV) with
convulsions (refer Table 11.33).
Fetor hepaticus and flapping tremor (asterixis) is common.
Ascites and splenomegaly are rare.
Fever, vomiting, hypotension and hypoglycemia may be observed.
Spasticity and extension of the arms and legs and plantar responses
remain flexor until late.
3. Features of cerebral edema: Cerebral edema develops in ~80% of
patients.
Bradycardia, intracranial hypertension and irregular respiration
(Cushing’s triad).
Pupils: Unequal or abnormally reacting or fixed pupils.

Hyperventilation and hyperreflexia.
Consequences: Intracranial hypertension and brain herniation are the
most common causes of death.
Investigations
Investigations to determine the cause of acute liver failure.
Serum findings:
–   Hyperbilirubinemia: Serum bilirubin is raised.
–   Serum aminotransferases: Raised, but are not useful indicators of the
course of the disease as they tend to fall with progressive liver damage.
–   Coagulation factors: Decreased including prothrombin and factor V.
Prothrombin time is prolonged.
–   Serum proteins: Hypoalbuminemia
–   Plasma and urine amino acids are increased.
–   Blood ammonia levels: Raised.Urine: Shows protein, bilirubin and urobilinogen.
Peripheral blood: Leukocytosis and thrombocytopenia.
EEG: It may be help in grading the encephalopathy.
Ultrasound : To detect liver size and for any evidence of underlying liver
pathology.
CSF : Intracranial pressure is raised, but CSF is normal.
Complications of fulminant hepatic failure  are listed in Table 11.20.
Table 11.20: Complications of fulminant hepatic failure.
Encephalopathy Bacterial and fungal infections
Cerebral edema Gastrointestinal bleeding, hypotension
Respiratory failure Hypoglycemia, hypokalemia
Renal failure Hypothermia
Pancreatitis Acid-base imbalance
Hypocalcemia, hypomagnesemia  
Management:  There is no specific treatment. Pathogenesis and management of major complications
of acute liver failure are summarized in Table 11.21.
General measures:

–   Monitor vital signs, urine output, renal functions, central venous pressure, and
electrolytes.
–   Maintain fluid and electrolyte balance. Hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, hypophosphatemia,
hypocalcemia and hypoglycemia should be corrected.
–   Supply of adequate calories: Glucose (300 g/day) orally or by nasogastric tube or by infusion
into a central vein.
Table 11.21: Pathogenesis and management of major complications of acute
liver failure.
Complication Pathogenesis Management
Hypoglycemia Diminished hepatic glucose
synthesisBlood glucose monitoring
  Intravenous glucose supplementation (10 or 20%
dextrose)
Encephalopathy Cerebral edema (refer pages 822-3)
Infections Reduced immune function Aseptic medical, nursing care
 Invasive procedures Daily surveillance cultures of blood, urine, and
sputum
  High index of suspicion for bacterial and fungal
infection
  Presumptive antibiotics for gram-negative
organisms, anerobes, and skin flora
  Consider antifungal therapy if patient worsens
despite antibacterial coverage
Gastrointestinal
hemorrhageStress ulceration Nasogastric tube placement. Intravenous H2
receptor antagonist or proton pump inhibitor
Coagulopathy Reduced clotting factor
synthesisParenteral vitamin K
 Thrombocytopenia Platelet infusions for bleeding and before
procedures
 Fibrinolysis Plasma infusions for bleeding and before
procedures
  Cryoprecipitate for bleeding with
hypofibrinogenemia
  Recombinant factor VIIIa
Hypotension Hypovolemia Hemodynamic monitoring of central venous
pressures
 Decreased vascular
resistanceVolume repletion with blood or colloid
  α-Adrenergic agents
Respiratory failure Acute respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS)Hemodynamic monitoring of central venous
pressures
  Mechanical ventilation

Pancreatitis Hypoxia Supportive care, including supplemental oxygen
if needed
  Abdominal CT to exclude necrotizing
pancreatitis
Renal failure Hypovolemia Hemodynamic monitoring of central venous
pressures
 Hepatorenal syndrome Volume repletion with blood or colloid
 Acute tubular necrosis Avoidance of nephrotoxic agents (e.g.
aminoglycosides, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs, contrast dye)
  Oral N-acetylcysteine prior to intravenous
contrast agent
  Hemofiltration, dialysis
Prognosis: The mortality is ~80% without liver transplantation, and ~35%
with transplantation.
Reye’s Syndrome
Q. Describe Reye’s syndrome.
Reye/Reye’s syndrome is a rapidly progressive encephalopathy with
hepatic dysfunction, which begins several days after apparent recovery
from a viral illness, especially varicella or influenza A or B. History of
aspirin intake may be present.Liver shows severe fatty change.
Raised ammonia levels and liver enzymes.
Usually no jaundice.
FATTY LIVER
Q. Discuss fatty liver and its causes.
Fatty liver (steatosis) is abnormal accumulations of triglycerides within
cytosol of the parenchymal cells.
Causes of fatty liver (Table 11.22)
Table 11.22: Various causes of fatty liver.
Alcohol Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)
Drugs Nutritional
Glucocorticoids, amiodarone, tetracycline, Protein-calorie malnutrition

aspirin, methotrexate, didanosine, zidovudine,
tamoxifene, amiodaroneTotal parenteral nutrition
Rapid weight loss/obesity
Metabolic Miscellaneous
Diabetes
Lipodystrophy
Pregnancy (acute fatty liver)Inflammatory bowel disease
HIV infection
Chronic hepatitis C
Toxic mushrooms (Amanita phalloides)
Reye’s syndrome
Obstructive sleep apnea
Indian childhood cirrhosis
Non-alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease (NAFLD), Non-alcoholic
Steatosis and Non-alcoholic Steatohepatitis (NASH)
Q. Write short note on non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD); non-
alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH).
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is a disease of affluent societies.
Its prevalence increases in proportion to the rise in obesity. Its progression
accounts for the majority of cryptogenic cirrhosis.
It is increasingly recognized condition and is the most common cause of
chronic liver disease after hepatitis B, hepatitis C and alcohol.
Classification
Simple fatty liver disease  with favorable prognosis.
Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) associated with fibrosis and
progression to cirrhosis and sometimes to hepatocellular carcinoma.
Risk Factors for NAFLD
Increased prevalence in those with the metabolic syndrome.
Obesity, hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia and
insulin resistance.
Rare causes: Tamoxifen, amiodarone and exposure to certain
petrochemicals.
Pathogenesis: NASH is induced by two consecutive steps: Excess fat
accumulation and subsequent necroinflammation in the liver (Fig. 11.8).
Clinical Features

Most are asymptomatic  at the time of diagnosis and many patients are
obese.
Some have fatigue, malaise and a sensation of fullness in the upper
abdomen.
Hepatomegaly is the only sign in most patients.
Diagnosis of NAFLD
Patient with mild to moderately elevated serum transaminases, no history of
alcohol abuse and a negative chronic liver disease screen.
Investigations
Mild elevation of serum aminotransferases are frequently the sole
abnormality with AST: ALT <1. This ratio increases as fibrosis advances.
May be only isolated elevation of the GGT. Elevated ALP in about 30% of
patients.Ferritin levels are increased in 20–50% of patients.
Autoantibodies in about 25% patients with more advanced fibrosis.
Ultrasound and CT features: Similar to those in alcoholic fatty liver.
Liver biopsy:
–   Best diagnostic tool for confirmation and staging the disease .
–   Microscopic changes are similar to those of alcohol-induced hepatic
injury and range from simple fatty change to fat and inflammation
(steatohepatitis) and fibrosis. NASH is characterized by fat, Mallory
bodies, neutrophil infiltration and pericellular fibrosis.


Fig. 11.8:  Pathogenesis of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD).
(NASH: non-alcoholic steatohepatitis; LDL: low-density lipoprotein; HDL: high density lipoprotein
Management/Treatment
Weight loss, control of diabetes and hyperlipidemia in the early stages.
Some drugs like metformin, thiazolidinediones (e.g. pioglitazone), liragltide, ursodeoxycholic acid
(UDCA), vitamin E, Orlistat, Obeticholic acid, Aramchol, Betaine, Losartan pentoxipylline and
atorvastatin have shown some promise.
Liver transplantation for end-stage cirrhosis. Unfortunately, it may recur in the graft.
Regular follow-up, particularly for steatohepatitis.
Table 11.23: Amount of alcohol consumption and its associated risk of
alcoholic liver disease in male.
Amount of ingestion per day Degree of risk
160 g ethanol (20 single drinks) High
80 g ethanol (10 single drinks) Medium
40 g ethanol (five single drinks) Low
ALCOHOLIC LIVER DISEASE
Q. Write short essay/note on alcoholic liver disease.
Chronic and excessive consumption of alcohol can produce a wide spectrum
of liver disease which can be divided mainly into four major lesions:
1. Fatty liver
2. Alcoholic hepatitis
3. Alcoholic cirrhosis (refer later)
4. Hepatocellular carcinoma
Threshold for alcohol and risk of alcoholic liver disease: Generally, the
effects of alcohol are worse in women compared to men and amount of
alcohol with degree of risk in male are presented in Table 11.23.
For women, the above figures should be reduced by 50%. Alcohol by
volume (ABV) of various alcoholic beverages is shown in Box 11.20.
Box 11.20:  Alcohol percentage content.
Vodka | ABV: 40–95%
Gin | ABV: 36–50%

Rum | ABV: 36–50%
Whiskey | ABV: 36–50%
Tequila | ABV: 50–51%
Liqueurs | ABV: 15%
Fortified Wine | ABV: 16–24%
Unfortified Wine | ABV: 14–16%
Beer | ABV: 4–8%
Malt Beverage | ABV: 5–15%
Note: ABV: alcohol by volume. ABV-millilitres (mL) of pure ethanol present
in 100 mL of solution at 20°C.
Alcoholic Fatty Liver (Alcoholic Steatosis)
Q. Write short note on alcoholic fatty liver or alcoholic steatosis.
Clinical Features
Asymptomatic
Occasionally, may present with discomfort in right upper quadrant, nausea
and jaundice.
Most common feature is hepatomegaly with or without tenderness.
Progression to cirrhosis not common with its associated complications.
Investigations
Biochemical findings:
–   Moderately raised ALT and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) with
AST: ALT > 1.
–   γ-GT level is a sensitive test to determine whether the individual is
taking alcohol.
Ultrasound: Diffuse increase in echogenicity.
CT scan: Fatty infiltration produces a low-density liver.
Liver biopsy: It shows accumulation of fat in perivenular hepatocytes
and later in entire hepatic lobule.
Treatment:  Complete cessation of alcohol consumption and nutritional support results in
normalization of biochemical findings and histological changes.
Alcoholic Hepatitis

Clinical Features
It may be asymptomatic or present with fever, rapid onset of jaundice ,
abdominal discomfort and proximal muscle wasting.
Portal hypertension, spider nevi, ascites and bleeding due to esophageal
varices can occur without cirrhosis
Hepatomegaly (tender), splenomegaly.
Investigations
Biochemical findings
–   Serum aminotransferase (AST and ALT) raised to 2–7 times of
normal (usually <400 IU).
–   AST: ALT ratio is >1 (generally >2).
–   Raised bilirubin
–   Mildly elevated serum alkaline phosphatase
–   Decreased albuminHematological findings: Prolonged prothrombin time and leukocytosis.
Liver biopsy: Ballooning degeneration of hepatocytes with leukocyte
infiltration. Mallory bodies often seen.
Potentially reversible but many progress to cirrhosis.
Prognosis
Variable and despite abstinence, the liver disease progresses in many
patients. Conversely, a few patients continue to drink heavily without
developing cirrhosis.
Mortality high in patient’s with severe alcoholic hepatitis.
Poor prognostic factors (Box 11.21).
Box 11.21:  Poor prognostic factors of alcoholic hepatitis.
Prothrombin time >5 seconds of control
Anemia
Albumin <2.5 g/dL
Serum bilirubin >8 mg/dL
Progressive encephalopathy
Renal failure
Presence of ascites
Maddrey discriminant function >32.

Maddrey discriminant function (DF) = (4.6 x [prothrombin time (sec) – control prothrombin time
(sec)]) + (serum bilirubin)
Treatment
Advised to stop alcohol consumption for life, because this is a precirrhotic condition.
Severe hepatitis needs bed rest.
Nutrition: Feeding—via a fine-bore nasogastric tube or sometimes intravenously (>3000 kcal/day;
multivitamins mainly vitamins B and C).
Treatment for encephalopathy and ascites.
Corticosteroids (prednisolone) may be tried in severe cases (discriminant function >32) in the
absence of any infection.
Antibiotics (pentoxifylline) in severe cases (discriminant function >32) and antifungal
prophylaxis.
CIRRHOSIS
Q. Mention the causes of cirrhosis. Discuss the pathology, pathogenesis,
classification, clinical features, investigations, complications and
treatment/management of cirrhosis.
Q. Describe Laennec’s cirrhosis and alcoholic cirrhosis.
Definition
Cirrhosis is an end stage of any chronic liver disease. It is a diffuse process
(entire liver is involved) characterized by fibrosis and conversion of normal
architecture to structurally abnormal regenerating nodules of liver cells.
The three main morphologic characteristics of cirrhosis are: (1) fibrosis, (2)
regenerating nodules and (3) loss of architecture of the entire liver .
Classification
Morphological classification (Box 11.22 and Fig. 11.9).
Box 11.22:  Morphological classification of cirrhosis.
Micronodular cirrhosis (Laennec’s cirrhosis)
–   Regular and small regenerating nodules of less than 3 mm in diameter
–   Uniform thin regular fibrous connective tissue septa
–   Involvement of every lobule of whole liver
–   Most common cause is alcoholic cirrhosisMacronodular cirrhosis

–   Regenerating, more irregular, coarse nodules of variable size and usually larger than 3 mm in
diameter
–   Fibrous connective tissue septa are broad and vary in thickness
–   Liver surface is grossly distorted
–   Most common cause is chronic viral hepatitis
–   Increased risk of developing carcinoma of liverMixed cirrhosis: Shows features of both micronodular and macronodular cirrhosis
Fig. 11.9:  Morphological classification of cirrhosis.
Etiological Classification
Main causes of cirrhosis are listed in Box 11.23.
Pathology and Pathogenesis of Cirrhosis
Chronic injury to the liver results in inflammation and widespread
necrosis of liver cells and, eventually, fibrosis. Fibrosis is due to
activation of the stellate cells (in the space of Disse) by many cytokines
and their receptors, reactive oxygen intermediates and other paracrine and
autocrine signals. TGF-β is the most potent fibrogenic mediator.
Cirrhotic changes affect the whole liver , but not necessarily every lobule.
Extensive fibrosis that distorts and results in loss of liver architecture.
Regenerating nodules are produced due to hyperplasia of the remaining
surviving liver cells.
Destruction and distortion of hepatic vasculature by fibrosis lead to
obstruction of blood flow. Vascular reorganization leads to portal
hypertension and its sequelae (gastroesophageal varices and
splenomegaly).Ascites and hepatic encephalopathy develop due to hepatocellular
insufficiency and portal hypertension.
Hepatocellular damage produces jaundice, edema, coagulopathy and a
various metabolic abnormalities.
Box 11.23:  Main causes of cirrhosis.

Alcohol (one of the commonest causes)
Chronic viral hepatitis (most common cause)
–   Hepatitis B
–   Hepatitis C
–   Delta hepatitis (hepatitis D) + hepatitis B
Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) or non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) (earlier was
considered as cryptogenic cirrhosis)
Biliary cirrhosis
–   Primary biliary cholangitis
–   Secondary biliary cirrhosis
–   Primary sclerosing cholangitis
–   Autoimmune cholangiopathy, IgG4 cholangiopathyAutoimmune hepatitis
Budd-Chiari syndrome
Intrahepatic or extrahepatic biliary obstruction: Recurrent biliary obstruction (e.g. gallstones)
Inherited metabolic liver disease
–   Hemochromatosis
–   Wilson’s disease
–   α1 antitrypsin deficiency
–   Cystic fibrosis
–   Glycogen storage diseaseDrug-induced cirrhosis: For example, methotrexate, methyldopa, isoniazid, phenylbutazone,
sulfonamides
Others: Indian childhood cirrhosis, cardiac cirrhosis, chronic venous outflow obstruction, celiac
disease. Hereditary hemotelangiectasia, infection [e.g. brucellosis, syphilis, echinococcosis,
porphyria, idiopathic adulthood ductopenia (Caroli disease)]
Alcoholic Cirrhosis
Safe limits of alcohol are 200 g (20–40 g per day) in males and 140 g (16–
30 g per day) in females of alcohol per week. Intake of 180 g of
alcohol/day for 25 years increases the risk of cirrhosis by 25 times.
Development of cirrhosis is six fold when alcohol consumption is double
the safety limit.
Hepatitis C infection is an important contributory factor for progression to
cirrhosis.
Pathogenesis of alcoholic cirrhosis (Fig. 11.10).

Fig. 11.10:  Pathogenesis of alcoholic liver disease.
Clinical Features
Q. Write the clinical features and treatment of alcoholic cirrhosis.
Symptoms
Highly variable  and in some patients it may be completely asymptomatic
and are incidentally diagnosed at ultrasound or at surgery.
Nonspecific symptoms: Weakness, fatigue, muscle cramps, weight loss,
anorexia, nausea, vomiting, upper abdominal discomfort.
Symptoms of hepatic insufficiency (refer page 802).
Symptoms of portal hypertension and its sequelae  (refer pages 814-5).
Symptoms due to endocrine changes:

–   Loss of libido, hair loss
–   Females: Irregular menses, amenorrhea and atrophy of breast
–   Males: Gynecomastia, testicular atrophy, and impotence.
Hemorrhagic tendencies: Due to decreased production of coagulation
factors by the liver and thrombocytopenia resulting from hypersplenism.
These include easy bruising, purpura, epistaxis, menorrhagia and
gastrointestinal bleeding.
Box 11.24:  Summary of signs of cirrhosis of liver.
Ascites
Circulatory changes
–   Spider naevi
–   Palmar erythema
Endocrine changes
–   Loss of libido, diminished body hair and hair loss
–   Male: Gynecomastia, testicular atrophy, impotence
–   Female: Irregular menses, amenorrhea and atrophy of breastHemorrhagic tendency: Bruises, purpura, epistaxis
Features due to portal hypertension: Splenomegaly, development of portosystemic collateral
vessels, variceal bleeding
Flapping tremors and fetor hepaticus
Other features
–   Pigmentation
–   Clubbing and cyanosis
–   White nails (Terry nails)
Parotid enlargement and Dupuytren’s contracture (signs of alcoholism)
Signs
Summary of signs of cirrhosis of liver (Box 11.24).
Jaundice
Jaundice is not a common feature of cirrhosis, its more common with
acute diseases.
Mechanisms of jaundice in cirrhosis:
–   Failure to excrete bilirubin (mainly)
–   Intrahepatic cholestasis (superadded hepatitis/tumor)
–   Hemolysis due to hypersplenism (not a major contributor).
Hepatomegaly

Early stages: Liver is enlarged , firm to hard, irregular and nontender.
Hepatomegaly is not common in cirrhosis but common when the cirrhosis
is due to alcoholic liver disease, NASH and hemochromatosis.
Hepatomegaly may indicate transformation into HCC.
Late stages: Liver decreases in size and non-palpable due to progressive
destruction of liver cells and accompanying fibrosis.
Ascites
Ascites due to liver failure and portal hypertension (refer ascites, pages 825-
7), and signifies advanced disease.
Circulatory changes
1. Spider naevi (Fig. 11.11)
(Spider telangiectasia; vascular spiders; spider angiomas; arterial
spiders).

Fig. 11.11: Cirrhosis of liver with ascites and spider nevi. Patient in addition has tatoo and
keloid—which may suggest viral hepatitis as the cause of cirrhosis.
–   Appearance: Consists of a central arteriole from which numerous
small vessels radiate peripherally-resembling spider’s legs. Whole
spider disappears when central arteriole is compressed with a
pinhead. When compression is released filling occurs from center
to periphery.
–   Cause: Due to arteriolar changes induced by hyperestrogenism.
–   Sites affected: Usually found only in the necklace area, i.e. above

the nipples, territory drained by the superior vena cava such as:
head and neck, upper limbs, front and back of upper chest.
–   Size: Vary from pinhead to 0.5 mm in diameter.
–   Significance: They are a strong indicator of liver disease but can be
found in other conditions (Table 11.24).
Florid spider telangiectasia, gynecomastia and parotid enlargement are
most common in alcoholic hepatitis.
Florid spiders and new onset clubbing in a patient with cirrhosis
indicates hepato-pulmonary syndrome.
Table 11.24: Conditions associated with spider nevi.
Liver disorders Others
Viral hepatitis
Alcoholic hepatitis
–    Hepatocellular carcinoma
–    Treatment with Sorafenib2% of healthy individuals
Third trimester of pregnancy
Rheumatoid arthritis
Thyrotoxicosis
Differential diagnosis for spider naevi includes venous star, Campbell de
Morgan spots, petechiae and hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasias.
2. Palmar erythema (liver palm) (Fig. 11.12A)
Can be seen early but is of limited diagnostic value, as it occurs in many
conditions associated with a hyperdynamic circulation (e.g. normal
pregnancy).
Cause: Develops due to increased peripheral blood flow. In cirrhosis,
circulatory changes results in increased peripheral blood flow and
decreased visceral blood flow (especially to the kidneys).Sites involved: Prominent in the thenar and hypothenar eminences of
palm. May be seen on the sole.
Endocrine changes
Diminished body hair and loss of hair (Fig. 11.12B)
–   Seen mainly in males with loss of male hair distribution.
–   Alopecia affects usually the face, axilla and chest and is due to
hyperestrogenism
–   Causes of hyperestrogenism: Due to increased peripheral formation of

estrogen resulting from diminished hepatic clearance of the precursor,
androstenedione.
–   Effects of hyperestrogenism: Alopecia, gynecomastia and testicular
atrophy.
Hyperglycemia: 80% of cirrhotics have impaired glucose tolerance, 20%
develop diabetes.
Males
Q. Write short note on gynecomastia and enumerate its causes.
Gynecomastia (Fig. 11.12C)
–   Found in males (atrophy of breasts in females).
–   Cause: Due to increased estradiol/free testosterone ratio. Causes of
gynecomastia are listed in Table 11.25.
–   Appear as palpable nodule (4 cm, subareolar). Microscopy:
Proliferation of glandular tissue of breast. Pseudogynecomastia is
accumulation of subareolar fat tissue without palpable nodule.
Testicular atrophy: Due to hyperestrogenic state, it is characterized by a
small size compared with Prader’s orchidometer (Fig. 11.13C)—soft testes
with loss of testicular sensation (sickening sensation in epigastrium on
squeezing the testes). The dimensions of the average adult testicle is 4.5 ×
3.5 × 2.5 cm and the volume is 15–25 mL.
Table 11.25: Cause of gynecomastia.Cirrhosis of liver  
Drugs:
–   Spironolactone
–   Cimetidine
–   Digoxin
–   Ketoconazole
–   Estrogens
–   IsoniazidPhysiological (puberty/ageing)
Klinefelter’s syndrome
Hypogonadism
Tumor
–   Testes
–   Lung
Female
Irregular menses, amenorrhea and atrophy of breast.
Flapping tremors (Fig. 11.13A): Observed in hepatic pre-coma (refer

hepatic encephalopathy on pages 820-3).
Other features
Generalized skin hyperpigmentation: Due to increased melanin
deposition.
Dupuytren’s contracture (Fig. 11.12A)—sign of alcoholism
Figs. 11.12A to C: Features of cirrhosis. (A) Palmar erythema with Dupuytren’s contracture; (B)
Diminished facial hair with parotid enlargement; (C) Gynecomastia.
–   Cause: Fibrosis of palmar aponeurosis probably caused by local
microvessel ischemia. Platelet and fibroblast-derived growth factors
promote fibrosis.
–   Sites involved: Flexion contracture of the fingers (especially ring and
little fingers).
–   Other causes of Dupuytren’s contracture: Diabetes mellitus,
rheumatoid arthritis, and manual labor (workers exposed to repetitive
handling tasks or vibration).Clubbing and central cyanosis: Due to development of pulmonary
arteriovenous shunts that leading to hypoxemia.
Nail changes
–   White (Terry’s) chalky (Fig. 11.13B) and brittle nails.
–   Muehrcke’s nails: Characterized by transverse white lines that
disappear on applying pressure and these lines do not move with
growth of nail.
–   Clubbing is present in primary biliary cholangitis or hepatoma.
Parotid and lacrimal gland enlargement: Observed commonly in
alcoholic cirrhosis due to associated autonomic dysfunction.
Anemia: Due to various causes (Box 11.25).
Box 11.25: Causes of anemia in cirrhosis.

Acute and chronic blood loss from varices
Nutritional deficiency of vitamin B 12 and folate
Hypersplenism
Bone marrow suppression by alcohol
Hemolysis.
Zeives syndrome: Alcohol induced hemolytic anemia with hypercholestrolemia
Symptoms and Signs due to Complications
Q. Write short essay on complications/life-threatening complications of
cirrhosis of liver.
Three major complications of cirrhosis (Table 11.26) are:
1. Portal hypertension (refer pages 813-6): Splenomegaly and collateral
vessel formation are features of portal hypertension develops in advanced
disease.
2. Hepatic encephalopathy (refer pages 820-3)
3. Renal failure (refer page 824).
Table 11.26: Complications of cirrhosis.
Portal hypertension
and its sequelaeHepatic encephalopathy Hepatocellular
carcinoma
Ascites Portal gastropathy Bleeding
manifestations and
coagulopathy
Spontaneous bacterial
peritonitisHepatorenal syndrome Cirrhotic
cardiomyopathy
Portopulmonary
hypertensionHepatopulmonary syndrome Hepatic
hydrothorax
Coagulopathy,
thrombocytopenia,
hyponatremiaEndocrine dysfunction—adrenal
insufficiency, gonadal dysfunction, thyroid
dysfunction.Cirrhotic
osteodystrophy
Extrahepatic manifestations
1. Pleural effusion (hepatic hydrothorax):
–   It is transudate. Often associated with ascites. Most often seen on right
side.
–   Mechanisms:

♦   Hypoalbuminemia causes decreased colloid osmotic pressure.
♦   Leakage of ascitic fluid may occur through diaphragmatic defects.
♦   Transdiaphragmatic migration of fluid via lymphatic channels.
Figs. 11.13A to C:  (A) Flapping tremor; (B) White nails; (C) Prader’s orchidometer.
–   Treatment:  It
Tincludes control of ascites (refer pages 829-30), transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt,
video-assisted thoracoscopy with pleurodesis, video-assisted thoracoscopy with repair of defects
in the diaphragm and liver transplantation.
2.  Hepatopulmonary syndrome
–   Definition: Hypoxemia occurring in patients with advanced liver
disease.
–   Cause: Hypoxemia is due to intrapulmonary vascular vasodilation
without any evidence of primary pulmonary disease.
–   Patients show features of cirrhosis with spider nevi, clubbing and
cyanosis.
–   Symptoms: Most patients have no respiratory symptoms but with
more severe disease complain of insidious onset of breathlessness on
standing (orthodeoxia-platypnea).
–   Investigations:
♦   Chest X-ray: May show a bibasilar interstitial pattern that reflects
the predominantly basal vascular dilatations.
♦   Transthoracic ECHO: Shows intrapulmonary shunting.
♦   Arterial blood gases: Confirm the arterial oxygen desaturation.
Diagnosis by contrast-enhanced (microbubble) echocardiography,

perfusion lung scan and pulmonary angiography.
–   Treatment:  Oxygen inhalation and coil embolization (in localized shunts). Liver
transplantation.
3.  Portopulmonary hypertension: It is characterized by a raised mean
pulmonary artery pressure, increased pulmonary vascular resistance and
normal wedge pressure developing in portal hypertension. Dyspnea on
exertion is the most common symptom, and can lead to right heart failure.
4.  Cirrhotic cardiomyopathy: Characterized by systolic and diastolic
dysfunction, electrophysiological changes, and gross and microscopic
structural changes.
5.  Hepatic osteodystrophy: Osteoporosis and osteomalacia.
Table 11.27 shows noninvasive direct and indirect markers of hepatic
fibrosis.
Table 11.27: Noninvasive direct and indirect markers of hepatic fibrosis.
Direct markers  
Procollagen type I carboxy terminal peptide
(PICP), Procollagen type III amino-terminal
peptide (PIIINP)Metalloproteinases (MMPs), tissue inhibitors of
matrix metalloproteinases (TIMPs), hyaluronic
acid
Indirect Serum Markers of Liver Fibrosis  
Indices Individual components
AST/ALT ratio Aspartate aminotransferase, alanine
aminotransferase
PGA Prothrombin index, GGT, apolipoprotein A1
APRI AST/platelet count
FibroSpect II HA, TIMP-1, α2-macroglobulin
FibroTest/FibroSure γ2 macroglobulin, γ2 globulin, γ globulin,
apolipoprotein A1, GGT, total bilirubin
FibroIndex Platelet count, AST, GGT
FibroMeter Platelet count, γ2 macroglobulin, AST, age,
prothrombin index, HA, blood urea nitrogen
Hepascore Age, gender, bilirubin, GGT, HA, γ2-
macroglobulin
FIB-4 Platelet count, ALT, AST, platelet count, age
Prognostic ClassificationsQ. Write short note on Child-Pugh score or Child-Turcotte-Pugh score.

The Child-Pugh (CP) scoring classification was originally used to risk-
stratify patients undergoing shunt surgery. Modifications of Child’s-Pugh
grading (A, B and C)/Child-Turcotte-Pugh score is shown in Table 11.28 and
is useful to grade the severity of liver disease and prognosticate patients
with established cirrhosis. Other scoring system used is The Model for End-
stage Liver Disease (MELD) which bilirubin, creatinine, and INR for
prothrombin time to predict three-month survival.
Characteristics of end stage of cirrhosis (Box 11.26).Box 11.26: Characteristics of end stage of cirrhosis.
Jaundice
Progressive, refractory ascites
Worsening of signs of portal hypertension
Progressive renal dysfunction Hepatic encephalopathy
Table 11.28: Modified Child’s-Pugh classification or Child-Turcotte-Pugh
(CTP) score.
Parameter Score
1 2 3
Encephalopathy None Mild Marked
Ascites None Mild or controlled with
diureticsModerate/severe
Prolongation of prothrombin time (seconds
over normal)<4 4–6 >6
Serum albumin (mg/dL) >3.5 2.8–3.5 <2.8
Serum bilirubin (mg/dL) <2 2–3 >3
CTP class A: Points 5–6; CP class B: 7–9; CP class C: > 9 (range 5–15) One-year survival rates for
patients with Child-Pugh class A, B, and C cirrhosis are approximately 100, 80, and 45 percent,
respectively.
Poor Prognostic Factors in Cirrhosis (Table 11.29)
Table 11.29: Poor prognostic factors in cirrhosis.
Laboratory findings Clinical findingsLow serum albumin of less than 2.5 g/dL Persistent jaundice (serum bilirubin more than
20 mg/dL)

Low serum sodium of less than 120 mmol/L Ascites responding poorly to therapy
Rising serum creatinine Encephalopathy not associated with an
extensive collateral circulation
Prolongation of prothrombin time more than
1.5 times of control (>6 seconds above
normal)Hemorrhage from varices with poor liver
function
 Neuropsychiatric complications
 Persistent hypotension
 Small liver
 Etiology (e.g. hepatitis C, alcoholic cirrhosis,
if the patient continues drinking)
Investigations
Investigations are helpful for assessing the severity and type of liver disease.
Liver Function Tests
Hyperbilirubinemia: Due to raise in both conjugated and unconjugated
bilirubin. Not very common with cirrhosis. could suggest superadded
hepatitis, hepatocellular carcinoma, congestive or obstructive etiology.
Serum proteins: Show reversal of A:G ratio.
–   Serum albumin is decreased (hypoalbuminemia) and is due to
reduced synthesis by liver.
–   Serum globulin is increased  (hyperglobulinemia) due to stimulation
of reticuloendothelial system.
Serum transaminases
–   AST (SGOT) is raised
–   ALT (SGPT) is raised and usually less than 300 units/dL.
–   AST:ALT ratio
♦   More than 2 in alcoholic cirrhosis.
♦   Less than 2 in cirrhosis complicating viral hepatitis.Alkaline phosphatase: It may be slightly elevated.
Prothrombin time: Prolonged  due to reduced synthesis of clotting
(especially vitamin K-dependent) factors.
Hematological Tests

Peripheral blood picture
Anemia and acanthocytosis (spur-like projections on RBC)
Leukopenia and thrombocytopenia (due to hypersplenism and bone
marrow suppression by alcohol).
Serological markers: For hepatitis B and C.
Other Biochemical Markers
Serum electrolytes:
–   Low sodium (hyponatremia) indicates severe liver disease and is due to
either defect in free water clearance or to excess diuretic therapy.
–   Hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia, hypophosphatemia.
Blood ammonia estimation: It is a reliable investigation when hepatic
encephalopathy is suspected. Raised blood ammonia is due to:
–   Decreased clearance by liver
–   Shunting of portal venous blood to systemic circulation.
Respiratory alkalosis: It may develop due to central hyperventilation.
Glucose intolerance.
Box 11.27: Ultrasound examination in cirrhosis.
Changes in size and shape of the liver
Fatty change and fibrosis produce a diffuse increased echogenicity
Nodularity of the liver surface
Distortion of the arterial vascular architecture
Patency and size of the portal and hepatic veins and their diameters
Detect hepatocellular carcinoma
Enlargement of spleen
Ascites.
Imaging
Ultrasound examination  can demonstrate features listed in Box 11.27.
CT scan: To detect hepatosplenomegaly and dilated collaterals. Arterial
phase-contrast-enhanced scans to detect hepatocellular carcinoma. Other
noninvasive markers to detect hepatic fibrosis are Hepascore, FIB-4 index,
Fibroindex, AST to platelet ratio, etc. (refer Table 11.29).
Endoscopy for detecting and treating varices and portal hypertensive

gastropathy. Barium swallow may also be useful for demonstration of
varices.
Hepatic Elastography
Q. Write short note on hepatic elastography.
Hepatic fibrosis represents an early stage of chronic liver disease and
cirrhosis.
Conventional liver tests and imaging studies are not sensitive for detecting
hepatic fibrosis.
Hepatic elastography is a noninvasive method for measurement of
hepatic fibrosis.
Methods used are ultrasound and MRI [acoustic radiation force impulse
imaging (ARFI), real-time shear wave elastography (SWE)].
Liver Biopsy (Box 11.28)
Special investigations depending on the etiology
Chemical measurement of iron (serum transferrin saturation level, serum
ferritin) and copper (ceruloplasmin) are required to confirm diagnosis of
iron overload or Wilson’s disease.Others: Serum α-foetoprotein, α1-antitrypsin, antinuclear antibodies and
anti-smooth muscle antibodies, etc. depending on the etiology.
Box 11.28: Usefulness of liver biopsy in cirrhosis.
To confirm the diagnosis of cirrhosis
Assesses the severity and type of liver disease
Special stains: It may be necessary for iron and copper
Immunocytochemical stains: It can identify viruses
Ascitic Fluid Examination (Discussed Later)
Investigations for the etiology of cirrhosis: Even in a patient with chronic
consumption of alcohol with cirrhosis rule out other causes (viral serology,
etc.) as only 15–18% of alcoholics develop cirrhosis.
Management (Treatment)There is no treatment available to arrest or reverse the cirrhotic changes in liver. Liver
transplantation  is the specific treatment.

Progression may be halted by correcting the underlying cause, removal of causative agents like
drugs, alcohol, etc.
Diet:
–   High-protein diet-minimum 1 g/kg/day; 2000–3000 kcal/day.
–   Diets with branched-chain amino acids in patients predisposed to hepatic encephalopathy.
–   Multivitamin supplements.
–   Reduce salt intake.Avoidance of aspirin, NSAIDs and other hepatotoxic drugs.
Management of the complications: Specific treatment of complications, e.g. variceal bleeding,
hepatic encephalopathy and ascites (discussed separately).
Follow-up:  With 6-monthly ultrasound and serum α-fetoprotein measurements for early detection
of development of a hepatocellular carcinoma.
PORTAL HYPERTENSION
Portal vein is formed by the union of the superior mesenteric and splenic
veins. Normally, the pressure within portal vein is 5–8mm Hg (or 10–15 cm
saline).
Definition
Portal hypertension is defined as prolonged elevation of portal venous
pressure  (more than 30 cm saline).
It is better defined as elevation of hepatic venous pressure gradient
(HVPG-difference in pressure between portal vein and hepatic vein) more
than 7 mm Hg. HVPG more than 10 mm Hg defines significant portal
hypertension.

Fig. 11.14: Classification of portal hypertension according to site of vascular obstruction.
Classification of Portal Hypertension (Fig. 11.14)
Q. Define and classify portal hypertension.
Portal hypertension can be classified according to the site of obstruction into
prehepatic, intrahepatic, and posthepatic.
Prehepatic causes: Obstruction/blockage of the portal vein before it
ramifies within the liver, e.g. portal vein thrombosis, splenic vein
thrombosis and massive splenomegaly (Banti’s syndrome).Intrahepatic causes: Due to distortion of the liver architecture and may
be further divided into:
–   Presinusoidal  (e.g. in schistosomiasis)
–   Sinusoidal  (e.g. in cirrhosis)
–   Postsinusoidal  (e.g. hepatic sinusoidal obstruction—veno-occlusive
syndrome).
Posthepatic causes: Due to venous blockage outside the liver and are
rare, e.g. severe right-sided heart failure, Budd-Chiari syndrome,

constrictive pericarditis, and hepatic vein outflow obstruction.
Pathogenesis of Portal Hypertension (Fig. 11.15)
Q. Discuss the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features, investigations,
complications and management of portal hypertension.
Portal hypertension in cirrhosis results from:
Increased intrahepatic resistance to blood flow through the liver and
leads to:
–   As portal pressure rises above 10–12 mm Hg, the portal venous system
dilates, reduces the portal blood to the liver and collaterals occur
within the systemic venous system. Development of collateral vessels
allowing portal blood to bypass the liver and enter systemic
circulation.
–   Initially, collateral vessel formation diverts most of the portal blood
and later almost all of the entire portal blood directly to the systemic
circulation, bypassing the liver.Increase in portal venous inflow (flow)  resulting from the hyperdynamic
circulation.
Clinical Features
Q. Write short note on clinical features and diagnosis of portal
hypertension.
Patients with portal hypertension are often asymptomatic.
History, e.g. alcoholism, past history of hepatitis. Triad of portal
hypertension consists of ascites, splenomegaly and dilated tortuous
abdominal wall veins (Fig. 11.16).
Bleeding from esophageal varices or portal hypertensive gastropathy
causes hematemesis and melena.
Splenomegaly: It may be only clinical evidence and single most important
diagnostic feature of portal hypertension.
–   A diagnosis of portal hypertension should not be made if there is no
documentation of splenomegaly either clinically, radiographically or
ultrasonography.
–   Usually spleen is palpable less than 5 cm below costal margin.

However, marked splenomegaly can be found in younger patients,
those with macronodular cirrhosis and in extrahepatic portal
hypertension.
–   Hypersplenism manifests as thrombocytopenia and leukopenia.
Splenomegaly may disappear after massive GI bleed or shunt surgery.
Fig. 11.15:  Consequences of portal hypertension with sites of portosystemic anastomosis in
cirrhosis.
Features due to liver cell failure/hepatic encephalopathy.
Fetor hepaticus: It is a musty odor of breath due to shunting of blood
from portal system to systemic circulation that allows mercaptans to pass
directly to the lungs, bypassing the liver.
Caput medusae, suggestive of an intrahepatic cause of portal
hypertension, are present around the umbilicus; the flow of blood is away
from the umbilicus.
–   In Budd-Chiari syndrome, by contrast, veins are dilated in the flanks
and back, and blood flows in a cephalic direction.

Fig. 11.16: Dilated veins over the anterior abdominal wall and ascites in cirrhosis.
A bruit may be heard in the left or the right upper quadrant in a patient
with a splanchnic arteriovenous fistula.
Cruveilhier-Baumgarten syndrome: A venous hum may be heard in the
epigastrium of a patient with portal hypertension and represents collateral
flow in the patent umbilical vein in the falciform ligament. A patent
umbilical vein excludes an extrahepatic cause of portal hypertension
because the umbilical vein arises from the intrahepatic portion of the left
portal vein.Rectal varices may be confused with internal hemorrhoids because of
their location. However, hemorrhoids result from a displacement of the
anal cushions and hyperperfusion of the arteriovenous plexus vascular
cushions without direct communication with any of the major branches of
the portal venous system.Liver: It may be enlarged or shrunken.
–   Small, contracted, fibrotic liver is found when the portal venous
pressure is very high.
–   Soft liver usually suggestive of extrahepatic portal vein obstruction.
–   Firm liver suggestive of cirrhosis and hence intrahepatic portal

hypertension.
Ascites: It develops partly due to portal hypertension but mainly due to
liver cell failure.
Investigations
The diagnosis of portal hypertension can be made on clinical grounds.
Barium swallow: It shows varices as filling defects in the lower-third of
esophagus (‘bag of worms appearance’).
Upper gastrointestinal scopy
–   Most reliable method of investigation.
–   Esophageal varices appear as blue rounded projections (red spots and
red stripes) under submucosa.
–   ‘Cherry red spots’ indicate impending rupture of varices.
Box 11.29: Complications of portal hypertension.
Variceal bleeding: Mainly esophageal and gastric
Hepatic encephalopathy
Ascites, SBP
Hepatorenal, hepatopulmonary syndrome
Congestive gastropathy
Hypersplenism
Iron deficiency anemia
Ultrasonography (refer Box 11.27).
Portal venography (splenoportal venogram) rarely done nowadays.
Measurement of portal venous pressure: By either wedged hepatic
venous pressure (WHVP) or transhepatic venous pressure. It is useful for
(1) confirmation of portal hypertension, and (2) differentiating sinusoidal
from presinusoidal portal hypertension.Proctoscopy and barium enema: Useful for demonstrating varices in the
rectum and colon.
Liver function tests: To confirm the liver diseases.
Box 11.30: Drugs used in the treatment of portal hypertension.
Drugs that decrease portal blood flow
Nonselective β-adrenergic blocking agents (propranolol nadalol, carvedilol)
Somatostatin and its analogs

Vasopressin
Drugs that decrease intrahepatic resistance
α1-adrenergic blocking agents (e.g. prazosin)
Angiotensin receptor blocking agents
Nitrates
Complications of Portal Hypertension (Box 11.29)
Q. Name the drugs that are used in the reduction of portal venous
pressure.
Treatment of Portal Hypertension
Treatment of underlying disease
Drugs used in the treatment of portal hypertension (Box 11.30)
Non-selective β-blockers (propranolol, nadolol) produce vasodilatation of both splanchnic arterial
bed and portal venous system. Also reduce recurrence of variceal bleed. The usual starting dose of
long-acting propranolol is 40 mg once daily and that of nadolol is 20 mg once daily
Nitrates (nitroglycerine and isosorbide dinitrate) along with β-blockers reduce the risk of variceal
bleed and are used for primary prophylaxis of variceal bleed.
Esophageal Varices
Q. Discuss the diagnosis and management of esophageal variceal
bleeding.
About 90% of patients with cirrhosis will develop gastroesophageal
varices, but only one-third of these will bleed from them.
Commonest site of bleeding is esophageal varices within 3–5 cm of the
esophagogastric junction.
Factors that predispose to rupture of varices are listed in Box 11.31.
Box 11.31: Factors predisposing varices rupture.
Large varices
‘Red sign’ on varices (diagnosed at endoscopy) suggest imminent rupture
Associated with severe liver disease
High portal venous pressure
Salicylates and other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Clinical Features
Painless, mild to massive hematemesis, with or without associated
melena.

Signs
Depending on the amount of blood loss, it may vary from mild postural
tachycardia to shock.
Features of liver cell failure, ascites and portal hypertension.
Box 11.32: Descriptors of esophageal varices.
Red color signs (ominous signs) include:
–   Red “wale” markings, which are longitudinal whip-like marks on the varix
–   Cherry-red spots, which usually are 2–3 mm or less in diameter
–   Hematocystic spots, which are blood-filled blisters 4 mm in diameter
Color of the varix can be white or blue
Form (size) of the varix at endoscopy:
–   Grade I: Esophageal varices may be small and straight
–   Grade II: Tortuous and occupying less than one-third of the esophageal lumen
–   Grade III: Large and occupying more than one-third of the esophageal lumen.
Diagnosis
Fiberoptic endoscopy: Performed within 8 hours of bleeding reveals the
bleeding site and the presence of varices (Fig. 11.17). This helps in
excluding the other causes of bleeding. The descriptors are presented in
Box 11.32.Ultrasonography: Useful to confirm the patency of portal vein.

Fig. 11.17: Endoscopy view of esophageal varices.
Fig. 11.18: Banding of esophageal varices.
Q. Describe the management of acute variceal bleeding. Describe the

medical management of bleeding of esophageal varices.
Management
Management goal (Box 11.33)
Box 11.33:  Management goal in esophageal varices.
Management of the active bleeding episode
Prevention of rebleeding
Prophylactic measures to prevent the first hemorrhage.
Management of acute variceal bleeding (Flowchart 11.2)
General measures—resuscitation
Immediate hospitalization and nursing: Patients require intensive-care nursing. Nil by mouth
until bleeding stops.
Assess the general condition of the patient pulse and blood pressure and maintain fluid (intake and
output) and electrolyte balance.
Obtain blood for grouping and cross matching, hemoglobin, prothrombin time, blood urea,
electrolytes, creatinine, liver function tests and blood cultures.
Grade cirrhosis according to Child-Pugh score (refer Table 11.28).
Immediately restore blood volume with blood transfusion and avoid saline infusions as far as
possible. Prompt correction of hypovolemia is needed.
Correction of coagulation factor deficiency by fresh blood or fresh frozen plasma.
Platelet transfusions to raise platelet count above 50,000/cumm.
Vitamin K is administered intramuscularly or intravenously.
To prevent stress ulcers give H 2 receptor antagonists (e.g. cimetidine, ranitidine or famotidine) or
proton-pump inhibitors (e.g. pantoprazole or omeprazole).
Prophylactic antibiotics:  Reduce infection and mortality and prevent spontaneous bacterial
peritonitis. Usually oral and intravenous quinolones are used (e.g. ciprofloxacin 500 mg twice
daily).
Measures to prevent hepatic encephalopathy: Portosystemic encephalopathy (PSE) may be
precipitated when the amount of bleeding is large because blood contains protein (refer pages 820-
3).Treatment of ascites by ascitic tap (paracentesis) or by administration of spironolactone or
amiloride.
Monitor for alcohol withdrawal (in case of alcoholic cirrhosis) and give thiamine.
Urgent endoscopy
Urgent endoscopy to confirm the diagnosis of gastroesophageal varices. Varices may or may not
be present and it helps to exclude bleeding from other sites (e.g. gastric ulceration).
Portal hypertensive (or congestive) gastropathy is defined as chronic gastric congestion,
punctate erythema and gastric erosions. It can also cause bleeding.
To reduce esophageal ulceration following endoscopic therapy, sucralfate is given in the dose of 1
g four times daily.
Local measures
Injection sclerotherapy or variceal banding

Acute variceal bleeding may be treated by endoscopic procedure with (1) sclerotherapy and (2)
endoscopic variceal banding (endoscopic variceal band ligation (EVBL). They arrest bleeding in 80%
of cases and reduce early rebleeding.
Sclerotherapy:  Injection of sclerosing agent into the varices may arrest bleeding by producing
thrombosis of vessel. Commonly used sclerosants are listed in Box 11.34 and complications of
sclerotherapy are mentioned in Table 11.30.
Banding (Fig. 11.18): Varices are banded by mounting a band on the tip of the endoscope,
sucking the varix just into the end of the scope and dislodging the band over the varix.
Flowchart 11.2:  Algorithm for the treatment of bleeding from acute esophageal varices.

Table 11.30: Complications of sclerotherapy.
Esophageal complications
Re-appearance of varices
Esophageal ulceration and perforation
Esophageal reflux
Stricture formationPulmonary complications
Chest pain, pleural effusion, mediastinitis and
aspiration pneumonia
Acute respiratory failure

Abdominal pain, fever and dysphagia Spinal cord paralysis due to anterior spinal artery
occlusion
 Mortality: 1%
Box 11.34: Commonly used sclerosants in esophageal varices.
Ethanolamine oleate
Sodium morrhuate
Absolute alcohol
Sodium tetradecyl sulfonate
Vasoconstrictor Therapy
Uses:  This therapy is mainly used for (1) emergency control of bleeding while waiting for
endoscopy and (2) in combination with endoscopic techniques.
Aim:  To reduce the portal inflow of blood and portal pressure constricting the splanchnic arterioles.
Drugs used
Terlipressin
–   Action: Terlipressin produces vasoconstriction by releasing vasopressin from it.
–   Dose: 2 mg IV 6-hourly till bleeding stops, and then reduced to 1 mg 4-hourly after 48 hours if
a prolonged dosage regimen is used.
–   Contraindication:  Patients with ischemic heart disease.
–   Side effects:  Abdominal colic, evacuation of bowels and facial pallor due to the generalized
vasoconstriction.
Somatostatin and octreotide
–   Somatostatin and its synthetic analog octreotide stops bleeding from varices in more than 80%
patients.
–   Its effects are equivalent to vasopressin and endoscopic therapy.
–   Side-effects:  Very few.
–   Dose:
♦   Somatostatin: Infusion of 250–500 μg/h followed by 250 μg/h for 2–5 days.
♦   Octreotide: 50 μg as bolus followed by 50 μg/h for 2–5 days.
–   Indication:  When there are contraindications to terlipressin.Vasopressin (0.1 0.5 units/minute for 4 to 12 hrs (up to 48 hrs) : It was used in the past but is not
commonly used now.
Balloon Tamponade
Indications:  To control variceal bleeding.
–   If endoscopic therapy or vasoconstrictor therapy fails or contraindicated.
–   If there is exsanguinating hemorrhage.
Instrument:  (1) Sengstaken-Blakemore tube with four lumens and (2) Minnesota tube with four
lumens. These tubes have two balloons namely esophageal and gastric balloons.
Use: It is very useful in the initial few hours of bleeding in about 90% of cases.
Complications:  (1) aspiration pneumonia, (2) esophageal rupture and (3) necrosis and ulcerations
of esophageal mucosa and (4) obstruction to pharynx.

Algorithm for the treatment of bleeding from acute esophageal varices (Flowchart 11.2)
Management of an acute Rebleed
About 30% of patients develop rebleed within 5 days after a single therapeutic endoscopy.
Source of the rebleed should be established by endoscopy. Sometimes it is due to an ulcer
developed due to previous sclerotherapy and it is difficult to manage.
Management: Repeat endoscopic therapy once only to control rebleeding and further
sclerotherapy or banding should not be done.
Transjugular Intrahepatic Portocaval Shunt (TIPS)
Indication:  When the bleeding does not stop after two sessions of endoscopic therapy within 5
days.
Technique:  A guidewire is passed from the jugular vein into the liver. An expandable metal shunt
is forced over it into the liver substance (intrahepatic) to form a portacaval shunt (between the
systemic and portal venous systems).
Advantages:  It reduces the hepatic sinusoidal and portal vein pressure without the risks of general
anesthesia and major surgery.
Disadvantages:  It is useful only for the short-term.
If the patient does not respond, transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPSS) is useful in
most patients.
Emergency Surgery
Indications:  (1) When other measures fail, (2) if TIPS is not available (3) continued or recurrent
hemorrhage and (4) if the bleeding is from gastric fundal varices.
Techniques:  Esophageal transection and ligation of the feeding vessels to the bleeding varices.
Infrequently acute portosystemic shunt surgery and esophageal staple transaction.
Prevention of Recurrent Variceal Bleeding (Secondary Prophylaxis)
Bleeding recurs in about 60–80% of patients within 2 year after initial bleed.
Long-term MeasuresMedical therapy by non-selective beta-blockade:
–   It is the treatment of choice.
–   Dose: Oral propranolol in a dose 80–160 mg/day decreases the portal pressure.
–   It decreases the frequency of rebleeding, and is as effective as sclerotherapy and ligation. It
also prevents bleeding from portal hypertensive gastropathy.
Endoscopic treatment:  It consists of injection sclerotherapy or variceal banding (refer page 817).
Repeated courses of banding done every 2 weeks until the varices are obliterated. It is superior to
sclerotherapy.
Transjugular portosystemic stent shunts:  They reduce rebleeding rates compared to endoscopic
techniques but are associated with increased rate of encephalopathy. They are used if endoscopic
or medical therapy fails.
Surgical Procedures
Surgical portosystemic shunting
Reserved when medical therapy, EVBL and sclerotherapy are not successful.
Performed in patients with good liver function (Child-Pugh A and B).
Very low risk of rebleeding.
Types of portal systemic shunts

Non-selective shunt: With end-to-side portocaval anastomosis that decompress the entire portal
venous system. It produces significant postoperative hepatic encephalopathy.
Selective distal splenorenal shunt (Warren shunt): Decompress only the varices while maintaining
blood flow to liver via the superior mesenteric vein. It produces less encephalopathy.
Complications of portosystemic shunts
Mortality of 5%
Shunt closure
Hepatic encephalopathy following surgery due to: Reduction in portal pressure and hepatic blood
flow leads to deterioration of liver function. Normally, encephalopathy-inducing toxic substances
carried by the portal system are metabolized by the liver. Following shunt, these substances bypass
the liver, enter systemic circulation and reach the brain.Postoperative jaundice because of deterioration of liver function.
Devascularization procedures  include esophageal transection and do not produce
encephalopathy.
Liver transplantation: It is the treatment of choice when there liver function is poor.
Primary Prevention of Variceal Bleeding (Prophylactic Measures)
Patients with cirrhosis and varices, who have not bled following prophylactic measures are useful.
Non-selective beta-blockers (e.g. propranolol or nadolol) reduce the chances of upper GI bleeding
and are cost-effective. The efficacy of β-blockers is similar to that of prophylactic banding.
Variceal banding is done if there are contraindications or intolerance to non-selective beta-
blockers.

HEPATIC ENCEPHALOPATHY
Q. Define hepatic (portosystemic) encephalopathy.
Definition
Hepatic encephalopathy or portosystemic encephalopathy is defined as a
neuropsychiatric syndrome (alteration in mental status and cognitive
function) occurring secondary to chronic liver disease.
Encephalopathy may be acute and potentially reversible, or chronic and
progressive.
Etiology
Q. Discuss the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features, precipitating
factors, investigations and treatment/management of hepatic
encephalopathy.
Q. Write short essay on alcoholic cirrhosis with acute hepatic
encephalopathy.
More common in patients with chronic liver disease such as cirrhosis. In
patients with portal hypertension it develops due to spontaneous
‘shunting’ or in patients following a portosystemic shunt procedure, e.g.
TIPS (transjugular intrahepatic portocaval shunt).
Acute encephalopathy can occur in acute fulminant hepatic failure.
Pathogenesis
Mechanism is unknown  but many factors play a role. Six pathogenic
mechanisms have been proposed
1. Gut derived neurotoxins that are normally metabolized by the liver
2. Brain water homeostasis
3. Oxidative/nitrosative stress
4. Astrocyte dysregulation
5. Neurotransmitter dysfunction (decreased glutamine, increased GABA,
serotonin)
6. Infection and inflammationHepatic encephalopathy develops due to disturbance of brain function

resulting from various toxic substances reaching the brain. Normally,
these toxic substances are derived from the intestine (gut-derived
neurotoxins) and carried by portal circulation to the liver, where they are
detoxified. Hence, they neither enter the systemic circulation nor reach
brain.In hepatic encephalopathy, these toxic substances are not removed by the
liver and reach brain. Three factors are responsible for this are:
1. Vascular shunting/bypassing the liver:  The portal blood bypasses
the liver via the collaterals into systemic circulation and the ‘toxic’
metabolites pass directly to the brain.
2. Decreased liver mass: It results in severe hepatocellular dysfunction
leading to defective detoxification of the toxic substances.
3. Increased permeability of the blood-brain barrier: Allows the
toxins to enter the brain.Toxic substances: Involved in hepatic encephalopathy is listed in Table
11.31. Ammonia plays a major role and is produced by the breakdown
of protein by intestinal bacteria.
Table 11.31: Toxic substances involved in hepatic encephalopathy.
Ammonia plays major role Aromatic amino acids (tyrosine and
phenylalanine)
Free fatty acids Reduced branched-chain amino acids (valine,
leucine and isoleucine)
Mercaptans derived from methionine Phenol, Indole (oxindole)
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) False neurotransmitters (octopamine)
Precipitating Factors for Portosystemic/Hepatic Encephalopathy (Table
11.32)
Q. List the precipitating causes of hepatic encephalopathy.
Table 11.32: Precipitating factors for hepatic/portosystemic
encephalopathy.
Increased protein load Acute infections including spontaneous
bacterial peritonitis
–   Dietary proteinDrugs, e.g. sedatives, antidepressants,

narcotics, alcohol
–   Gastrointestinal bleeding Viral/alcoholic hepatitis
Fluid and electrolyte disturbance such as
hypokalemia, hyponatremia, metabolic
alkalosis due to:Surgical procedure: Portosystemic shunt
operations
–   Large volume paracentesisDevelopment of hepatocellular carcinoma,
hepatic or portal vein thrombosis
–   Overzealous use of diureticsUremia
–   Vomiting and diarrhea Constipation
Types of Hepatic Encephalopathy (Flowchart 11.3)
Flowchart 11.3:  Types of hepatic encephalopathy.
Clinical Features
Acute hepatic (portosystemic) encephalopathy often has a precipitating
factor (Table 11.32) and the patient becomes drowsy and comatose within
weeks to months. Brain edema may occur with severe encephalopathy and
may lead to cerebral herniation.Chronic hepatic (portosystemic) encephalopathy.
Disturbances in consciousness and behavior: Which may fluctuate.
Hypersomnia is the earliest feature and may progresses to reversion of
sleep rhythm (day time somnolence). Patient may become quite violent
and difficult to manage or may be very sleepy and difficult to rouse.

Patients are irritable, confused, disoriented  with slow slurred speech.
Later may become drowsy and eventually progress to coma.
Clinical grade of hepatic encephalopathy are presented in Table 11.33.
Table 11.33: West Haven criteria clinical grade of hepatic encephalopathy.
Clinical grade Clinical signs
Grade 0/ Minimal HE Lack of detectable changes in personality or
behavior. No asterixis
Grade 1 Trivial lack of awareness, euphoria or anxiety,
shortened attention span, impaired performance
of addition, asterixis may be present
Grade 2 Lethargy or apathy, minimal disorientation for
time or place, subtle personality change,
inappropriate behavior, slurred speech, impaired
performance of subtraction. Asterixis is present
Grade 3 Somnolence to semi-stupor, but responsive to
verbal stimuli, confusion, gross disorientation.
Asterixis is usually absent
Grade 4 Coma (unresponsive to verbal or noxious stimuli)
(HE: hepatic encephalopathy)Change in personality mood and intellect.
General features: Nausea, vomiting and weakness.
Signs
Fetor hepaticus (a sweet smell to the breath).
Asterixis (flapping tremors) (refer Fig. 11.13A) is a motor disturbance marked by intermittent
lapses of an assumed posture, as a result of intermittency of sustained contraction of groups of
muscles. Usually manifests as a bilateral flapping tremor at the wrist, metacarpophalangeal, and
hip joints. It may also be seen in tongue, foot, and any skeletal muscle.
–   Mechanism:  Probably due to interruption of the posture pathway in the rostral reticular
formation and abnormal joint proprioception.
–   The lapse of posture has been termed ‘negative myoclonus’  because, during tonic muscle
contraction (i.e. posture), a short EMG silent period precedes the tremor.
–   Causes:  Hepatic encephalopathy, renal failure, metabolic encephalopathy, CO 2 toxicity,
Wilson’s disease, electrolyte abnormalities (hypoglycemia, hypokalemia and hypomagnesemia,
drug intoxications (e.g. barbiturate intoxication, alcoholism, phenytoin intoxication (‘phenytoin
flap’) and primidone intoxication) and psychotropic drugs (clozapine, sodium valproate, and
risperidone). Lesions in the genu and anterior portion of the internal capsule or ventrolateral
thalamus may cause unilateral asterixis.Fluctuating neurological signs.

Constructional apraxia with the patient being unable to write or draw
Hypertonia—later hypotonia
Hyperreflexia and extensor plantar, later loss of reflexes
Decreased mental function.
Diagnosis: It is based on clinical features. Diagnosis of minimal hepatic
encephalopathy is currently based on neuropsychometric tests, including the
number connection test, digit symbol test, and the block design test.
Fig. 11.19:  Number connection test.

Reitan’s Number Connection Test (Fig. 11.19)
There are 25 numbered circles which can normally be joined together within
30 seconds.
Investigations
Blood ammonia levels: Raised  (upper limit of normal is 0.8–1 ug/mL)
and can be used for the differential diagnosis of coma and to follow a
patient with PSE.
Electroencephalography (EEG): A decrease in the frequency of the
normal  α-waves (8–13 Hz) to α-waves of 1.5–3 Hz is seen before coma
develops.
Cerebrospinal fluid: Glutamine increased, proteins normal and cell
count is normal.
Visual evoked potential abnormalities may be present during subclinical
encephalopathy.
Routine liver function tests only confirm the presence of liver disease and
not the presence of encephalopathy. Imaging to rule out other causes.
Q. Write short note on treatment of hepatic encephalopathy.
Treatment of Hepatic Encephalopathy
Treatment is multifactorial. Restriction of protein intake is reserved for resistant cases.
General measures:
Management or removal of the precipitating factors is the most important aspect in the treatment.
Maintain nutrition with adequate calories 35–40 kcal/kg/day.
Maintain hydration and correct the electrolyte imbalance.
Protein restriction  in the diet. Administer 1.0–1.2 g/kg of proteins daily, preferably vegetable
protein.
Zinc supplementation may be helpful and is relatively harmless.
Stop or reduce diuretic therapy.
Treat any infection with suitable antibiotics (e.g. ampicillin, rifaximin, metronidazole or
neomycin).
Stop alcohol. Avoid sedatives. For restlessness and excitement small dose of diazepam or
midazolam may be given intravenously.
Evacuation of the bowels and sterilizing the bowel:
Give purgation and enemas to empty the bowels of nitrogenous substances.
Lactulose therapy: To reduce plasma ammonia level.
Actions:  Lactulose (beta-galactosidofructose) is a nonabsorbable disaccharide acts as an osmotic
purgative. In the colon, lactulose and lactitol are catabolized by the bacterial flora to lactic acid

and acetic acid. It lowers the colonic pH and favors the formation of the nonabsorbable NH 4+
from NH 3, trapping NH 4+ in the colon and thus reducing plasma ammonia concentrations. Other
mechanism of action include (1) increased incorporation of ammonia by bacteria for synthesis of
nitrogenous compounds, (2) modification of colonic flora, resulting in displacement of urease-
producing bacteria with non-urease-producing bacteria and cathartic effects that improves
gastrointestinal transit, allowing less time for ammonia absorption, (3) increased fecal nitrogen
excretion due to the increase in stool volume and (4) reduced formation of toxic short-chain fatty
acids (e.g. propionate, butyrate, valerate).Dose: 15–30 mL three times orally per day.  Dose is increased gradually till there are 2–3 loose
stools per day.
Lactitol  (β-galactoside sorbitol 30 g daily): It has a similar action, more palatable and better than
lactulose.
Poorly absorbed antibiotics:  They are often used as adjunctive to sterilize the gut in patients who
have difficulty with lactulose. They reduce the intestinal ammonia production by bacteria.
Alternating administration of neomycin and metronidazole to reduce the individual side
effects of each: neomycin for nephrotoxicity and ototoxicity and metronidazole for peripheral
neuropathy.
Rifaximin  semisynthetic, gut-selective, and nonabsorbable oral antibiotic, derived from rifamycin
and a structural analog of rifampin in the dose of 550 mg twice daily or 400 mg thrice daily is very
effective and without any side effects of neomycin or metronidazole. It has only 0.4% systemic
absorption.
When there is gastrointestinal bleeding, Ryles tube aspiration  and bowel washes are performed to
remove the blood and blood products. It reduces the production of nitrogen in the gut.
Other drugs tried are:
Bromocriptine
Probiotics and
prebiotics
FlumazenilL-ornithine L-
aspartate (LOLA)
Sodium benzoate
MelatoninBranched chain
amino acids
Zinc,
polyethylene
glycol, acarbose
Novel treatment strategies include use of L carnitine, rivastigmine, endocannabinoids, mGluR1
antagonists.In acute liver failure, mannitol and judicious use of intravenous fluids to reduce the spontaneous
cerebral edema (controversial).
Liver transplantation.
MARS—Molecular Adsorption reversibility System —purifies the blood by removal of albumin
bound as well as water soluble substrates.
Management of hepatic encephalopathy is summarized in Flowchart. 11.4.
Flowchart 11.4:  Management of hepatic encephalopathy.

Hepatorenal Syndrome
Q. Write a short note on hepatorenal syndrome.
Hepatorenal syndrome (HRS) is a form of functional azotemia without
renal pathology in patients with advanced cirrhosis or acute liver
failure.
The urine output is low, tubular function is normal and kidneys are
histologically normal.
This occurs in 10% of patients with advanced cirrhosis with jaundice and

ascites.
Pathogenesis
Initially, severe peripheral vasodilatation  (probably due to nitric oxide),
leads to severe reduction in the effective blood volume and
hypotension .
This activates the homeostatic mechanisms and rennin-angiotensin-
aldosterone system leading to vasoconstriction of the renal vessels.
Increased preglomerular vascular resistance directs the flow of blood away
from the renal cortex. This leads to a reduced glomerular filtration rate.
Eicosanoids is another mediator involved in pathogenesis of HRS.
Precipitating Factors for HRS (Box 11.35)
Box 11.35: Precipitating factors for hepatorenal syndrome (HRS).
Gastrointestinal bleeding
Aggressive paracentesis
Diuretic therapy
Sepsis including spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
Diarrhea.
Clinical Types
Type 1 hepatorenal syndrome
It is characterized by progressive oliguria, a rapid rise of the serum creatinine to above 2.5
mg/dL and has a very poor prognosis.
Usually precipitated by spontaneous bacterial peritonitis.
Without treatment, median survival is less than 1 month and almost all patients die within 10
weeks after the onset of renal failure.
Type 2 hepatorenal syndrome
It is characterized by a reduction in glomerular filtration, moderate and stable increase in serum
creatinine (>1.5 mg/dL), but it is fairly stable and has a better prognosis than Type 1 HRS.
Usually occurs in patients with refractory ascites  (resistant to diuretics).
Median survival is 3–6 months.
Clinical Features
Develops in advanced cirrhosis, almost always with ascites.
Anorexia, weakness, fatigue, oliguria, nausea, vomiting and thirst.

Terminally coma deepens and hypotension develops.
Investigations
Urea and creatinine levels: High .
Serum sodium: less than 130 mEq/L.
Urine sodium excretion: Less than 10 mEq/day
Urinalysis: Normal
Urine: Plasma osmolality ratio is more than 1.5.
Table 11.34: All of the following must be present for the diagnosis of
hepatorenal syndrome (HRS).
Cirrhosis with ascites
Serum creatinine >1.5 mg/dL
No improvement of serum creatinine (decrease to a level of 1.5 mg/dL or less) after at least 2 days
of diuretic withdrawal and volume expansion with albumin
Absence of shock
No current or recent treatment with nephrotoxic drugs
Absence of parenchymal kidney disease as indicated by proteinuria >500 mg/day, microhematuria
(>50 red blood cells per high power field), and/or abnormal renal ultrasonography
Diagnosis
Usually made in the presence of a large amount of ascites in patients who
have a stepwise progressive increase in creatinine.
Diagnostic criteria hepatorenal syndrome (Table 11.34).
Treatment
Prevention:
–   Avoid over vigorous diuretic therapy.
–   Slow treatment of ascites.
–   Early recognition of electrolyte imbalance, hemorrhage or infection.
Stop diuretic therapy
Correct hypovolemia by intravenous plasma protein solution or salt-poor albumin.
Screen and treat infection  including SBP (spontaneous bacterial peritonitis).
An albumin infusion  (1 g/kg body weight/day up to a maximum of 100 g/day) in combination
with terlipressin  (vasopressin analogues) is effective short-term medical therapy.
Currently, midodrine (α-agonist) along with octreotide and intravenous albumin is also used.
TIPSS if vasoconstrictors fail.

Liver transplantation  is the treatment of choice.
ASCITES
Q. Discuss the pathogenesis and management of ascites and refractory
ascites in cirrhosis.
Q. Discuss the definition, mechanism, causes, clinical features and
differential diagnosis of ascites.
Q. What is Puddle sign?
Ascites is defined as the accumulation of excess fluid within the peritoneal
cavity.
The most common  (85% of cases) cause of ascites is portal hypertension
caused by cirrhosis; however, malignant or infectious causes can also
produce ascites.
Pathogenesis/Mechanisms
Pathogenesis of Ascites in Cirrhosis (Fig. 11.20)
It is complex, involving the following mechanisms.Portal hypertension: Increase in portal vein hydrostatic pressure and
results in extravasation of fluid from plasma into the peritoneal cavity.
Hypoalbuminemia: Due to decreased synthetic function in a cirrhotic
liver reduces the plasma oncotic pressure. This results in an extravasation
of fluid (ascites and edema).Splanchnic vasodilation and hyperdynamic circulation . It reduces
systemic arterial blood pressure, activates renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
system with the development of secondary hyperaldosteronism. Failure
of liver to metabolize aldosterone intensifies secondary
hyperaldosteronism. It leads to sodium retention  and fluid accumulation
and expansion of the extracellular fluid volume.
The combination of portal hypertension, splanchnic arterial vasodilation,
and sodium and water retention increases the hydrostatic pressure as well as
permeability of interstitial capillaries. It causes extravasation of fluid into the
peritoneal cavity.

Percolation of hepatic lymph into the peritoneal cavity:  In cirrhosis,
hepatic lymphatic flow exceeds thoracic duct capacity. The excess lymph
oozes freely from the surface of cirrhotic liver into the peritoneal cavity
and cause ascites.
Fig. 11.20:  Pathogenesis of ascites in cirrhosis.
Theories of ascites:  According to the underfill theory, transudation from the liver leads to
reduction of the blood volume, thereby stimulating sodium (Na) retention by the kidney.
–   According to the overflow theory, increased portal pressure stimulates renal Na retention
through incompletely defined mechanisms.
–   The vasodilation theory suggests that portal hypertension leads to vasodilation and relative
arterial hypotension.

Pathogenesis in the Absence of Cirrhosis
Ascites due to inflammation of peritoneum: Inflammation of the
peritoneum (peritonitis) by bacteria or mycobacteria (tuberculous
peritonitis) causes increased vascular permeability and exudation of fluid
into the peritoneal cavity.Ascites due to venous obstruction: Such as inferior vena cava (IVC)
obstruction increases the hydrostatic pressure and leads to transudation of
fluid into peritoneal cavity.Ascites due to lymphatic obstruction: Obstruction of lymphatic flow due
to involvement of mesenteric lymph nodes, thoracic duct and abdominal
lymphatic ducts can cause leakage of chyle into peritoneal cavity and can
lead to chylous ascites.Ascites following rupture of a viscus: It can results in outpouring of
blood, cystic fluid or contaminated material, favoring ascites. Pancreatic
ascites results from leakage of pancreatic enzymes into the peritoneum
(e.g. pancreatitis).Ascites associated with malignancy: Ascites may result from primary
peritoneal malignancies (e.g. mesothelioma or sarcoma), abdominal
malignancies (e.g. gastric or colonic adenocarcinoma), or metastatic
disease from breast or lung carcinoma or melanoma.
Clinical Features
SymptomsDistension of abdominal (increase in abdominal girth) and bloated feeling
often accompanied by peripheral edema.
Ascitic fluid may cause elevation of diaphragm and compromise
respiratory function and produce dyspnea and orthopnea.
Indigestion and heart burns due to gastroesophageal reflux may develop
because of increased intra-abdominal pressure.
Malnourishment and patients have muscle wasting and excessive
fatigue and weakness.
Signs (Fig. 11.21 and Box 11.36)
Distension of abdomen and fullness of flanks (bloated feeling).
Umbilicus appear flat or everted .

Skin over the abdominal wall appear stretched  and shiny.
In the erect posture, hypogastrium appears prominent.
Box 11.36: Five signs of ascites.
1. Horse shoe dullness
2. Shifting dullness
3. Puddle sign
4. Fullness of flank
5. Fluid thrill/ fluid wave
Fig. 11.21:  Signs of ascites.
Abdominal wall may show two types of distended veins:
–   Caput medusa in which veins radiate out from the umbilicus with
blood flow away from the umbilicus. They represent collaterals
developed due to portal hypertension.
–   Prominent veins in the flanks with blood flow from below upwards.
They represent the IVC collaterals developed due to compression of
IVC by severe ascites.
Abdominal dullness: It indicates the presence of fluid in the abdominal
cavity.

–   Dullness in the paraumbilical zone is detected with smaller amounts of
fluid. This is elicited by asking the patient to assume knee elbow
position and paraumbilical region percussed. Normally, the percussion
note is tympanitic. With mild ascites the dullness is found only in the
flanks.
Q. What is Puddle sign?
Puddle sign/Lawson’s sign: It can detect even ascites as low as 120 mL.
Patient is asked to lie in prone position for 5 minutes, followed by knee
elbow position. Place the diaphragm of the stethoscope on the most
dependent part of the abdomen. Repeatedly flick one flank lightly.
Diaphragm is gradually moved to the opposite flank. A marked change in
the intensity and character of percussion note indicates the presence of
fluid.With moderate ascites both the flanks and hypogastric areas are dull
(horseshoe-shaped dullness). The epigastrium and umbilical regions
show resonant note due to floating intestines.With massive ascites the whole of the abdomen is dull except for a small
region over the umbilicus.
For elicitation shifting dullness at least of 500–1000 mL of fluid is
required.
Fluid thrill  can be elicited in tense ascites (fluid more than 2000 mL).
Secondary effects
Edema of scrotum.
Pedal edema: Due to hypoproteinemia and a functional block of IVC
caused by tense ascites.
Pleural effusion: Mainly on the right side. Pleural effusion is due to
defects in the diaphragm that allows the ascitic fluid to pass into the
pleural cavity.Cardiac apex: Shifted upwards because of raised diaphragm.
Distension of neck veins: Secondary to an raised right atrial pressure,
which follows tense ascites and raised diaphragm.
Meralgia paresthetica: It can develop due to compression of lateral
cutaneous nerve of thigh.

Divarication of recti and hernia.
Investigations
Ultrasonography: It is very sensitive and can detect even small amounts of
ascitic fluid and also useful in identifying the cause.
Paracentesis and evaluation of ascitic fluid  (refer Table 11.37).
Laparoscopy and biopsy of peritoneum.
Aspirate about 10–20 mL of ascitic fluid and ascitic tap (Fig. 11.22) the
following tests are performed:
Fig. 11.22:  Ascitic tap.
Cell count : A neutrophil count above 250 cells/mm3 usually indicates
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis.
Gram stain and culture: for bacteria and acid-fast bacilli.
Protein : Total ascitic fluid protein more than 1.5 g/dL indicates an
increased risk of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis.
SAAG (Serum ascites albumin gradient):  It is the differences between serum albumin and ascitic
fluid albumin. SAAG is useful for differentiating ascites caused by portal hypertension from
nonportal hypertensive ascites. It is calculated by subtracting the ascitic albumin concentration
form the serum albumin concentration and does not change with diuresis. It is better indicator
than simple estimation of protein in the ascitic fluid. SAAG is not a ratio, its the difference.

Classification of ascites based on SAAG is presented in Table 11.35. Corrected SAAG =
Uncorrected SAAG × 0.16 × (Serum globulin g/dL + 2.5).
Cytology: For malignant cells to exclude neoplasms causing ascites.
Amylase: To exclude pancreatic ascites. It is increased in acute
pancreatitis.
Ascitic fluid changes in cirrhosis are presented in Table 11.36.
Causes of high and low serum-ascites albumin gradient (Table 11.35)
Table 11.35: Causes of high and low serum-ascites albumin gradient.
Causes of high serum-ascites albumin gradient
(> 1.1 g/dL)Causes of low serum-ascites albumin gradient
(< 1.1 g/dL)
Portal hypertension, e.g. cirrhosis of liver Peritoneal tuberculosis
Hepatic outflow obstruction Carcinoma involving peritoneal cavity
Alcoholic hepatitis Pancreatitis
Cardiac failure Nephrotic syndrome
Myxodema Biliary ascites
Fatty liver of pregnancy Serositis
Budd-Chiari syndrome Bowel infarction
Hepatic veno-occlusive disease  
Right-sided heart failure  
Constrictive pericarditis  
Table 11.36: Ascitic fluid changes in cirrhosis.
Features Findings
Appearance Clear, straw colored or light green
Specific gravity Less than 1.018
Protein Less than 2.5 g/dL
Total cell count Normal (<250/L)
Differential cell count Mesothelial cells and lymphocytes
Gram’s stain Negative
Culture Negative
Malignant cells Absent
Serum ascites albumin gradient (SAAG) 1.1g/dL
Differential Diagnosis of Ascites (Table 11.37)

Nature of Ascitic Fluid
The ascitic fluid may be transudate or exudate. Differences between
transudates and exudates are listed in Table 11.38.
Table 11.37: Examination of ascitic fluid and its interpretation.
Feature Interpretation
Gross appearance
Clear, straw-colored or light green Cirrhosis, infective (e.g. tuberculosis,
following intra-abdominal perforation),
malignancy, chronic pancreatitis, heart
disorders (congestive cardiac failure,
constrictive pericarditis, hepatic vein
obstruction (e.g. Budd-Chiari syndrome),
Meigs' syndrome (ovarian tumor),
hypoproteinemia (e.g. nephrotic syndrome)Hemorrhagic Malignant tumors, tuberculosis, acute
pancreatitis, ruptured ectopic pregnancy,
trauma to abdomen
Cloudy, turbid Bacterial peritonitis
Milky white (chylous) Lymphatic obstruction (e.g. by carcinoma),
cirrhosis
Specific gravity Less than 1.018 in transudates
More than 1.018 in exudates
Protein Less than 2.5 g/dL in transudates
More than 2.5 g/dL in exudates
Serum-ascites albumin gradient (SAAG) Refer Table 11.35
Glucose Low in malignancy, tuberculosis, peritonitis
Amylase activity More than 1000 units/L in pancreatitis
Microscopy
PolymorphsLess than 250/mm3 in cirrhosis
More than 250/mm3 in bacterial peritonitis
Lymphocytes Tuberculosis, malignancy
Cytological examination Malignancy
Special stains
–   Gram’s stain
–   Ziehl-Neelsen stainingBacterial peritonitis
Tuberculosis

Culture
Pyogenic bacteria Bacterial peritonitis
Mycobacteria Tuberculosis
Table 11.38: Differences between transudative and exudative ascites.
Characteristics Transudate Exudate
Cause Non-inflammatory process Inflammatory process
Mechanism Ultrafiltrate of plasma, due to
increased hydrostatic pressure with
normal vascular permeabilityIncreased vascular permeability
Appearance Clear, serous Cloudy/turbid
purulent/hemorrhagic/chylous
Color Straw yellow Yellow to red
Specific gravity <1.018 >1.018
Protein Low, <2 g/dL, mainly albumin High, >2 g/dL
Clot Absent Clots spontaneously because of high
fibrinogen
Cell count Low (<250/uL) High (>250/uL)
Type of cells Few lymphocytes and mesothelial cells Neutrophils in acute and lymphocytes
in chronic inflammation
Bacteria Absent Usually present
Lactate
dehydrogenase
(LDH)Low High
Examples Cirrhosis, nephrotic syndrome, heart
failurePeritonitis, Malignancy
Table 11.39: Various causes of ascites categorized depending on the nature
of ascitic fluid.
Transudates (High SAAG) Exudates (Low SAAG)Cirrhosis and portal hypertension (common
cause)Tuberculous peritonitis
Nephrotic syndrome Malignant peritonitis
Hypoproteinemia (protein-losing enteropathy,
malnutrition)Bacterial peritonitis
Congestive cardiac failure (common cause) Pancreatic ascites (acute pancreatitis)
Constrictive pericarditis Miscellaneous (exudate/transudate)
Beriberi Meigs’ syndrome (may be transudate also)*
Inferior vena cava (IVC) obstruction Chylous ascites (lymphatic obstruction)

Hypothyroidism (rare cause) Budd-Chiari syndrome
(SAAG: serum ascites albumin gradient)
Causes: Various causes of ascites are listed in Table 11.39.
Management
General measures:
–   Hospitalization is necessary, if there is massive ascites.
–   Check serum electrolytes, renal function tests at the start of treatment and twice a week.
–   Weigh the patient daily. Measure abdominal girth and strict intake and output monitoring daily.
Bed rest  alone induces diuresis in a small proportion of people because renal blood flow increases
in the horizontal position, but in practice is not helpful. Ascites treatment algorithm is shown in
Flowchart 11.5.
Dietary restriction of sodium  by reducing sodium intake to 40 mmol in 24 hours and maintain an
adequate protein and calorie intake with a palatable diet.
Drugs:  Many contain significant amounts of sodium (up to 50 mmol daily). Examples include
antacids, antibiotics (particularly the penicillins and cephalosporins) and effervescent tablets.
Sodium-retaining drugs (non-steroidal, corticosteroids) should be avoided.
Fluid restriction to 1000–1500 mL/day is necessary if the serum sodium is under 128 mmol/L.
Diuretics
–   Aim of diuretic therapy: To produce a net loss of fluid of about 700 mL per day (0.7 kg
weight loss in patients with ascites alone or 1.0 kg if both ascites and peripheral edema is
present). The maximum rate at which ascites can be mobilized is 500–700 mL per day. This is
to prevent diuretic-induced renal failure and/or hypernatremia.
–   Diuretics are administered in a step-wise manner.
–   Aldosterone antagonists:  As there is secondary hyperaldosteronism, the diuretic of first
choice is the one of the aldosterone antagonists (potassium-sparing diuretics) e.g.
spironolactone, triamterene, amiloride. Spironolactone is started at a low dose of 25 mg QID
(100 mg daily), and gradually stepped up every week to a maximum of 400 mg/day (providing
there is no hyperkalemia). Chronic administration of spironolactone produces gynecomastia.
Eplerenone 25 mg once daily does not produce gynecomastia.
–   Loop diuretics:  When a large dose of spironolactone has failed, add a loop diuretic, such as
furosemide 20–40 mg or bumetanide 0.5 mg or 1 mg daily . Usually spironolactone is
combined with furosemide. Disadvantages of loop diuretics include development of
hyponatremia, hypokalemia and volume depletion.
–   Stop all diuretics, if severe hyponatremia (sodium <120 mEq/L), progressive renal failure or
worsening of hepatic encephalopathy occurs. Vaptans may improve serum sodium in patients
with cirrhosis and ascites.
Flowchart 11.5:  Ascites treatment algorithm

Treatment of Refractory Ascites
Q. Write short essay/note on indication, procedure and complications of abdominal
paracentesis.
Refractory ascites  is defined as fluid overload that (1) is unresponsive to sodium-restricted diet and
highdose diuretic treatment (400 mg per day of spironolactone and 160 mg per day furosemide), or
(2) recurs rapidly after therapeutic paracentesis.
They are managed on the following lines:
1. Intravenous salt-poor albumin, 25 g in 3 hours.
2. Oral midodrine 7.5 mg three times daily.
Box 11.37:  Indications for large-volume paracentesis.
Refractory ascites.
Used to relieve symptomatic tense ascites, e.g. cardiorespiratory distress due to gross ascites.
Impending rupture of a hernia.
3. Large-volume Paracentesis
Indications (Box 11.37)
Procedure:
–   Remove 3–5 L of fluid over 1–2 hours.
–   Salt-free albumin (8 g/L of ascitic fluid removed) if volume is more than 4–5 liters is
removed. If albumin is not available, dextran-70 may be used. Strict monitoring is
necessary.

Complication:  Hypovolemic and renal dysfunction (postparacentesis circulatory dysfunction)
more likely with removal of > 5 L and worse liver function.
4. Shunts:
Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS):  It is used for resistant ascites, if
there is no spontaneous portosystemic encephalopathy and no disturbance of renal function.
Le Veen shunt: It is a peritoneovenous shunt that allows the peritoneal fluid to drain directly
into the internal jugular vein.
5. Slow low-dose continuous albumin, Furosemide with or without Terlipressin SIFA(T)  infusion.
6. Liver transplantation.
Bacterial Peritonitis
Types: (1) Acute bacterial peritonitis or (2) Chronic bacterial peritonitis.
1.  Acute Bacterial Peritonitis
Causes: Appendicitis, perforated peptic ulcer or typhoid ulcer,
cholecystitis, diverticulitis, gangrene of the small intestine and ulcerative
colitis.
Flowchart 11.6:  Approach to the patient with ascites following diagnostic paracentesis
Symptoms
Fever, nausea, thirst, vomiting, severe abdominal pain. No flatus.
Signs
Hippocratic facies
Tachycardia, hypotension, and shock

Board like rigidity, tenderness and rebound tenderness
Absent peristaltic sounds.
Investigations (Box 11.38)
Box 11.38: Investigations in acute bacterial peritonitis.
Plain radiograph of abdomen
–   Dilated loops of intestine
–   Gas under the diaphragm if there is intestinal perforation
Ascitic fluid (Flowchart 11.6)
–   Exudate, turbid or purulent
–   Shows intestinal contents in the fluid
–   Cell counts: Markedly increased, polymorphs >250/mm3
–   Gram stain: Positive for bacteria
–   Culture: It shows growth of organism
Treatment:  It is a surgical emergency.
Correction of fluid and electrolyte balance.
Broad spectrum antibiotic therapy.
Treat the shock.
Surgical treatment depending on the causes.
2. Chronic Bacterial Peritonitis
Associated with subacute intestinal obstruction.
Ascitic fluid: exudate, protein is high and contains large number of
chronic inflammatory cells.
Classification of ascitic fluid infections are listed in Table 11.40.
Treatment  of the underlying cause.
Table 11.40: Classification of ascitic fluid infection.
Culture-negative neutrocytic ascites
Monomicrobial non-neutrocytic bacterascites
Polymicrobial bacterascites (needle perforation of the bowel)
Secondary bacterial peritonitis
Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis

Spontaneous Bacterial Peritonitis (SBP)
Q. Write short note on diagnosis and management of spontaneous
bacterial peritonitis (SBP).
Patients with cirrhosis and ascites are highly susceptible to infection of ascitic
fluid.
Definition
Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis is a common and severe complication of
ascites characterized by spontaneous infection of ascitic without an
evident intra-abdominal surgically treatable source.
Pathogenesis
Causative agents: Most common organisms are Escherichia coli,
Klebsiella or enterococci or other gut bacteria. Others include streptococci
and enterococci.Route of infection: The infecting organisms in the gut flora traverse the
intestine into mesenteric lymph nodes, leading to bacteremia and seeding
of the ascitic fluid by hematogenous spread.
Clinical featuresSpontaneous bacterial peritonitis should be suspected in any patient with
ascites who clinically deteriorates.
It may present as sudden deterioration or hepatic encephalopathy in a
cirrhotic patient with ascites.
Features include fever, abdominal pain or discomfort and rebound
abdominal tenderness or they may present without any of these features.
Investigations
Peripheral blood: Leukocytosis.
Ascitic fluid:
–   Cloudy fluid
–   Leucocyte count: More than 500/mm3. A raised neutrophil count of
> 250/mm3 in ascites is alone sufficient for diagnosis and to start
treatment immediately.
–   pH: Less than 7.3.
–   Culture: Positive. Monomicrobial E. coli is the most common

organism.
Investigations to rule out abdominal sources of peritonitis by imaging.
Diagnosis
With clinical suspicion, a diagnostic aspiration  (paracentesis) should
always be performed in patients with gastrointestinal bleeding, shock, fever,
worsening liver and/or renal function, and hepatic encephalopathy for making
the diagnosis.
Treatment
Third-generation cephalosporin: such as cefotaxime or ceftazidime being the most commonly
used antibiotic. This is modified on the basis of culture results. Dose of Cefotaxime: 2 g IV 8
hourly for 5 days.
Alternative therapy in patients without shock or hepatic encephalopathy.
–   Amoxicillin/clavulanate (1.2 g IV 8 hourly followed by 625 mg orally).
–   Ciprofloxacin  (200 mg IV12 hourly followed by 500 mg BID orally).
–   Ofloxacin  (400 mg twice daily).
Note: Quinolones should not be given if patient is on norfloxacin for prophylaxis.
Antibiotic therapy and albumin (1.5 g/kg body weight within 6 hours of detection and 1g/kg on
day 3) reduces risk of type 1 hepatorenal syndrome.
Box 11.39:  Indications for prophylaxis for spontaneous bacterial peritonitis.
Patients with acute gastrointestinal bleeding (antibiotic prophylaxis also reduces the rate of re-
bleeding).
Patients with a previous episode(s) of SBP and recovered.
Patients with low total ascites protein content  <1.5 g/dL or severe liver disease and no prior
history of SBP.
Prophylaxis for SBP
Recurrence is common (70% within a year) and prophylaxis is indicated (Box 11.39).
Drugs:
–   In patients with upper GI hemorrhage: cefotaxime or norfloxacin (400 mg BID for 7 days).
–   In patients with low ascitic protein content or previous episode of spontaneous bacterial
peritonitis: long term quinolones such as norfloxacin (400 mg/day).
–   Alternative but less effective drugs: include cotrimoxazole (800 mg sulfamethoxazole + 160
mg trimethoprim once a day) or ciprofloxacin (750 mg once a week).
Tuberculous Peritonitis
Pathogenesis: Tuberculosis spreads to involve peritoneum by or more of
the following sources:
–   Through hematogenous seeding of peritoneum.
–   Through lymphatics or mesenteric nodes.

–   From genitourinary source.
Clinical Features
Night sweats, weight loss, loss of appetite, malaise and evening rise of
temperature.
Gradual abdominal distension and ‘doughy feel’ of the abdomen .
Multiple palpable masses in the abdomen produced due to matted
omentum and loops of intestine.
Investigations (Table 11.41)
Table 11.41: Investigations in tuberculous peritonitis.
Ascitic fluid
Usually straw colored.
Protein: more than 2.5g/dL.
Lymphocytes more than 70%.
Ziehl-Neelsen staining: It may
show acid fast bacilli .Culture of ascitic fluid for tubercle bacilli.
ADA levels: Raised
Peritoneal biopsy under laparoscopy: Shows granuloma
and helps in confirmation of diagnosis
Treatment:  Antituberculous chemotherapy.
Malignant Ascites
Causes
Primary tumors of stomach, colon, ovary or other intra-abdominal
tumors may produce exudation fluid into the peritoneal cavity.
Peritoneal metastasis: from any primary.
Periumbilical subcutaneous metastatic tumor deposits (known as
‘Sister-Joseph’s nodules’), e.g. carcinoma of stomach.
Investigations
Ascitic fluid (Box 11.40)
Biopsy of the peritoneum by laparoscope: It shows the tumor  and useful
for confirmation of diagnosis.
Treatment:  Palliative
Repeated paracentesis.

Intraperitoneal instillation of chemotherapeutic drugs: It may reduce rate of reaccumulation of
ascites. The drugs include methotrexate, nitrogen mustard or immunotherapy (interferon alfa).
Box 11.40: Ascitic fluid findings in malignant ascites.
Appearance: Exudate and hemorrhagic
Protein: High
Specific gravity: High
Microscopy: Sediment shows malignant cells.
Meigs’ Syndrome
Q. Write short note on Meig’s syndrome.
Features of Meig’s syndrome are presented in Box 11.41.
Chylous Ascites
Characterized by the presence of chyle  (intestinal lymph) in the peritoneal
cavity. Ascitic fluid is milky or creamy due to the presence of
chylomicrons.
Causes:
–   Injury/trauma to the main lymph ducts in the abdomen.
–   Malignancy (e.g. lymphoma) or tuberculosis causing obstruction of the
intestinal lymphatics.
–   Filariasis.
–   Intestinal obstruction associated with rupture of a major lymphatic
channel.
–   Congenital lymphangiectasia.
Clinical features:
–   Acute abdominal pain with signs of peritoneal irritation.
–   Distended, non-tender, fluid filling the abdomen (chylous ascites).
Ascitic fluid:
–   Milky or creamy
–   High fat (triglycerides > 1000 mg/dL) content.
–   Sudan III staining demonstrates fat globules.Box 11.41: Features of Meig’s syndrome.

Pleural effusion is most commonly right sided , may be an exudates or transudate.
Ascites
Pelvic tumor  (commonly fibroma of the ovary) in females. Both ascites and pleural effusion
resolve following excision of the pelvic tumor.
Ascites Praecox
Q. What is ascites praecox?
In ascites praecox, ascites occurs early and is disproportionately prominent as well as appears
before the edema. It occurs in constrictive pericarditis, acute Budd Chiari syndrome, tuberculous
peritonitis, and malignant peritonitis.
In constrictive pericarditis, ascites appears first, followed by edema. This sequence is one of the
cardinal features, distinguishing ascites from congestive heart failure in which edema appears first
and ascites much later. Edema is minimal in constrictive pericarditis and occurs in the later part of
the disease.
DRUG AND TOXIN-INDUCED HEPATITIS
Q. Write a short note on drug-induced liver injury (DILI).
Types of Drug and Toxin-induced Hepatitis
Direct toxic hepatitis: It is characterized by a predictable and dose-
related toxicity, short latent period and absence of extrahepatic
manifestations.
Idiosyncratic drug reactions: These are characterized by unpredictable,
most often dose-independent toxicity with variable latent period and
presence of extrahepatic manifestations (e.g. fever, rashes, arthralgia and
eosinophilia). However, for many drugs, idiosyncratic hepatotoxicity can
be dose dependent. Examples: Drugs such as chlorpromazine, isoniazid
and halothane.
TreatmentWithdrawal of the drug/toxin.
Supportive therapy.
Clinicopathologic Classification of Drug-induced Liver Disease
(Table 11.42)
Table 11.42: Clinicopathologic classification of drug-induced liver disease

(DILI).
Category Implicated drugs: Examples
Hepatic adaptation Phenytoin, warfarin, rifampin, flavaspidic acid
Dose-dependent hepatotoxicity (necrosis) Acetaminophen (Paracetamol), nicotinic acid,
amodiaquine, hycanthone, carbon tetrachloride,
mushroom (Amanita phalloides), yellow
phosphorus
Other cytopathic toxicity, acute steatosis Valproic acid, didanosine, HAART agents,
fialuridine, l-asparaginase, some herbal
medicines
Acute hepatitis Isoniazid, dantrolene, nitrofurantoin, halothane,
sulfonamides, phenytoin, disulfiram, acebutolol,
etretinate, ketoconazole, terbinafine, troglitazone,
rifampicin, methyldopa, ibuprofen, ketoconazole,
fluconazole, zidovudine, chlorothiazide,
oxyphenisatin
Chronic hepatitis Nitrofurantoin, etretinate, diclofenac,
minocycline, nefazodone, phenytoin, isoniazid
Granulomatous hepatitis Allopurinol, carbamazepine, hydralazine,
quinidine, quinine, phenylbutazone,
sulfonamides, allopurinol
Cholestasis without hepatitis Oral contraceptives, androgens
Cholestatic hepatitis Chlorpromazine, tricyclic antidepressants,
erythromycins estolate, amoxicillin-clavulanic
acid, methimazole, chlorpromazine,
chlorpropamide, methyltestosterone, anabolic
steroids, cyclosporine, nimesulide
Cholestasis with bile duct injury Chlorpromazine, flucloxacillin,
dextropropoxyphene
Chronic cholestasis Chlorpromazine, Haloperidol, erythromycin,
cimetidine/ranitidine, nitrofurantoin, imipramine,
azathioprine
Hepatic fibrosis Methotrexate
Vanishing bile duct syndrome Chlorpromazine, flucloxacillin, trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole
Sclerosing cholangitis Intra-arterial floxuridine, intralesional scolicidals
Steatosis (fatty change) Zidovudine, amiodarone, indinavir, ritonavir,
methotrexate, tetracyclines, valproic acid
Steatohepatitis Perhexiline, amiodarone,
Vascular disorders Contraceptive drugs, anabolic steroids,
azathioprine
Tumors Contraceptive pill, danazol
HEPATIC VENOUS OUTFLOW TRACT (HVOT)

OBSTRUCTION
Q. Discuss the etiology, pathology, clinical features, investigations and
management of hepatic venous outflow tract (HVOT) obstruction.
Q. Describe veno-occlusive disease or sinusoidal obstruction syndrome.
Obstruction to the hepatic-venous outflow can occur at different levels.
These include:
–   Small central hepatic veins—Veno-occlusive disease.
–   Large hepatic veins—Budd-Chiari syndrome.
–   Inferior vena cava
–   HeartClinical features: It depends on the cause and on the speed with which
obstruction develops. Common features are congestive hepatomegaly and
ascites.
Budd-Chiari Syndrome
Q. Explain briefly about Budd-Chiari syndrome.
Definition : Budd-Chiari syndrome is characterized by obstruction of
hepatic venous outflow owing to occlusion of the hepatic vein.
Level of obstruction: It may be at any level from the small hepatic veins
to the junction of the IVC with the right atrium.
Classic Budd-Chiari syndrome results from thrombosis of one or
more hepatic veins at their openings into the inferior vena cava.
Etiology (Box 11.42)
Box 11.42: Various causes of Budd-Chiari syndrome.
Hepatic vein obstruction
Venous thrombosis
Hypercoagulability states
–   Hematological disorders
–   Polycythemia vera
–   Paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria
–   Antithrombin III, protein C or protein S deficiencies
–   Antiphospholipid syndrome
–   Sickle cell disease

–   Leukemia
–   Pregnancy
–   Use of oral contraceptive pills
Compression (may also produce thrombosis)
Hepatic infections
Hydatid cyst
Liver abscess
Obstruction due to tumors
Renal cell carcinoma
Adrenal tumors
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Posterior abdominal wall sarcomas
Radiation injury
Congenital venous webs
Trauma to the liver
Idiopathic (40 to 50% of cases)
Clinical Features
Budd-Chiari syndrome: It comprises of a triad of (1) abdominal pain, (2)
ascites and (3) hepatomegaly with hepatic histology showing centrilobular
sinusoidal distension and pooling.Acute form (acute Budd-Chiari)
–   Follows sudden venous occlusion (e.g. by renal cell carcinoma,
hepatocellular carcinoma, and polycythemia).
–   Acute upper abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, tender hepatomegaly,
marked ascites and mild jaundice.
–   With total venous occlusion: Delirium, coma and hepatocellular
failure.
Fulminant form (fulminant Budd-Chiari syndrome)
–   Presents with fulminant hepatic failure usually in the setting of an
additional predisposing factor (e.g. factor V Leiden mutation).
–   Occurs particularly in pregnant women.
Chronic form (chronic Budd-Chiari)
–   More gradual occlusion and more usual presentation.
–   Pain in abdomen, tender hepatomegaly and gross ascites.
–   Enlarged caudate lobe of the liver becomes palpable.
–   Jaundice is mild or absent.

–   Splenomegaly with portal hypertension.
–   Negative hepatojugular reflux, i.e. pressure over the liver fails to fill
the jugular veins.
–   Bilateral pedal edema and distended veins over abdomen, flanks and
back (Fig. 11.23), with IVC obstruction .
–   Features of cirrhosis and portal hypertension in patients who survive
the acute event.
–   Hepatocellular carcinoma may develop.
Fig. 11.23:  Budd-Chiari dilated veins in back and lumbar region.
Investigations
Liver function tests vary considerably
–   Features of acute hepatitis: Mild hyperbilirubinemia, raised alkaline
phosphatase, low serum albumin and raised transaminases.
Ascitic fluid examination: Typically shows a high protein content
(>2.5 g/dL, i.e. exudate) in the early stages however, this often falls later
in the disease.
Ultrasound: It may show enlargement of the caudate lobe, intrahepatic
collaterals, echogenic areas and ascites. It also may show compression of

the inferior vena cava, if present.
Pulsed Doppler sonography or a color Doppler: It may show
obliteration of the hepatic veins and reversed flow or associated
thrombosis in the portal vein with high accuracy. This may be
sufficient to establish the diagnosis. Doppler ultrasonography, with
sensitivity and specificity rates >80%, is the diagnostic procedure of first
choice.Noninvasive CT or MRI: It may also demonstrate occlusion of the
hepatic veins and inferior vena cava with diffuse abnormal parenchyma
on contrast-enhancement. It may also demonstrate enlargement of the
caudate lobe which has independent blood supply and venous drainage.Hepatic venography is only necessary if CT and MRI are unable to
demonstrate the hepatic venous anatomy clearly. It helps to determine
extent of block and caval pressures.Liver biopsy: It shows centrilobular congestion hemorrhage, fibrosis
and cirrhosis depending on the duration of the disease.
Other investigations: To identify a cause (e.g. blood tests and
coagulation studies).
Management
Predisposing causes should be removed or treated as far as possible.
In the acute situation with recent thrombosis:  Treated with thrombolytic therapy consisting of
intrahepatic venous streptokinase (in very early cases of thrombosis), followed by heparin and
oral anticoagulation (warfarin).
Short hepatic venous strictures: Treated with angioplasty.
Extensive hepatic vein occlusion:  Insertion of a covered TIPSS followed by anticoagulation may
be useful in opening of the hepatic veins.
Ascites: Initially treated medically with low-salt diet, diuretics as well as treating the
underlying cause (e.g. polycythemia). If not relieved may be treated with surgical shunts such as
Le Veen shunt and portosystemic shunts.
Percutaneous balloon angioplasty for membranous obstruction of the IVC and hepatic vein.
Congenital web can be treated radiologically or resected surgically.
Liver transplantation is indicated for chronic Budd-Chiari syndrome  and for progressive liver
failure, followed by lifelong anticoagulation.
Without transplantation or shunting, particularly acute and fulminant types is associated with poor
prognosis.
Veno-occlusive Disease
Veno-occlusive disease (VOD) also known as sinusoidal obstruction

syndrome is a rare condition characterized by widespread occlusion of the
small central hepatic veins.
Etiology
Develops as a complication of
–   Total body irradiation/myeloablative regimens used before
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. It carries a high mortality.
–   A variety of antineoplastic drugs have been implicated as causes of
sinusoidal obstruction syndrome including gemtuzumab ozogamicin,
actinomycin D, dacarbazine, cytosine arabinoside, mithramycin, and 6-
thioguanine.
–   Chronic immunosuppression with azathioprine or 6-thioguanine.
–   Ingestion of herbal teas made with pyrrolizidine alkaloids in
Senecio and Heliotropium plants.
–   Ingestion of alkaloids in inadequately winnowed wheat or in ‘bush
tea’.
–   Hepatic irradiation.
Clinical Features
Similar to those of the Budd-Chiari syndrome. Classically, sinusoidal
obstruction syndrome manifests with mild hyperbilirubinemia (bilirubin
levels >2 mg/dL), painful hepatomegaly, weight gain of >2%, and
development of ascites.Investigations
Large hepatic veins appear patent radiologically . This is in contrast to
Budd-Chiari syndrome.
Transjugular liver biopsy (with portal pressure measurements) confirms
diagnosis.
Liver biopsy: Evidence of venous outflow obstruction .
Treatment
Supportive and includes control of fluid overload, ascites and hepatocellular failure.
Defibrotide  is a novel oligodeoxyribonucleotide with anti-ischemic, antithrombotic, and
thrombolytic activity but minimal systemic anticoagulant effect. Several studies have shown
efficacy of defibrotide in the prevention and treatment of sinusoidal obstruction syndrome, with no
major toxicity.

HEPATOCELLULAR CARCINOMA (HCC)
Q. Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations and management
of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the most common primary malignancy
of liver from hepatocytes or their precursors.
Predominantly in males with M: F ratio of 2.4: 1. The number of men and
number of women with hepatocellular carcinoma in the absence of cirrhosis
are almost equal.
Etiology (Table 11.43)
Table 11.43: Risk factors for hepatocellular carcinoma.
Major risk factors Minor risk factors
Chronic hepatitis :
HBV/HCVHereditary
hemochromatosisOral contraceptives
Alcoholic cirrhosis Wilson disease Cigarette smoking
Aflatoxin B 1 (a fungal
toxin contaminating food)Primary biliary
cholangitisBetel quid chewing
Non-alcoholic
steatohepatitis (NASH)Tyrosinemia Thorotrast and arsenic exposure
 α1-Antitrypsin deficiency Obesity
 Glycogen storage disease Ataxia telangiectasia
 Hormones: Anabolic
steroids, estrogens and
androgensHypercitrulinemia
  Acute intermittent porphyria
  Gallstones and cholecystectomy >
one in second column and other
in third column
Clinical Features
Usually develops in patients with underlying cirrhosis.
Non-specific symptoms include ill-defined upper abdominal pain in the
right hypochondrium, malaise, weakness, anorexia, fatigue, weight loss
and ascites. Rapid development of these symptoms in a patient with

cirrhosis is suggestive of HCC. Fever due to tumor necrosis.
On examination:
–   Liver is enlarged, irregular, and nodular with pain or tenderness.
–   Friction rub or a hepatic bruit over the liver due to vascularity of
tumor.
Blood-tinged ascites. Bone pain, dyspnea due to metastasis.
Paraneoplastic Syndromes Associated with Hepatocellular
Carcinoma (Table 11.44)
Table 11.44: Paraneoplastic syndromes associated with hepatocellular
carcinoma.
Carcinoid syndrome Porphyria
Hypercalcemia Sexual changes—isosexual precocity, gynecomastia, feminization
Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy Systemic arterial hypertension
Hypoglycemia Thyrotoxicosis
Neuropathy Thrombophlebitis migrans
Osteoporosis Watery diarrhea syndrome
Polycythemia (erythrocytosis) Dermatomyositis, pemphigus foliaceus, pityriasis rotunda
All patterns of HCCs have a strong tendency for invasion of vessels. The
portal vein and its branches are infiltrated by tumor. Occasionally, long,
snakelike tumor masses may invade the portal vein  and occlude portal
circulation. Rarely tumor may invade inferior vena cava and extend into the
right side of the heart through the hepatic veins. It may metastasize to the
lungs.
InvestigationsSerum marker
–   Alpha-fetoprotein: About 50% hepatocellular carcinoma is associated
with high serum (>500 ug/L) or rising levels of alpha-fetoprotein.
However, α-fetoprotein levels are often raised in other neoplastic and
non-neoplastic liver diseases and in some extrahepatic disorders. AFP
concentrations are normal in up to ٪٠٤  of small HCCs.
–   α- L-fucosidase: It is raised in HCC and also in cirrhosis.
–   Serum des-γ -carboxy prothrombin:  It is raised in a majority of
hepatocellular carcinoma.

–   Plasma microRNA expression is also marker of HCC.
–   Serum alkaline phosphatase: Very high.
Ultrasound scans show filling defects.
CT scan (triple-phase) or MRI abdomen have 75-85% sensitivity in
picking HCC.
Hepatic artery angiography shows ‘tumor blushes’.
Liver scintigraphic scans.
Liver aspiration or biopsy particularly under ultrasonic guidance
confirms the diagnosis.
Management/Treatment
Treatment is different for patients with cirrhosis and those without. Therapy depends on tumor size,
multicentricity, extent of liver disease (Child-Pugh score) and performance status.
Surgical resection:  It is indicated when lesions 1–3 in number and < 5 cm in size; without
metastasis; with child score A. Local or segmental resections are preferred to major resections.
After successful resection tumor recurs in the cirrhotic liver in about 70% of patients after 5 years.
Nonsurgical therapy:  Majority of patients diagnosed in the advanced stage of HCC and cannot be
treated by surgical resection. These patients can be treated by following non-surgical therapy.
–   Local ablation strategies:
♦   Radiofrequency ablation (RFA): Percutaneous radiofrequency ablation uses heat to kill
tumor cells. A single electrode inserted into the tumor under CT or ultrasound guidance.
♦   Transarterial embolisation (TAE):  Hepatic artery embolization with Gelfoam and
doxorubicin.
♦   Transarterial chemo-embolization (TACE):  With drugs such as doxorubicin but is
contraindicated in decompensated cirrhosis and when HCC is multifocal can be combined
with RFA.
–   Local injection therapy:  Numerous agents can be used for local injection into tumors and
includes percutaneous ethanol injection (PEI) or percutaneous acetic acid injection (PAI). PEI
causes not only direct destruction of tumor cells, but also destroy normal cells in the vicinity. It
usually requires multiple injections (average three) and the maximum size of tumor treated is 3
cm.
–   Conventional chemotherapy and radiotherapy are unsuccessful.
–   Chemotherapy using sorafenib:  This drug is a multikinase inhibitor with activity against RAF,
VEGF and PDGF signaling.
–   Nivolumab  against programmed cell death 1 receptor (PD-1) has been used as immunotherapy Liver transplantation: Indicated in presence of localized tumor and underlying advanced liver
disease. Unfortunately, the underlying liver disease (e.g. hepatitis B and C) may recur in the
transplanted liver.
Prognosis
Depends on size of tumor, the extent of spread (e.g. presence of vascular
invasion), and liver function in those with cirrhosis.

LIVER TRANSPLANTATION
Q. Discuss briefly about liver transplantation.
Transplantation of liver is useful in treating patient with end-stage liver
disease or acute/fulminant liver failure and 5-year survival rate in good
centers is about 75%.
‘Split’ livers: In which one liver is used for two recipients. It is helpful in
tackling organ shortage and in shortening the time on the waiting list.
Orthotopic liver transplantation: It is the most common form of liver
transplantation. Orthotopic means that the graft is placed in its correct
anatomical location. In this technique, donor organ after removal of the
native organ is transplanted in the same anatomic location.Auxiliary partial orthotopic liver transplantation  (APOLT), also called
partial or split liver transplantation.
–   In this technique, a segment of donor liver is transplanted in a recipient
who has undergone hemi-hepatectomy to make room for the graft.
–   Advantage:
♦   If the donor’s liver fails, the recipient’s own organ can function as a
backup until a new liver is found.
Living donor liver transplantation: In this technique a portion of healthy
person’s liver is removed and used for transplantation.
–   Living related donors: In this, the donor of the liver segment is a
first-degree living relative.
Bioartificial liver: Cultured hepatocytes are used in patients with acute
liver failure till donor liver becomes available.
Indications (Table 11.45)
Table 11.45: Indications for liver transplantation.
Cirrhosis due to
Acute/fulminant liver failure (e.g.
seronegative hepatitis, drug-induced liver
injury).
Chronic viral hepatitis C and B
Alcoholic liver disease (after successful
demonstration of abstention)In children
Biliary atresia
Inborn errors of metabolism:  Wilson’s
disease, glycogen storage diseases, Crigler-
Najjar syndrome type I, familial
hypercholesterolemia, α 1-antitrypsin
deficiency Familial amyloid polyneuropathy,
Primary hyperoxaluria

Other causes of cirrhosis (e.g. non-alcoholic
steatohepatitis, autoimmune diseases, primary
biliary cholangitis)
Hepatocellular carcinoma with no single lesion >5 cm or no more than three lesions with the
largest being 3 cm or smaller.
Failure of previous liver transplant.
Contraindications
Absolute contraindications
–   Poor expected outcome of transplantation (e.g. multisystem organ
failure, malignancy or infection of extrahepatic or extrabiliary tract,
hepatocellular carcinoma with metastatic spread advanced cardiac or
pulmonary disease, and HIV infection).
Relative contraindications
–   Comorbidities that reduce survival (e.g. renal insufficiency, primary
hepatobiliary malignancy >5 cm, hemochromatosis, spontaneous
bacterial peritonitis, patient older than 65 years, etc.).
Complications of Liver Transplantation (Table 11.46) and
immunosuppression (Box 11.43)
Table 11.46: Complications of liver transplantation.
Hepatic complications Non-hepatic complications
Preservation-reperfusion injury with
graft failure due to ischemia
Acute graft rejection
Surgical complications—relating to
the anastomosis of bile duct and
blood vessels such as failure or
obstruction of biliary anastomosis.Chronic graft rejection
Recurrent disease
Infection and drug-
induced liver injury
Jaundice (due to blood
transfusion, use of drugs
and anesthetic agents,
etc.).Infections/sepsis
Fluid overload
Renal dysfunction
Intraperitoneal bleed
Box 11.43: Complications of immunosuppression.
Infections
Metabolic syndrome
–   Hypertension
–   Diabetes mellitus
–   Obesity
–   Dyslipidemia

–   Cardiovascular risk
–   Acute and chronic renal disease
–   Metabolic bone disease
–   De novo malignancy
PYOGENIC ABSCESS
Q. Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations and management
of pyogenic liver abscess (bacterial liver abscess).
Etiology
Bacterial infections in the liver may be manifest as pyogenic abscess.
Most common organism includes E. coli. Streptococcus milleri, Klebsiella
pneumoniae and Bacteroides. Other organisms include Enterococcus
faecalis, Proteus vulgaris and Staphylococcus aureus. Often the infection
is mixed. Tuberculosis and meliodosis can present with liver abscess.Route of infection: The organisms may reach the liver through one of the
following routes:
1. Portal vein: Major source is intra-abdominal infections (e.g.
appendicitis, diverticulitis, colitis and perforated bowel).
2. Arterial blood supply: During systemic bacteremia, organism may
reach liver via hepatic artery.
3. Ascending infection  in the biliary tract (ascending cholangitis).
4. Direct invasion of the liver from a nearby source (e.g. subphrenic
abscess, perinephric abscess), or a penetrating injury.
Clinical FeaturesFever, chills, rigors and right upper quadrant pain  radiating to right
shoulder.
Weight loss, anorexia, nausea and vomiting. Can manifest as PUO
Pleuritic chest pain.
Tender hepatomegaly.
Mild jaundice may develop when there is extrahepatic biliary obstruction.
Respiratory findings at the base of right lung (pleural effusion,
crepitations) or a pleural rub in the right lower chest.

Investigations
Serum bilirubin: Raised in 25% of cases.
Serum alkaline phosphatase: Markedly elevated.
Blood cultures: Positive in only 30% of cases.
Normochromic normocytic anemia, usually accompanied by a
polymorphonuclear leukocytosis.
ESR and CRP  are often raised.
Chest radiograph: Elevation of the right dome of diaphragm, and in severe
cases right basilar atelectasis and pneumonia or effusion
Ultrasonography: confirms the diagnosis
CT scan of abdomen: helpful when ultrasound is normal.
Needle aspiration of pus for culture and sensitivity.
Management
Antibiotics:  Initiate treatment with antibiotics (combination of ampicillin, gentamicin and
metronidazole) to cover Gram-positive, Gram-negative and anaerobic organisms till the causative
organism is identified. Later, change the antibiotic according to the culture and sensitivity reports.
Duration of treatment is 4-8 weeks.
Ultrasound-guided aspiration of the abscess:  Indications are listed in Box 11.44.
Surgical drainage via a large-bore needle for those who fail to respond (Fig. 11.24).
Treat the underlying cause.
Box 11.44: Indications for ultrasound-guided aspiration of liver abscess.
Large abscess (>6 cm).
Abscess in the left lobe.
Lack of response within 48 to 72 hours of medical therapy.
Ultrasonography suggestive of large abscess impending rupture.
Amebic Liver Abscess
Q. Write short essay/note on diagnosis and management of amebic liver
abscess/hepatic amebiasis.
Liver involvement by Entamoeba histolytica produces amebic liver abscess.
The term amebic hepatitis is not used at present.
Pathogenesis
Entamoeba histolytica trophozoites from the base of an amebic ulcer in

colon  may reach liver through the portal circulation. The capillary
system of the liver acts as an efficient filter and holds these trophozoites.
Trophozoites multiply, kill hepatocytes, cause coagulation necrosis of
the liver cells and produce single or multiple abscesses.
Amebic abscess ranges from 8–12 cm in diameter and appears well
circumscribed. In most of the cases, the abscess is single and confined to
the posterosuperior aspect of the right lobe of the liver. This is because
right lobe portal laminar blood flow is supplied predominantly by the
superior mesenteric vein, whereas the left lobe portal blood flow is
supplied by the splenic vein. Abscess cavity is filled with a thick, dark
brown, odourless, semisolid necrotic material, which resembles anchovy
paste (sauce) in color and consistency.
Fig. 11.24: Drainage of abscess with pig tail.
Clinical Features
Symptoms are similar to pyogenic abscesses (such as fever, anorexia,
weight loss and malaise). Concurrent diarrhea is present in less than one-
third of patients.Insidious/gradual onset with low-grade fever, sweats, malaise, weight
loss, chills and rigors. Few may have an acute onset of fever. Later phase

there may be swinging temperature and sweating usually without marked
systemic symptoms or associated cardiovascular signs.
Pain: Patient may have pain in the right hypochondrium due to stretching
of the liver capsule. Diaphragmatic irritation by abscess may cause
referred pain in the right shoulder.Past history of dysentery may be present. Jaundice is rare.
Physical examination: The patient looks ill, shows an enlarged, tender
liver, intercostals point tenderness in the posterolateral of a lower right
intercostals space (intercostal tenderness) and bulging of the intercostals
spaces, upward extension of the liver dullness on percussion. There may
be signs of an effusion or consolidation in the base of the right side of the
chest.
Complications
1. Due to rupture of abscess:Spontaneous external rupture may produce ‘granuloma cutis’.
Rupture into bronchus may result in expectorates large amounts of the typical ‘anchovy-sauce’
pus.
Rupture into pleural space may produce massive pleural effusion.
Rupture into peritoneal cavity may produce peritonitis.
Rupture below the diaphragm to produce subdiaphargmatic abscess.
Rupture into stomach.
Abscess in the left lobe of liver may rupture into pericardium resulting in pericarditis and rarely
cardiac tamponade.
2. Due to direct extension  into lung may produce amebic lung abscess.
3. Due to hematogenous spread:  Metastatic brain abscess, splenic abscess.
Diagnosis
Blood: Polymorphonuclear leukocytosis is a characteristic finding.
Liver function tests: May be abnormal.
–   Most consistent abnormality is raised alkaline phosphatase.
–   Level of aspartate aminotransferase (AST) reflects the severity of the
disease. Jaundice is uncommon, and its presence is indicative of a
grave prognosis.
Chest radiography: Demonstrate abscess (a raised right hemidiaphragm
on chest X-ray). Other findings include right-sided pleural effusion and
right basal pneumonitis.

Ultrasound: Ultrasonic scanning of liver is very useful for establishing
the diagnosis and localization of the abscess. The defect produced by
abscess in the liver usually persists for several months after the complete
recovery of the patient.Isotope liver scans and computed tomography:  Can also assist to detect
abscess.
Serologic tests: For ameba includes indirect hemagglutination test, amebic
complement fixation test, ELISA or counter immunoelectrophoresis can
detect antibodies in the blood and are more useful in amebic liver abscess.Amebic fluorescent antibody test: It is positive in about 90% of patients
with liver abscess and in 60–70% with active colitis. Nested-multiplex
PCR has a sensitivity of 75-100%.
Aspiration of amebic liver abscess: Needle aspiration yields the
characteristic ‘anchovy-sauce’ or ‘chocolate-brown’ pus (Fig. 11.25). The
pus is usually thick in consistency, yellow or green in color, and
characteristically odourless. It consists of liquefied necrotic liver tissue
and does not contain polymorphonuclear leucocytes. As the parasites are
localized in the abscess wall, pus may not show free amebae. Ameba may
be demonstrated in the terminal portion of the aspirate, or by a needle
biopsy of the abscess wall.


Fig. 11.25: Anchovy sauce appearance of amebic abscess.
Treatment
Metronidazole  800 mg three times daily for 7 to 10 days or tinidazole  2 g orally daily as a single
dose for 5 days is usually adequate in liver abscess. Severe cases may need intravenous
administration of metronidazole (500 mg 8 hourly).
Chloroquine:  It may be given at a dose of 300 mg twice daily for 2 days, followed by 150 mg
twice daily for another 19 days. It is usually administered to those patients who do not respond
adequately to metronidazole.
Emetine and dehydroemetine are lethal to the trophozoites of E. histolytica . However, because
of their toxicity they are rarely used. Dehydroemetine is less toxic than emetine. Toxicity includes
cardiac arrhythmias, muscle weakness, vomiting precordial pain, and diarrhea.
Therapeutic aspiration of the abscess:  If a liver abscess is large or likely to burst, or if the
response to chemotherapy is not prompt, aspiration is required and repeated if required. Rupture of
an abscess into the pleural cavity, pericardial sac or peritoneal cavity needs immediate aspiration
or surgical drainage.Percutaneous drainage:  It is achieved by placing a large bore catheter into the abscesses for
draining the abscess. It is usually performed when therapeutic aspiration fails and its indications
are:
–   Large abscess and associated risk of spontaneous rupture (especially left lobe abscesses).
–   If abscess is ruptured already (drainage of both abscess and extraneous collection).
–   Absence of response to medical therapy with signs of persistent sepsis or enlarging abscesses
or persistent symptoms.
–   Evidence of liver failure.After treatment  of the invasive disease, luminal amebicide such as diloxanide furoate 500 mg
orally TID for 10 days; or aminosidine (paromomycin) 25–35 mg/kg/day orally in three divided
doses for 7–10 days should be given to clear luminal cysts or parasite. Alternative agents include
iodoquinol 650 mg orally TID for 20 days, and nitazoxanide.
Clinical comparison between pyogenic and amebic liver abscess (Table
11.47).
Table 11.47: Pyogenic and amebic liver abscess: clinical comparisons.
Parameter Pyogenic liver abscess Amebic liver abscess
Number Often multiple Usually single
Location Either lobe of liver Usually right hepatic lobe,
near the diaphragm
Presentation Subacute Acute
Jaundice Mild Moderate
Diagnosis US or CT guided aspiration US or CT and serology
METABOLIC LIVER DISEASE

Iron Overload
Q. What are various disorders associated with iron overload?
Q. Discuss the etiology, pathology, clinical features, investigations and
management of hereditary (primary) hemochromatosis (‘bronze
diabetes’).
Classification of Iron Overload (Box 11.45)
In secondary iron overload, iron accumulates in Kupffer cells rather than
hepatocytes compared to that of hereditary hemochromatosis.
Hereditary Hemochromatosis
Hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) is an inherited autosomal recessive
disorder characterized by abnormal (excessive) accumulation of iron  in
various parenchymal organs leading to eventual fibrosis and functional
organ failure.
In symptomatic patients of hemochromatosis the total body iron is
increased to 20–40 g, compared with 3–4 g in normal individuals.
Associated with high incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Most of the hereditary hemochromatosis is inherited as autosomal
recessive genetic disorder and associated with HLA-B3, B7 and B14
histocompatibility antigens.
Box 11.45: Classification of iron overload.
Hereditary
Mutations of genes encoding HFE, transferrin receptor 2 (TfR2), or hepcidin
Mutations of genes encoding hemojuvelin (HJV)
Hemosiderosis (secondary hemochromatosis)
Parenteral iron overload
–   Exogenous: Multiple blood transfusions, repeated iron injections, long-term hemodialysis
–   Endogenous: Sickle cell disease
Ineffective erythropoiesis with increased erythroid activity: β-Thalassemia, sideroblastic anemia,
porphyria cutanea tarda
Increased oral intake of iron
Chronic liver disease : Chronic alcoholic liver disease.
Pathology

The excess iron is deposited  commonly in the liver, joint, heart, pancreas,
endocrine glands (e.g. pituitary gland) and skin.
Clinical Features
Age and gender: Overt clinical manifestations occur more frequently in
males over the age of 40 years. About 90% of the patients are males.
Females are protected because of loss of iron during menstruation and
pregnancy.
Symptoms:
–   It may develop due to toxic damage of cells by accumulated iron and
consequent fibrosis.
–   Symptoms may be vague -muscle aches, weakness, abdominal and/or
joint pain.
–   Classic triad: Consists of bronze skin pigmentation (Fig. 11.26) (due
to melanin deposition in exposed parts, axillae, groins and genitalia),
hepatomegaly and diabetes mellitus (‘bronzed diabetes’) is
observed in patients with gross iron overload.
–   Late features: Hypopituitarism, loss of libido, testicular atrophy,
cardiac complaints (cardiomyopathy, heart failure and cardiac
arrhythmias), hypothyroidism, cirrhosis with hepatosplenomegaly,
spiders, loss of body hair, jaundice and ascites.
–   Cirrhosis.

Fig. 11.26: Skin pigmentation in hemochromatosis.
Complications
Chondrocalcinosis: develops due to asymmetrical deposition of calcium
pyrophosphate in both large and small joints and leads to an arthropathy. It
has a characteristic radiologic findings: squared-off bone ends and hook-
like osteophytes in the second and third metacarpophalangeal (MCP)
joints.Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in 30% of patients with cirrhosis.
Multiorgan failure.
Susceptibility to specific infections (bacteria whose virulence is increased
in the presence of excess iron). These include Listeria monocytogenes,
Yersinia enterocolitica and Vibrio vulnificus.
Investigations
Serum iron profile:
–   Serum iron is elevated (>30 μmol/L).
–   Total iron binding capacity (TIBC): reduced.
–   Fasting transferrin saturation  (serum iron divided by the total iron

binding capacity) is high (> 45%) which is highly sensitive for
diagnosis.
–   Serum ferritin is elevated  (usually >500 μg/L or 240 nmol/L). It is
less sensitive than transferrin saturation in screening for
hemochromatosis because it is also increased in alcoholic liver disease,
hepatitis C infection, non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. It is also an acute
phase reactant and increased in other inflammatory and neoplastic
conditions.Biochemical tests for liver function are often normal , even with
established cirrhosis.
Genetic testing: It is performed if iron studies are abnormal.
CT scan: Shows increased density of liver  due to deposits of iron.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) : It is sensitive to detect liver iron
content.
Liver biopsy: Not necessary for diagnosis. It shows iron deposition  and
hepatic fibrosis leading on to cirrhosis.
Screening: All first-degree family members of hereditary
hemochromatosis must be screened to detect early and asymptomatic
disease.
Treatment and ManagementTreatment should be started before permanent organ damage occurs due to iron toxicity. The
excess iron should be removed as rapidly as possible and prolongs life and may reverse tissue
damage.
Phlebotomy/Venesection:  Venesection of 500 mL blood (removes 250 mg of iron) is performed
twice-weekly until the serum iron is normal. This may take 2 years or more.
Chelation therapy:  Rarely in patients who cannot tolerate venesection because of severe cardiac
disease or anemia, chelation therapy with desferrioxamine can be used. Dose is 40–80 mg/kg/day
subcutaneously. It removes about 10–20 mg of iron/day. Deferiprone, deferasirox are other
chelators.Erythrocytapheresis  is an apheresis technique whereby red cells are removed in an isovolemic
manner and the patient's plasma is returned to the patient, larger amounts of iron can be removed
per session than by phlebotomy.
Treatment of diabetes.
Treatment of cirrhosis: There is a risk of malignancy if cirrhosis is present.
Treatment of congestive heart failure and cardiac arrhythmias.
Dietary limitations:  (i) Dietary iron intake to be restricted, (ii) agents for reducing iron absorption
(tannates in tea, phytates, oxalates, calcium, and phosphates) to be used, (iii) avoidance of
excessive ethanol, (iv) avoidance of ascorbic acid (vitamin C) supplements, and (v) avoidance of
uncooked seafood.

Wilson’s Disease
Q. Discuss the etiology, pathology, clinical features, investigations and
management of Wilson’s disease (hepatolenticular degeneration).
Q. Explain in brief about Kayser-Fleischer ring.
Wilson disease (progressive hepatolenticular degeneration) is a very
rare inborn error of copper metabolism characterized by increased
total body copper.
Excess copper deposition  in various organs: (1) liver, (2) basal ganglia
of the brain, (3) cornea, (4) kidneys, and (5) skeleton .
Potentially treatabl e condition.
Etiology
Autosomal recessive disorder.
Consanguinity is risk factor.
Molecular defect within a copper-transporting ATPase encoded by a
gene (ATP7B ) located on chromosome 13. More than 300 mutations have
been identified and is rare in India and Asia.
Defect: Excessive accumulation of copper in the body due to:
–   Failure of incorporation of copper into proceruloplasmin and leads to
low serum ceruloplasmin.
–   Failure of biliary copper excretion, causing its accumulation in the
body.
Pathology
Liver: Microscopic features are not diagnostic and vary from that of
chronic hepatitis to macronodular cirrhosis. Stains for copper show a
periportal distribution of copper.
Clinical Features
Age of presentation  is usually between 5 and 30 years.
–   Children usually present with hepatic problems.
–   Young adults usually present with more neurological problems.
Features of liver involvement: Varies from (1) acute hepatitis going on

to (2) fulminant hepatic failure, to (3) chronic hepatitis or (4) cirrhosis.
Features of brain involvement: Dysarthria, involuntary movements,
tremors (especially asymmetric, resting and intention tremors, wing
beating), ataxia and eventually dementia.
Psychiatric manifestations: Phobia, depression, compulsive behavior.
Kayser-Fleischer rings
–   It is a characteristic sign  due to deposition of copper in the Descemet’s membrane of
cornea.
–   Appears as greenish-brown or golden-brown ring at the corneoscleral junction  (around the
periphery of the cornea), appearing first at the upper periphery gradually disappear with
effective medical treatment or liver transplantation.
–   Best identified by slit-lamp examination.
–   It may be absent in young children and disappears with treatment.
–   May be associated with ‘sunflower cataracts’.
–   Kayser-Fleischer rings (Fig. 11.27) are not specific for Wilson disease ; they are found
occasionally in patients with other types of chronic liver disease, usually with a prominent
cholestatic component, such as primary biliary cholangitis, primary sclerosing cholangitis, or
familial cholestatic syndromes, and rarely in patients with nonhepatic diseases.
Fig. 11.27: Kayser-Fleischer ring
Other manifestations: Kidney (renal tubular damage), skeleton
(osteoporosis, arthropathy).

Investigations
Slit-lamp examination of the eyes for Kayser-Fleischer ring.
Serum copper: Reduced but can be normal.
Serum ceruloplasmin levels: Low and less than 29 mg/dL.
Urinary copper: Usually increased  100–1000 μg in 24 h (1.6–16 μmol);
normal levels <40 μg (0.6 μmol). The penicillamine challenge: 500 mg
dose of penicillamine at the beginning of the 24-hour urine collection and
then again at 12 hours. Urinary copper excretion greater than 1600 μg per
24 hours (>25 micromol) is diagnostic.
Liver biopsy: Gold standard. Diagnosis depends on the amount of copper
in the liver (>250 μg/g dry weight).
Hemolysis and anemia may be found.
Treatment and Management
Treatment should be started early and will show improvement both clinically and biochemically.
Chelating drugs
–   Penicillamine with pyridoxine:  It should be given lifetime in the dose of 1–1.5 g daily and
effectively chelates copper.
For asymptomatic cases and maintenance therapy (after maximal improvement with
penicillamine).
–   Trientine dihydrochloride:  in the dose of 1.2–1.8 g/day.
–   Zinc acetate:  Indicated in chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis. Dose 150 mg/day. It blocks
absorption of copper from intestine. However, it should not be administered with
penicillamine or trientine since both these drugs chelate zinc.
–   Other drugs: (1) intramuscular dimercaprol (2) ammonium tetrathiomolybdate (3)
potassium sulfide and (4) carbacrylamine resins.
–   Liver transplantation: In fulminant hepatic failure and decompensated/advanced cirrhosis.
–   All siblings and children of the patient should be screened for Wilson’s disease and treated
even if they are asymptomatic, and if there is evidence of copper accumulation.
α1-Antitrypsin Deficiency
Q. Write a short note on α1-antitrypsin.
Clinical Features
In neonates produces cholestatic jaundice.
In adults:
–   Liver: Chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis, hepatocellular carcinoma and
cholangiocarcinoma.

–   Lung: Emphysema, chronic bronchitis
–   Others: Panniculitis, vasculitis, pancreatitis, glomerulonephritis.
Investigations
Serum α1-antritrypsin is low (normal above 150 mg/dL).
Serum protein electrophoresis shows absence of ∝1-globulin peak .
Liver biopsy: α1-AT accumulates in periportal hepatocytes and can be
seen as periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-positive, diastase-resistant globular
inclusions in these hepatocytes. The injury to these hepatocytes results in
progressive fibrosis and cirrhosis.
Treatment
No treatment  apart from dealing with the complications of liver disease.
Stop cigarette smoking and alcohol intake.
Liver or lung transplantation.
BILIARY CIRRHOSIS
Q. What is biliary cirrhosis? Discuss the etiology, pathology, clinical
features, investigations and management of primary biliary
cholangitis.
It is a type of cirrhosis  of the liver secondary to prolonged obstruction
of biliary system (anywhere between the small interlobular bile ducts and
the papilla of Vater).
Obstruction results in progressive destruction of bile ducts.
Classification
Biliary cirrhosis may be subdivided into primary biliary cholangitis and
secondary biliary cirrhosis.
1. Primary biliary cholangitis: It is a probably an autoimmune disorder
of the intrahepatic biliary tree.
2. Secondary biliary cirrhosis: It is due to prolonged obstruction of the
extrahepatic biliary tree .
Primary Biliary Cirrhosis Presently called as Primary Biliary
Cholangitis

Gender: It usually affects middle-aged women , with a female to male ratio
of more than 6:1.
Age: Peak incidence between 40 to 50 years of age (perimenopausal).
Etiology and Pathogenesis
PBC is thought to be an autoimmune disorder, but its exact pathogenesis
is not known.
Genetic and environmental  factors paly role in the pathogenesis of the
PBC. Probably an environmental factor acts on a genetically predisposed
individual via molecular mimicry initiate autoimmunity.
Clinical Features
It is insidious in onset and asymptomatic patients are discovered during
routine examination or investigations.
Commonly present with pruritus  (often the earliest symptom), fatigue,
and skin pigmentation  (due to melanin deposition) abdominal
discomfort.
Features of liver involvement:
–   Intense pruritus (probably due to bile salts) occurs months to years
before jaundice and is more at night. Scratch marks.
–   Progressive jaundice (bottle green color)
–   Clubbing of fingers
–   Hepatosplenomegaly
–   Hepatic decompensation, portal hypertension, ascites and variceal
bleeding developHypercholesterolemia
–   Xanthelasmas (cholesterol-rich macrophages) around the eyes (Fig.
11.28).
–   Xanthomas over joints, tendons, hand creases, elbows and knees.
–   Pain, tingling and numbness over feet and hands due to peripheral
neuropathy produced by lipid infiltration of peripheral nerves.
Malabsorption
–   Steatorrhoea and diarrhea due to malabsorption of fat.
–   Easy bruising and ecchymosis due to vitamin K deficiency.

–   Osteomalacia and/or osteoporosis due to malabsorption of vitamin D.
–   Night blindness due to vitamin A deficiency.
–   Dermatitis due to vitamin E deficiency.
Extrahepatic manifestations: These include autoimmune disorders such
as Sjögren syndrome, keratoconjunctivitis sicca (dry eyes and mouth),
systemic sclerosis, autoimmune thyroiditis, rheumatoid arthritis, Raynaud
phenomenon, membranous glomerulonephritis and celiac disease.
Fig. 11.28:  Xanthelasmas around the eyes.
Investigations
Antimitochondrial antibodies are characteristic and are essential for the
diagnosis of PBC. They are found in 90–95% of patients. M2 antibody is
specific. Other nonspecific antibodies (e.g. antinuclear factor and smooth
muscle) may also be present.Marked rise of serum 5’-nucleotidase activity.
High serum alkaline phosphatase (markers of cholestasis) : Two-to five-
fold rise
Hyperlipidemia and serum cholesterol  is raised.
Serum bilirubin: Hyperbilirubinemia of the conjugated type occurs in
late stages.
Serum transaminase: Mild elevation of transaminases.
Serum IgM  may be very high .
Ultrasound: It shows diffuse alteration in liver architecture.
MRCP (or ERCP): It shows normal biliary tree.

Liver biopsy: Portal tract infiltration by lymphocytes and plasma cells
and about 40% have granulomas. Later portal tract fibrosis and, eventually
progress to cirrhosis.
Note: Hepatic granulomas are not specific and are also found in sarcoidosis,
tuberculosis, schistosomiasis, drug reactions, brucellosis, parasitic infestation
(e.g. strongyloidiasis) and other conditions.
Management/TreatmentUrsodeoxycholic acid (10–15 mg/kg):  It improves bilirubin and aminotransferase levels. It
should be started early in the asymptomatic phase.
Steroids:  They improve biochemical and histological disease but may lead to increased
osteoporosis.
Other therapies: include azathioprine, colchicines, methotrexate and cyclosporine may be
beneficial in few patients.
Steatorrhoea:  It is treated by limiting intake of fat and substituting long chain triglycerides with
medium chain triglycerides in the diet.
Malabsorption of fat-soluble vitamins (A, D and K) is managed by supplementation.
Calcium supplementation.
Pruritus  is difficult to control but following can be helpful.
–   Cholestyramine one 4 g sachet three times daily, but is unpalatable.
–   Antihistamines.
–   Rifampicin, naloxone hydrochloride, ondansetron and opiate antagonists (naloxone and
naltrexone).
Liver transplantation.
Complications:  These include (i) cirrhosis, (ii) osteoporosis and
osteomalacia, (iii) polyneuropathy, and (iv) increased risk of hepatocellular
carcinomas.
Secondary Biliary Cirrhosis
Q. Write short note on secondary biliary cirrhosis.
Definition
Cirrhosis developing secondary to prolonged (for months) obstruction  of
the extrahepatic (large biliary duct) biliary tree.
Causes of Obstruction
(1) gallstones, (2) bile duct strictures, and (3) sclerosing cholangitis.

Patients with malignant tumors of bile duct or pancreas rarely survive long
enough to develop secondary biliary cirrhosis.
Cardiac Cirrhosis
Q. Write short note on cardiac cirrhosis.
Cause: Liver damage primarily due to congestion may develop in all
types of right heart failure. Examples: valvular heart disease, constrictive
pericarditis or cor pulmonale of long duration (more than 10 years).Mechanism:  Right heart failure causes retrograde transmission of raised
venous pressure via the IVC and hepatic vein into the liver. This leads to
passive congestion of liver. When passive venous congestion becomes
chronic/prolonged, the liver becomes enlarged, tender and shows a
‘nutmeg appearance’ (alternating red-congested and pale-fibrotic areas).
Very rarely, prolonged, severe right—sided heart failure and hepatic
congestion cause cardiac cirrhosis.Clinical features
–   Usually dominated by the heart disease.
–   Symptoms and signs of severe right heart failure.
Diagnosis
–   Firm enlarged liver with signs of chronic liver disease in a patient with
valvular heart disease, constrictive pericarditis or chronic
corpulmonale.
–   Nonpulsatile liver despite the presence of tricuspid regurgitation.
–   Liver biopsy confirms the diagnosis (not required in most cases).
Treatment  of the underlying cardiovascular disorder.
Noncirrhotic Portal Fibrosis
Q. Write a short note on noncirrhotic portal fibrosis (NCPF).
NCPF is an idiopathic disease characterized by periportal fibrosis and
involvement of small and medium branches of portal vein.
It leads to development of portal hypertension and splenomegaly without
features of liver cell failure.
World wide it accounts for 3–5% of all patients with portal hypertension,

but in India it accounts for 15–20% of case of portal hypertension.
Etiology
Bacterial infections, exposure to toxins (arsenic, vinyl chloride monomer,
copper sulfate, methotrexate, hypervitaminosis A, 6-mercaptopurine),
immunological abnormalities and hypercoagulable states may play role.
Clinical Features
Characterized by upper GI bleed, massive splenomegaly with anemia.
Preserved liver function.
Ascites, jaundice and hepatic encephalopathy is uncommon.
Investigations
Liver function tests: Usually normal.
Peripheral blood: Pancytopenia may develop due to hypersplenism.
Doppler ultrasound: It shows patent splenoportal axis and hepatic veins.
Splenoportovenography (SPV): It reveals massive dilatation of the portal
and splenic veins, and the presence of collaterals.
Liver biopsy: Lobular architecture maintained, portal fibrosis of variable
degree, sclerosis and obliteration of small-sized portal vein radicals.
Treatment:  Endoscopic sclerotherapy or banding to prevent variceal bleed and shunt surgery.
Differences between EHPVO, NCPF and cirrhosis are presented in Table
11.48.
Table 11.48: Differences between EHPVO, NCPF and cirrhosis.
Features EHPVO NCPF Cirrhosis
Median age 10 years 28 years 40 years
Ascites Absent Absent +++
Encephalopathy Nil Nil Present
Deranged LFT Nil Nil Present
Splenomegaly Moderate- massive Moderate Mild- moderate
Abdominal vein Nil Nil Anterior abdominal
veins +
Liver–Gross Normal Normal Shrunken, nodular
Liver biopsy Normal Portal fibrosis Hepatic necrosis,

fibrosis, regenerative
nodules
Ultrasonography Portal/splenic vein
block and cavernomaDilated and patent
portal veinCoarse echotexture of
liver. Dilated portal
vein, ascites
Site of block Extrahepatic
presinusoidalIntrahepatic
presinusoidalIntrahepatic sinusoidal
and post sinusoidal
Table 11.49: Differential diagnosis of jaundice in an elderly patient.Viral hepatitis
Drug-induced hepatitis
Gallstone disease
Alcoholic hepatitis
Weil’s disease
Cirrhosis of liverNeoplastic
–   Hepatocellular carcinoma
–   Secondaries in liver
–   Carcinoma of head of pancreas
Differential diagnosis of jaundice  of 3 weeks’ duration in an elderly person
(Table 11.49).
Q. Discuss the differential diagnosis of jaundice of 3 weeks’ duration in
an elderly person.
Common Causes of Painful Hepatomegaly (Table 11.50)
Table 11.50: Common causes of painful hepatomegaly.
Hepatitis –   Amoebic liver abscess Malignancies
–   Viral hepatitis –   Pyogenic liver abscess –   Hepatocellular carcinoma
–   Drug-induced hepatitis –   Actinomycosis –   Secondaries
–   Alcoholic hepatitis –   Congestive cardiac failure  
–   Chronic hepatitis –   Acute Budd-Chiari syndrome  
Q. What are the common causes of hepatomegaly with tenderness
(tender hepatomegaly)?
Causes of Pulsatile Liver (Box 11.46)
Q. Write short note on causes of pulsatile liver.
Box 11.46:  Causes of pulsatile liver.

Tricuspid regurgitation (systolic)
Tricuspid stenosis (diastolic)
Aortic regurgitation
Causes of Splenomegaly (Table 11.51)
Q. Enumerate the common causes of splenomegaly.
Table 11.51: Classification of splenomegaly and their causes.
Mild splenomegaly (up to 5 cm)
Acute
infectionsSeptic shock, infective endocarditis, enteric fever, infectious hepatitis, infectious
monoculeosis, brucellosis, cytomegalovirus, toxoplasmosis
Chronic
infectionsTuberculosis, syphilis, brucellosis, chronic bacteremia, HIV
Parasitic
infestationsMalaria, kala-azar, and schistosomiasis
Inflammation Rheumatoid arthritis, sarcoidosis, SLE
Others Congestive cardiac failure, thalassemia minor
Moderate splenomegaly (up to umbilicus) (5–8 cm)
Neoplastic Lymphomas, acute leukemias, chronic lymphocytic leukemia, chronic myeloid
leukemia
Non-
neoplasticCirrhosis of liver (with portal hypertension), chronic hemolytic anemia, malaria, kala-
azar, sarcoidosis, infectious mononucleosis, splenic abscess, amyloidosis,
hemochromatosis, polycythemia vera
Massive splenomegaly (below umbilicus) (more than 8 cm) (Fig. 11.29)
Common
causesChronic myeloid leukemia, myelofibrosis, kala-azar, hairy cell leukemia, tropical
splenomegaly, portal hypertension (extrahepatic portal vein thrombosis),
hyperreactive malarial splenomegaly
Uncommon
causesLymphomas, Gaucher’s disease, Niemann-Pick disease, thalassemia major, splenic
cysts and tumors of spleen, myeloid metaplasia, hairy cell leukemia, sarcoidosis,
MAC infection in HIV patients

Fig. 11.29:  Massive splenomegaly in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML).
Causes of Hepatosplenomegaly (Table 11.52 and Fig. 11.30)
Table 11.52: Causes of hepatosplenomegaly.
Infections:  Malaria, kala-azar, infective hepatitis,
disseminated TB, bacterial endocarditis,
infectious mononucleosisHematological disorders:  Chronic hemolytic
anemia, chronic myeloid leukemia,
myelofibrosis, Hodgkin and Non-Hodgkin
lymphoma
Congestive states:  Congestive cardiac failure,
constrictive pericarditis, cirrhosis of liver with
portal hypertension, Budd-Chiari syndromeStorage disorders: Gaucher’s disease, glycogen
storage disorders and amyloidosis
Causes of Hepatosplenomegaly with Lymphadenopathy (Box
11.47)Box 11.47:  Causes of hepatosplenomegaly with lymphadenopathy.
Lymphomas
Infectious mononucleosis
HIV
SarcoidosisLymphocytic leukemia
Disseminated tuberculosis
Disseminated histoplasmosis

Hepatomegaly (Fig. 11.31)
Toxemia of Pregnancy and HELLP
Q. Write short note on HELLP.
The HELLP syndrome is characterized by hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes
and l ow p latelets.
Clinical features: It is a variant of preeclampsia which develops in
multiparous women.
Usually presents during 27–36 weeks of pregnancy with hypertension,
proteinuria and fluid retention. Jaundice is observed in about 5% of patients.
Investigations: Low hemoglobin level, fragmented red cells in peripheral
smear, markedly elevated serum transaminases and raised D-dimers.
Complications: Infarction and rupture of liver, disseminated intravascular
coagulation and placental abruption.
Prognosis: Maternal mortality is 1% and perinatal mortality may be 30%.
Usually prompt resolution after delivery and it may recur in subsequent
pregnancies in less than 5% of patients.
Fig. 11.30:  Causes of hepatosplenomegaly according to the associated sign.

Fig. 11.31:  Hepatomegaly according to underlying pathology.
Management  include urgent delivery and control of the complications.

Pancreas

CHAPTER
12
PANCREATITIS
Acute Pancreatitis
Q. Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations, diagnosis,
complications and management of acute pancreatitis.
Definition
Acute pancreatitis is best defined clinically by a patient presenting with two
of the three criteria listed in Box 12.1.
Box 12.1: Criteria for diagnosis of acute pancreatitis.
Symptoms: Epigastric pain, consistent with the disease.
Laboratory findings: Serum amylase or lipase three times greater than the upper limit of normal.
Radiologic imaging: Findings consistent with the diagnosis, by either computed tomography (CT)
or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
Classification of Acute Pancreatitis
Atlanta classification of acute pancreatitis
Interstitial edematous acute pancreatitis: Characterized by acute
inflammation of the pancreatic parenchyma and peripancreatic tissues, but
without tissue necrosis.
Necrotizing acute pancreatitis: Characterized by inflammation
associated with pancreatic parenchymal necrosis and/or peripancreatic
necrosis.
Classification of acute pancreatitis according to the severityMild acute pancreatitis: Not associated with organ failure and local or
systemic complications.

Moderately severe acute pancreatitis: No organ failure or transient
organ failure (<48 hours) and/or local complications.
Severe acute pancreatitis: Persistent organ failure (>48 hours) that may
involve one or multiple organs.
Box 12.2: Mnemonic for causes of pancreatitis.
I GET SMASHED
Idiopathic
Gallstones
Ethanol
Trauma
Steroid
Mumps
Autoimmune
Scorpion bite
Hyperlipidemia
ERCP
DrugsEtiology (Table 12.1) (Box 12.2)
Q. Describe etiology of acute pancreatitis.
Table 12.1: Causes of acute pancreatitis.
OBSTRUCTIVE CAUSES
Gallstones
Obstruction of the pancreatic duct system:
Ampullary or pancreatic tumors
Parasites: Ascaris lumbricoides and Clonorchis
sinensis organisms
Developmental anomalies: Pancreas divisum,
choledochocele, annular pancreasTOXINS
Ethyl alcohol
Methyl alcohol
Scorpion venom
Organophosphates
Insecticides
Smoking
DRUGS
Definite association:  Azathioprine, 6-
mercaptopurine, valproic acid, estrogens,
corticosteroids, didanosine
Probable association:  Thiazides, ethacrynic acid,
phenformin, procainamide, chlorthalidone, L-
asparaginaseMETABOLIC CAUSES
Hyperlipoproteinemia
Hypertriglyceridemia
Hyperparathyroidism
Hypercalcemia
Renal failure
Postrenal transplantation
TRAUMA
Accidental : Blunt trauma to the abdomenINFECTIOUS
Viral:  Mumps, rubella, viral hepatitis, coxsackie

Iatrogenic injury:  Postoperative, postendoscopic
retrograde cholangiopancreatography, endoscopic
sphincterotomy, sphincter of Oddi manometryvirus B, echovirus, cytomegalovirus, human
immunodeficiency virus
Bacterial:  Mycoplasma, Campylobacter jejuni,
tuberculosis, Legionella species, Leptospirosis
VASCULAR
Ischemia:  Hypoperfusion (e.g. postcardiac
surgery) or atherosclerotic emboli
Vasculitis: Systemic lupus erythematosus,
polyarteritis nodosa, malignant hypertensionIDIOPATHIC
Pancreas divisum
MISCELLANEOUS
Penetrating peptic ulcer
Pregnancy associated Reye syndromeGENETIC
Mutations in the pancreatic trypsin inhibitor
(SPINK1) gene and in the cystic fibrosis
transmembrane regulator (CFTR)
Pathogenesis (Fig. 12.1)
Autodigestion of the pancreatic substance is a currently accepted
pathogenic theory of acute pancreatitis. According to this theory, acute
pancreatitis develops as a consequence of premature and exaggerated
activation of proteolytic enzymes within the pancreas itself (e.g. trypsinogen,
chymotrypsinogen, proelastase, and lipolytic enzymes such as phospholipase
A2).Activation of pancreatic enzymes
Activation of trypsin: One of the proenzyme is trypsinogen, which is
prematurely activated to trypsin. It is an important triggering event.
Actions of trypsin are:
–   Activates other proenzymes: Trypsin converts many proenzymes into
active forms (such as proelastase and prophospholipase). Activated
enzymes elastase (from proelastase) and phospholipase
(prophospholipase) can damage the elastic fibers of blood vessels and
degrade fat cells.
–   Activation of kinin, clotting and complement system: Trypsin acts on
kinin system and converts prekallikrein to its activated form kallikrein.
This in turn can activate Hageman factor (factor XII), the clotting and
complement systems.
The severity of acute pancreatitis depends on the balance of two opposite
sets of forces, namely the activity of released proteolytic enzymes and
antiproteolytic factors. The latter consists of an intracellular pancreatic
trypsin inhibitor protein and circulating β2-macroglobulin, α 1-antitrypsin

and C1-esterase inhibitors.
Fig. 12.1:  Pathogenesis of acute pancreatitis.
Clinical Features
Q. Write short note on signs and symptoms of acute pancreatitis.
Symptoms
Abdominal pain: It is the cardinal and major symptom of acute
pancreatitis. Its characteristics are:
–   Location: Upper abdominal pain usually located in the epigastric and
periumbilical region  more on the left or right side, depending on the
portion of the pancreas is involved.
–   Onset: Sudden  onset and gradually increases in severity.
–   Nature: Constant, steady, intense (over 15–60 minutes)/dull and
boring.

♦  Pain relief is often obtained by sitting with trunk flexed and knees
drawn up.
♦ When the retroperitoneum is involved, pain often radiates to the
upper back  as well as to the chest, flanks, and lower abdomen.
Other symptoms: These include anorexia, nausea, and vomiting.
Acute pancreatitis may present as acute abdomen as a medical emergency.
Signs
Early stages
Distressed and anxious patient.
Marked epigastric tenderness and abdominal distension  (due to gastric
and intestinal hypomotility). In the early stages, rebound tenderness and
guarding are absent because the inflammation is mainly in the
retroperitoneal region.
Tachypnea due to ARDS, atelectasis and pleural effusion.
In patients with gallstones jaundice may develop due to compression of
the intrapancreatic portion of the common bile duct caused by edema of
the head of the pancreas.
Severe disease
Low grade fever, tachycardia, and hypotension  are common.
Shock with oliguria may develop due to:
–   Hypovolemia secondary to exudation of blood and plasma into the
retroperitoneal space.
–   Vasodilation and increased vascular permeability produced due to
increased formation and release of kinin peptides.
–   Systemic effects of proteolytic and lipolytic enzymes released from the
pancreas into the circulation.
Abdominal examination  may show tenderness with guarding as well as
diminished or absent bowel sounds (when paralytic ileus develops).
Respiratory system: Lungs findings include basal rales, atelectasis, and
pleural effusion.
Skin: Erythematous skin nodules due to focal subcutaneous fat necrosis
may be seen.
Purtscher retinopathy: Ischemic injury to retina may be visible on

fundus examination.
Cullen’s sign: Faint bluish discoloration (bruising) around the umbilicus
(Fig. 12.2) due to hemoperitoneum. It may be also found in association
with ruptured ectopic pregnancy, ruptured aortic aneurysm, ruptured
spleen and hepatocellular carcinoma, blunt abdominal trauma and
spontaneous bleeding secondary to coagulopathy.Grey Turner’s sign: Blue-red-purple or green-brown discoloration of the
flanks (Fig. 12.2) due to tissue catabolism of hemoglobin.
Fox’s sign: Bluish discoloration over the inguinal ligament.
Fig. 12.2: Ecchymotic discoloration in the periumbilical region (Cullen’s
sign) or along the flank (Grey Turner sign).
Laboratory Investigations
Q. Write short note on diagnosis and treatment of acute pancreatitis.
Q. Write short note on investigation (including biochemical evaluation)
in acute pancreatitis.
Blood
The diagnosis of acute pancreatitis is usually established by the finding of
raised level of serum amylase and lipase and ultrasound or CT evidence of
pancreatic swelling.
1. Serum amylase:

Levels markedly (three times the upper limit of normal) raised during
the first 24 hours and then decline to normal within 3–5 days.
Persistently elevated serum amylase levels indicate development of
complications such as pancreatic abscess or pseudocyst formation.
Amylase levels may be spuriously normal in 20% patients with
alcoholic pancreatitis and 50% patients with hypertriglyceridemia.
Peritoneal amylase is massively raised in pancreatic ascites.
Serum amylase concentrations are also elevated in other conditions
like perforated bowel, salivary gland obstruction/ infection, ruptured
ectopic pregnancy, renal failure, mesenteric infarction, etc.2. Urinary amylase: Levels may be diagnostic because they remain elevated
over a longer period of time.
3. Serum lipase:
Preferable to amylase for diagnosis as it remains elevated for a longer
period of time (8–14 days) than levels of serum amylase. It has greater
diagnostic accuracy and is a more useful indicator of acute
pancreatitis.Levels will be raised within 72 to 96 hours and takes longer time to
clear from the blood.
Marked elevation of lipase in pleural or peritoneal fluid (> 5000
IU/dL) suggests acute pancreatitis.
4. C-reactive protein level : It is useful in assessing severity and prognosis of
acute pancreatitis.
5. Other blood investigations:
Leukocytosis: Moderate to severe acute pancreatitis usually show
leukocytosis.
Hyperglycemia and glycosuria: It occurs in 10% of cases. Possibly
due to hyperglucagonemia, associated with relative hypoinsulinemia.
Hypocalcemia: It is due to precipitation of calcium soaps in necrotic
fat. Persistent hypocalcemia is a poor prognostic sign.
Other baseline investigations: These include urea and electrolytes,
liver biochemistry, LDH, triglycerides, and arterial blood gases.
Radiology
The enlarged inflamed pancreas may be directly visualized by radiography.

Plain X-ray:
–  X-ray abdomen and chest: Useful for excluding other causes of acute
abdominal pain (e.g. gastroduodenal perforation or obstruction). A
supine abdominal X-ray may reveal gallstones or pancreatic
calcification. Nonspecific signs like ‘colon cut-off sign’, ‘sentinel loop
sign’ can be seen.Abdominal ultrasound scan: Used as a screening test to evaluate
gallbladder and biliary tree (to identify gallstones, biliary obstruction or
pseudocyst formation). It may show pancreatic swelling, necrosis and
peripancreatic fluid collections. However, the pancreas may not be
visualized because of gas-filled loops of bowel.CT scan of abdomen: May show swollen pancreas (Phlegmon),
pseudocyst (Fig. 12.3) or pancreatic abscess. Helpful in assessing the
severity, the risk of morbidity and mortality and the complications of
acute pancreatitis.
Fig. 12.3:  CT image showing pseudocyst.
Contrast-enhanced CT scanning: Should be performed after 72 hours of
onset of symptoms to know the extent of pancreatic necrosis. Necrotizing
pancreatitis shows decreased pancreatic enhancement on CT, following
intravenous injection of contrast material.
It can detect complications such as fluid collections, abscess formation,
pseudocyst and involvement of the colon, blood vessels and other adjacent

structures by the inflammatory process. The presence of gas within
necrotic material suggests infection and possible abscess formation.
MRI abdomen and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography
(MRCP): Its uses are:
–   For assessing the degree of pancreatic damage/necrosis.
–   To identify gallstones within the biliary tree.
–   To differentiate between fluid and solid inflammatory masses.Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP):  Used for
removing bile duct stones in few selected cases of gallstone-related
pancreatitis.
Determining the Severity of Acute Pancreatitis
Course of acute pancreatitis: Majority of cases of acute pancreatitis are
mild and run a short, self-limiting course. About 25% develop a more
complicated course and in about 10% this may be life-threatening.The best scoring system available is: Ranson scoring system (Table
12.2).
The modified Glasgow (Box 12.3) or the Imrie criteria consists of 8
parameters and requires a 48 hour period of observation and scores 3 or
more it indicates severe pancreatitis.
Acute physiology and chronic health evaluation (APACHE) II score: It
is based on common physiological and laboratory values, adjusted for age
and the presence or absence of a number of other chronic health problems
(>8 predicts severe disease).Bedside index for severity in acute pancreatitis (BISAP), also uses the
first letter of each parameter for 1 point. The BISAP score provides a
single point for 5 parameters: blood urea nitrogen (BUN) greater than 25
mg/dL, impaired mental status, systemic inflammatory response syndrome,
age greater than 60, and/or the presence of a pleural effusion, for a
possible total of 5 points. A BISAP score greater than 3 is associated with
a seven- to twelve-fold increase in developing organ failure.Computed tomography (CT) grading system of Balthazar and CT
severity index (CTSI) is presented in Table 12.3 (Added score >5
indicates severe pancreatitis).
Box 12.3: Modified Glasgow criteria.

P  -  PaO 2 <8 kPa
A  -  Age >55-year-old
N  -  Neutrophilia: WBC >15 × 109/L
C  -  Calcium <2 mmol/L
R  -  Renal function, urea >16 mmol/L
E  -  Enzymes: LDH >600 IU/L; AST >200 IU/L
A  -  Albumin <32 g/L (serum)
S  -  Sugar: Blood glucose >10 mmol/L
Apart from the above scoring systems, individual laboratory tests have been
suggested to establish severity.These include methemalbumin, alpha-2 macroglobulin, alpha-1
antitrypsin, C3 and C4 levels, phospholipase A2, C-reactive protein,
trypsinogen-activated peptide (TAP) and granulocytic elastase.
Table 12.2: Ranson criteria for assessing severity of acute pancreatitis.
Factors Alcoholic pancreatitis Gallstone pancreatitis
1.  On admissionAge
WBC count
Blood glucose
Serum lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH)
Serum aspartate
aminotransferase (AST)>55 years
>16,000/cumm
>200 mg/dL
>350 IU/L
>250 IU/L>70 years
>18,000/cumm
>220 mg/dL
>400 IU/L
>250 IU/L
2.  Within 48 h
Hematocrit decreases
Increase of blood urea
nitrogen (BUN)
Serum calcium
PaO2
Base deficit
Fluid deficit>10%
>5 mg/dL
<8 mg/dL
60 mmHg
>4 mEq/L
>6 L–
>2 mg/dL
<8 mg/dL
–
>5 mEq/L
>4 L
Number of criteria and approximate mortality (%): 0 to 2 = 0%; 3 to 4 = 15%; 5 to 6 = 50%; >6 =
100%.
Table 12.3: Computed tomography (CT) grading system of Balthazar and
CT severity index (CTSI).

Balthazar grades
Grade A Normal pancreas consistent with mild
pancreatitis
Grade B Focal or diffuse enlargement of the gland,
including contour irregularities and
inhomogeneous attenuation but without
peripancreatic inflammation
Grade C Grade B plus peripancreatic inflammation
Grade D Grade C plus associated single fluid collection
Grade E Grade C plus two or more peripancreatic fluid
collections or gas in the pancreas or
retroperitoneum
CTSI = Balthazar grade score plus necrosis score*
Balthazar grade score: Necrosis score:
A        = 0 Absence of necrosis                           0
B        = 1 Necrosis of up to 33% of pancreas    2
C        = 2 Necrosis of 33% to 50%                    4
D        = 3 Necrosis of >50%                              6
E        = 4
*Score = morbidity [%]/mortality [%]: 0 to 3 = 8%/3%; 4 to 6 = 35%/6%; 7 to 10 = 92%/17%.Differential Diagnosis of Acute Pancreatitis (Table 12.4)
Complications of Acute Pancreatitis
Table 12.4: Differential diagnosis of acute pancreatitis.
Perforation: Peptic ulcer/intestinal
Acute cholecystitis
Acute appendicitis
Bowel ischemiaAcute myocardial infarction
Pneumonia
Abdominal aortic dissection
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Renal colic
Acute hepatitis
Q. Write short note on complications of acute pancreatitis.
Local (pancreatic) complications
Acute peripancreatic fluid collections (APFC) do not have a well-
defined wall, usually remain asymptomatic.
Pancreatic pseudocyst: It represents a localized peripancreatic collection
of pancreatic juice and debris usually developing in the lesser sac

following inflammatory rupture of the pancreatic duct. It may be palpable
in the upper abdomen four to six weeks after onset of symptoms. Small
pseudocysts are common and resolve as the pancreatitis recovers, but
those larger than 6 cm can persist causing abdominal pain and may
compress or erode surrounding structures.Pancreatic necrosis (sterile or infected): Necrosis may result in an acute
necrotic collection (ANC) that contains a variable amount of fluid and
necrosis or walled-off necrosis (WON), which consists of a mature,
encapsulated collection.Pancreatic abscess: Localized collection of pus close to the pancreas and
containing little or no pancreatic necrotic tissue.
Pancreatic ascites: May develop due to leakage of fluid from a disrupted
pancreatic duct into the peritoneal cavity.
Systemic complication are listed in Table 12.5.
Table 12.5: Complications of acute pancreatitis.
Local Systemic
Pseudocyst
Necrosis:  Sterile/infected necrosis/walled-off
necrosis
Abscess
Pancreatic ascites
Disruption of main pancreatic duct
Leaking pseudocyst
Involvement of contiguous organs by
necrotizing pancreatitis
Massive intraperitoneal hemorrhage
Thrombosis of blood vessels (splenic vein,
portal vein)
Bowel infarction
Obstructive jaundice
Abdominal compartment syndromeSystemic inflammatory response syndrome
(SIRS) due to increased vascular permeability
caused by release of cytokine, platelet
aggregating factor and kininRespiratory complications:  Pleural effusion,
hypoxia–adult respiratory distress syndrome
(ARDS) due to microthrombi in pulmonary
vessels, pneumoniaCardiovascular:  Hypotension and shock,
hypovolemia
Gastrointestinal complications: Upper
gastrointestinal bleeding due to gastric or
duodenal erosions and paralytic ileusHepatobiliary complications:  Jaundice,
common bile duct obstruction (obstructive
jaundice), splenic or portal vein thrombosis,
variceal hemorrhageRenal:  Oliguria, azotemia renal artery and/or
renal vein thrombosis, acute tubular necrosis
Metabolic:  Hyperglycemia (due to disruption
of islets of Langerhans with altered
insulin/glucagon release), hypocalcemia: due
to sequestration of calcium in fat necrosisHematological complication:  Disseminated

intravascular coagulation (DIC), Increased
factor VII or fibrinogen
Fat necrosis (subcutaneous nodules),
polyarthritis.
Retinopathy (Purtscher’s retinopathy): Sudden
blindness
Central nervous system:  Psychosis,
encephalopathy and coma
Q. Write short note on treatment of acute pancreatitis.
Management/Treatment
Steps involved (Box 12.4):
Box 12.4:  Steps involved in the treatment of acute pancreatitis.
Establishing the diagnosis and assessing the severity of acute pancreatitis
Early treatment (resuscitation)
Detection and treatment of complications
Treatment of the underlying cause (e.g. gallstones).
General supportive care
In about 85–90% of patients, acute pancreatitis is self-limited and subsides spontaneously. The initial
management of acute pancreatitis is similar, irrespective of the cause.
Intravenous (IV) fluids:  To maintain normal intravascular volume. There may be large amount of
fluid loss during early phase of acute pancreatitis.
Feeding:  Nil orally initially in severe pancreatitis. Total parenteral nutrition  may be associated
with a high risk of infection. Nasogastric/naso-jejunal administration of feed is possible in most of
the patients followed by gradual oral intake. If tolerated, enteral feeding should be started as early
as possible in patients with severe pancreatitis to decrease endotoxemia and reduce systemic
complications.Analgesia for pain:  Tramadol or other opiates are the drugs for pain control. Morphine and
diamorphine are avoided, because they may exacerbate pancreatic ductular hypertension by
causing contraction of sphincter of Oddi.
Nasogastric suction/aspiration:  Indications include (1) continuation of pain, (2) presence of
protracted vomiting or (3) obstruction observed on plain X-ray abdomen. It prevents abdominal
distension and vomiting and the risk of aspiration pneumonia.
Prophylactic antibiotics:  Carbapenems (imipenem or meropenem) or ceftazidime/cefuroxime
may reduce the incidence of infected pancreatic necrosis.
Other drugs:  Proton-pump inhibitors, glucagon, octreotide, pentoxyphylline and aprotinin
(protease inhibitor).
Anticoagulation  with a low molecular weight heparin for prevention of deep vein thrombosis
(DVT).
Management of acute pancreatitis (Flowchart 12.1).
Indications for surgery (Box 12.5).
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP)  is indicated within first 36–48
hours in severe pancreatitis associated with gallstone obstruction (particularly when complicated

by cholangitis or jaundice).
Small percentage patients develop multiorgan failure (reflecting the extent of pancreatic necrosis)
and all severe cases should be managed in a high-dependency or intensive care unit.
Flowchart 12.1:  Management of acute pancreatitis.
(APFC: acute peripancreatic fluid collections; PPC: pancreatic pseudcyst)
Chronic Pancreatitis
Q. Write short essay/note on chronic pancreatitis.
Box 12.5: Indications for surgery in acute pancreatitis.

Infected pancreatic necrosis (pancreatic abscess).
Complications: Most patients with complications such as acute peripancreatic fluid collections and
or pseudocysts do not require surgical interventions unless they become infected or cause
compression of other organs.
When there is uncertainty of diagnosis.
Cholecystectomy: It should be carried out in gallstone related pancreatitis as soon as feasible
(within 2 weeks after the resolution of acute episode). This will prevent potentially fatal/recurrent
episode of pancreatitis.
Chronic pancreatitis is defined as chronic inflammation of the pancreas
presenting as recurrent pain, characterized by the presence of permanent
and progressive morphologic or functional damage to the pancreas.
The pancreas shows irreversible damage to the exocrine pancreas in
the form of fibrosis causing exocrine deficiency (malabsorption). In the
late stages, there may be destruction of endocrine parenchyma producing
endocrine deficiency (diabetes mellitus).
Etiology (Table 12.6)
Q. Write short essay/note on causes and complications of chronic
pancreatitis.
Pathogenesis
Repeated attacks of acute pancreatitis may lead to chronic pancreatitis. Four
models have been suggested which are responsible for the development of
chronic pancreatitis.
Obstruction theory: Some etiological agents cause increase protein
concentrations, precipitation of these protein to form ductal plugs in
pancreatic juice. The ductal plugs may calcify to form calculi which
further obstruct the pancreatic ducts.Necrosis-fibrosis theory: The inflammation and scarring resulting from
bouts of acute pancreatitis cause obstruction and stasis within the duct. It
may subsequently form stones in the duct.Toxic-metabolic theory: Toxins such as alcohol and its metabolites can
cause direct toxic damage to acinar cells, and eventually fibrosis.
Oxidative stress theory: The pancreas is exposed to ‘oxidative stress’
either through the systemic circulation or through reflux of bile into the
pancreatic duct. It also results in recurrent inflammation, tissue damage
and fibrosis, and the activation of lysosomes and proenzymes.

Table 12.6: Causes of chronic pancreatitis: Tigar-O classification system.
Toxic-metabolic
Alcohol abuse ( ∼70%)
Tobacco smoking
Hypercalcemia (e.g. hyperparathyroidism)
Chronic renal failure
Idiopathic ( ∼20%)
Early/late onset
Tropical
Genetic
Hereditary pancreatitis (cationic trypsinogen mutation)
Cystic fibrosis due to cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene mutations
SPINK1 mutations
Autoimmune
Isolated autoimmune chronic pancreatitis
Part of multi-organ disorders (Sjögren’s syndrome, primary biliary cirrhosis)
Recurrent and severe acute pancreatitis
Postnecrotic (severe acute pancreatitis)
Recurrent acute pancreatitis
Obstructive
Duct obstruction (e.g. tumor)
Pancreas divisum
Stenosis of sphincter of Oddi
Clinical Features
Q. Write short note on chronic calcific pancreatitis.
Predominantly affects middle-aged alcoholic men. In southern India,
severe chronic calcific pancreatitis may develop in non-alcoholics,
probably as a result of malnutrition and cassava consumption.
Abdominal pain: Due to increased pressure within the pancreatic ducts
and direct involvement of pancreatic and peripancreatic nerves by the
inflammatory process. Pain is variable in location, severity, and frequency.
–   May be continuous or intermittent.
–   May be referred to back .
–   Pain is often increased by eating of heavy meals. This may lead to a
fear of eating with consequent weight loss.
–  No uniform relationship between pain and alcohol. Pain may be either

exacerbated by alcohol excess or may be relieved by drinking alcohol.
–   It is partially relieved on stooping and bending forwards
(Mohammedan Prayer sign).
Features of maldigestion/ malabsorption:  Manifested as chronic diarrhea,
steatorrhea, weight loss, fatigue.
Diabetes mellitus develops in about 30% of patients.
In late stages, mechanical obstruction of the common bile duct due to
fibrosed head of pancreas can produce jaundice.
Physical examination
Thin, malnourished  patient with tenderness in the epigastric region.
Investigations
Serum amylase and lipase: May be elevated but in advanced disease they
are usually normal.
Plain X-ray of abdomen (Fig. 12.4): May show diffuse calcifications in
pancreatic area (in ∼30%) and usually indicate significant damage to the
pancreas.
Transabdominal ultrasound scan: Used for initial assessment.
Contrast-enhanced spiral CT scan: Useful for a more detailed
assessment. It may show pancreatic calcification, dilated pancreatic duct,
pancreatic atrophy and dilatation/stricture of bile duct.Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP)  is the gold
standard for accurate diagnosis and demonstrates pancreatic ducts.
MRI with MRCP: Provides a direct view of the pancreatic duct and
detects more subtle abnormalities of the pancreatic duct. MRI and  MRCP
are now the diagnostic procedures of choice.
Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) is useful for specifically assessing
complications of chronic pancreatitis including pseudocyst formation and
possible development of malignancy.Pancreatic exocrine function tests:
–   Secretin/cholecystokinin (CCK) stimulation test: Collection of pure
pancreatic juice after secretin/CCK injection (gold standard but
invasive and seldom used).
–   Fecal chymotrypsin or elastase level: Abnormal in the majority of

moderate to severe chronic pancreatitis.
–   24-hour fecal fat, the Lundh test meal, oral glucose tolerance test and
pancreolauryl or PABA test.
Gene mutation analysis: In cases where the etiology is not known.
Common mutations include PRSS1, SPINK-1 and CFTR encoding genes.
Fig. 12.4:  Erect abdominal X-ray AP and lateral views showing calcific pancreatitis.
Complications of Chronic Pancreatitis
Q. Write short note on complications of chronic pancreatitis.
Pseudocyst formation, bile duct or duodenal obstruction, pancreatic ascites
or pleural effusion, splenic vein thrombosis, pseudoaneurysms, and,
pancreatic cancer are the complications of chronic pancreatitis.
TreatmentLong-term abstinence of alcohol  in patients with alcohol-related chronic pancreatitis may
benefit. Smoking cessation prevents progression.
Treatment of abdominal pain:  About 60% of patients will become pain-free after about 6–10

years.
–   Opioids (tramadol) or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAIDs). Tricyclic
antidepressants (e.g. amitriptyline) and membrane stabilizing agents (e.g. pregabalin) may also
be used for chronic pain.
–   Intractable pain  may be treated by celiac axis nerve block .
–   Surgery includes pancreatectomy and pancretojejunostomy performed for unremitting pain.
–   Endoscopic therapy is useful in painful chronic pancreatitis to drain pancreatic duct in
patients with obstructed ducts and treatment of complications (e.g. pseudocysts and bile duct
obstruction with jaundice).
Steatorrhea:
–   The steatorrhea seen in pancreatic insufficiency may be high, with up to 30 mmol of fat lost/24
h. This is treated with pancreatic enzymes supplements particularly lipase, 80,000–1,00,000
units before each meal.
–   An acid suppressor (H 2-receptor antagonist or proton pump inhibitor) to prevent
inactivation of pancreatic enzymes by gastric acid.
–   Diet rich in medium-chain triglycerides which do not require lipase for digestion may be
given.
Treatment of diabetes:  With insulin.
Tropical Pancreatitis
Q. Describe the features of tropical pancreatitis.
Juvenile form of chronic calcific pancreatitis and is not related to
alcohol  intake.
Almost exclusively observed in tropical countries. In India, it is more
common in southern states namely Kerala and Tamil Nadu.
Etiology
Exact etiology is not known and possible risk factors are listed in Box 12.6.
Box 12.6: Risk factors for tropical pancreatitis.
Malnutrition
Infections, e.g. Coxsackie and viral hepatitis
Oxidant stress
Diet rich in cassava, tapioca (contains cyanogenic glycosides)
Familial.
Clinical Features
Age and gender: Young males.
Course: Accelerated course.

Symptoms: Recurrent abdominal pain, typically in epigastric area
with radiation to back . Pain precipitated by heavy meals. Pancreatic
exocrine deficiency presents with steatorrhea and malabsorption and
endocrine deficiency presents with diabetes mellitus. Even without
insulin ketosis is uncommon and frequent episodes of hypoglycemia with
insulin are observed.
Signs: Malnutrition, enlarged parotid glands, abdominal distention and a
peculiar cyanotic hue of the lips.
Investigations
Plain X-ray and ultrasound of abdomen: Shows multiple, large intraductal
calculi.
Blood: Sugar, serum amylase, lipids, calcium need to be checked.
Treatment
Similar to chronic pancreatitis described in page 857.
Insulin for diabetes and requires a careful watch for hypoglycemia.
Differences between Alcoholic Pancreatitis and Tropical
Pancreatitis (Table 12.7)
Q. How will you differentiate tropical pancreatitis from alcoholic
pancreatitis?
Table 12.7: Differences between alcoholic pancreatitis and tropical
pancreatitis.
Characteristics Alcoholic pancreatitis Tropical pancreatitis
Age 35–45 years 20–40 years
Gender Commonly males Males > females
Steatorrhea More common Less common
Diabetes mellitus Less common More common
Intraductal calculi Less common Frequent
Development of pancreatic
malignancyLess common More common
Autoimmune Pancreatitis (AIP)/Autoimmune Chronic
Pancreatitis (ACP)

Autoimmune pancreatitis is a distinct chronic inflammatory and
sclerosing disease of the pancreas.
IgG4-related disorder: It is one of the IgG4-related disorders
characterized by a raised serum IgG4 level . Other IgG4-related disorders
are autoimmune cholangitis, Riedel’s thyroiditis, aortitis and tubulo-
interstitial nephritis. Microscopically, IgG4-related disorders show dense
lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate with many IgG4-positive plasma cells, a
mild to moderate infiltration by eosinophils and an obliterative phlebitis in
some organs, e.g. pancreas.Age and gender: It is more common in men  (2:1) and usually manifests
in middle age (>85% above the age of 50 years).
Clinical presentation: It presents with abdominal pain, weight loss or
painless obstructive jaundice (due to obstruction of the intrapancreatic
bile duct), without acute attacks of pancreatitis. Other symptoms include
vomiting, and glucose intolerance.Association with other autoimmune disease: AIP may also develop in
association with other autoimmune disorders. These disorders include
Sjögren’s syndrome, primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC), inflammatory
bowel disease, retroperitoneal fibrosis (most commonly presenting as
hydronephrosis due to entrapment of the ureter).Laboratory findings: Elevated serum immunoglobulins (IgG or IgG4),
and the presence of other autoantibodies including those directed towards
nuclear and smooth muscle antigens.Imaging: It shows diffuse enlargement of pancreas, narrowing of the
pancreatic duct and stricturing of the lower bile duct.
Treatment:  Glucocorticoid therapy usually produces rather dramatic improvement with rapid
resolution of both symptoms and radiographic abnormalities. This is the hallmark of autoimmune
pancreatitis. Some patients require azathioprine.
PANCREATIC CANCER
Pancreatic cancer is the fifth most common cause of cancer death in the
Western World.
Age and gender: Its incidence increases with age and the majority occur
in the elderly over the age of 60. Males are affected twice as often as
females.

Etiology
Risk factors: Excess intake of alcohol, cigarette smoking, high fat and
protein diet, excessive intake of coffee and tea consumption and chronic
calcific pancreatitis.
Genetic predisposition: About 5 to 10% of patients with pancreatic
cancer have a family history of the disease. FAMMM (familial atypical
multiple mole melanoma syndrome), HNPCC (hereditary nonpolyposis
colorectal cancer syndrome), hereditary pancreatitis, MEN, and Peutz-
Jeghers syndrome have an increased risk of pancreatic cancer.
PathologyDuctal adenocarcinoma accounts for 85–90% of pancreatic tumors.
Location: About 60–70% of these tumors are localized in the head of the
gland, 5–10% in the body, and 10–15% in the tail.
Spread: Local spread, lymphatic spread as well as hematogenous spread
occurs rapidly.
Clinical Features (Fig. 12.5)
Symptoms
Central abdominal pain: Pain is common symptom and is usually
incessant and gnawing, epigastric, radiate  from the upper abdomen to
the back , increasing on lying down and relieved by sitting up or bending
forwards. Weight loss, obstructive jaundice and steatorrhea are often
found. The pain results from invasion of the celiac plexus.
Others: Loss of weight and cachexia.
Symptoms depend upon the site of the tumor.
–  Carcinoma of the head of pancreas: They present early because of the
obstruction to the common bile duct by the tumor produces
obstructive jaundice (due to obstruction of bile flow), often with
severe pruritus (secondary to cholestasis). Other symptoms include
clay-colored stools with or without melena or silver stools. Obstruction
of the pancreatic duct may cause episodes of pancreatitis.
–   Carcinoma of the body and tail of the pancreas: May be silent till
quite large and widely disseminated.

Fig. 12.5: Features of carcinoma of the pancreas.
Physical Signs
General: Pallor, jaundice and weight loss may be present. Scratch marks
and erythema ab igne is seen.
Abdominal mass: A mass may be felt in the epigastrium; the liver may
be enlarged (hepatomegaly) due to biliary obstruction or secondary
involvement (hepatic metastasis).Courvoisier’s law: A distended non-tender gallbladder may be palpable
in a jaundiced patient due to distal biliary obstruction by a pancreatic
cancer.Due to spread of tumor:
–  With peritoneal involvement and ascites, shifting dullness and fluid

thrill can be elicited. On per rectal examination, nodules (Blumer’s
shelf) or peritoneal fluid may be felt.
–   Involvement of the left supraclavicular node (Virchow’s node) and
umbilicus (Sister Mary Joseph’s node) indicates advanced
carcinoma.
Other presenting physical signs: Migratory thrombophlebitis–recurrent
venous thrombosis (Trousseau sign), diabetes, polyarthritis, paraneoplastic
syndromes (Cushing syndrome), skin nodules (secondary to localized fat
necrosis and associated inflammation) and hypercalcemia may be seen in
some cases.
InvestigationsBlood: It may show anemia. Liver function tests may show features of
obstructive jaundice with elevated alkaline phosphatase. Urobilinogen is
absent in urine whereas bile salts and bile pigments are evident. Occult
blood may be present in stool.Radiology: Barium meal  shows widening of the ‘C’ loop (pad sign) and
reverse ‘3’ sign in periampullary carcinoma. Hypotonic duodenography
reveals a ‘rose thorn’ appearance. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiography
increases the diagnostic yield; USG and CT scan are helpful in localizing
the tumor.Ultrasound, contrast CT and ERCP yield in localization of tumor,
assessing the spread as well as operability, guided biopsy/cytology helps
to confirm diagnosis.Tumor markers: Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and CA-19-9 (high
sensitivity (80%) but a high false-positive rate).
Prognosis
Overall survival is about 3–5%, with median survival of 6–10 months for
locally advanced cancer and 3–5 months for those with metastases.
Treatment
Surgical resection:  It is the only method of effecting cure. Resectable tumors in the head and
periampullary region are removed by Whipple’s pancreaticoduodenectomy or its modifications.
Chemotherapy:  For inoperable cases chemotherapy with gemcitabine, capecitabine, nab-
paclitaxel, cisplatin, docetaxel, oxaliplatin, irinotecan, 5- fluorouracil, mitomycin, streptozotocin
and high-dose methotrexate, alone or in combination, may be beneficial. Tyrosine kinase
inhibitors of EGFR (e.g. erlotinib) and monoclonal antibodies cetuximab is under trials.
Radiotherapy may be supportive.

Palliative treatment:
–  Pain:  Palliation for pain may be achieved with either analgesic nerve blocks (coeliac axis
block/neurolysis, percutaneous cordotomy) or with duct drainage (pancreaticogastric
anastomosis).
–   Jaundice can be relieved by choledochojejunostomy or percutaneous/endoscopic stenting–
endoprostheses (elderly and with very advanced disease).
ENDOCRINE TUMORS OF PANCREAS
Insulinoma (Beta Cell Tumor)
Most common  of endocrine tumors; 10% are malignant and produce
pronounced hypoglycemia.
Clinical Features
Higher incidence in women .
Whipple’s triad (Box 12.7) .
Box 12.7: Whipple’s triad.
Attack of hypoglycemia (mental confusion, weakness, fatigue and convulsions) while fasting.
Neuroglycopenic symptoms (anxiety, nervousness, dizziness and confusion) may develop during
fasting. In some psychoses, seizures related to hypoglycemia and weight gain is seen.
Blood sugar <50 mg/dL during an attack.
Relief of symptoms by administration of glucose.
Diagnosis
Fasting blood levels of insulin and glucose:
Inappropriately elevated serum level of insulin (>54 u/mL) for the level
of glucose establishes the diagnosis.
Blood insulin-to-glucose ratio of >0.4 is diagnostic .
Blood fasting C-peptide level  of >1.7 mg/mL is a good indicator.
Proinsulin level  is elevated and is used as a tumor marker.
Suppression and stimulation (tolbutamide, calcium, glucogon) tests may
be performed.
Radiology
Selective angiography is best investigation, with few false positive
results.

USG  is positive in 20–40% of cases.
CT with intravenous contrast shows a dense blush.
MRI: Bright spots are seen on T2 weighted images. In the presence of
somatostatin receptors, octreotide scan may be useful. Portal venous
sampling has 75% accuracy.
Calcium angiography: It can determine the location of insulinoma
whereas endoscopic USG has 80% positivity.
Treatment
Aim:  To localize and remove the tumor safely.
Hypoglycemia can be managed medically (by using diazoxide, octreotide, lanreatide).
Surgery:
–   If tumor is small  and in the head : Removed by enucleation.
–   If in the body or tail : Remove it either by enucleation  or by distal  (subtotal) pancreatectomy.
–   If the tumor is malignant and is operable: Resection .
For metastasis  (liver, adjacent lymph nodes):
–   Hepatic artery embolization, RFA and cryoablation or radioembolization.
–   Streptozotocin, chlorozocin, 5-FU, either alone or in combination.
Gastrinoma (Delta Cell Tumor)
(Synonym: Zollinger-Ellison syndrome)
Second most common islet cell tumor (0.1–0.4/million population/year),
but with MEN I it is the most common functional pancreatic neoplasm;
20% of ZES have MEN I.
Q. Write short essay/note on etiology, clinical features and treatment of
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome.
Pathology
Sites: Most commonly in the pancreas, less commonly in the duodenum
(23%), rarely in the gastric antrum.
Effects: It produces excessive gastrin.
Characteristics:
–   Often solitary and malignant.
–   When occurs as part of MEN I, they are multiple and less
malignant.
–   Duodenal gastrinomas are less malignant than pancreatic tumors. They

are slow growing even in the presence of metastasis.
Clinical Features
More frequent in middle-aged men . With MEN I, the symptoms occur
earlier (3rd decade).
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome is characterized by hyperacidity and non-
healing ulcers (gastric, duodenal, jejunal, or in atypical locations).
Epigastric pain with duodenal ulcer is seen in 90% of cases; 1/3rd have
diarrhea, and weight loss is common (40% of cases). Esophagitis,
dysphagia (30%), stricture and perforation may occur.
Diagnosis
ZES: About 30–40% do not have evidence of peptic ulcer disease and
40% have duodenal instead of pancreatic tumor.
Gastric acid hypersecretion (basal acid output >15 mEq/L) and elevated
fasting gastrin (> 100 pg/mL) are suggestive. Provocative tests using
secretin, calcium or gastrin may be used.
Immunohistochemistry: Demonstration of gastrin in neoplastic cells by
immunoperoxidase is confirmatory.
Tumor localization: Using ultrasound, CT scan and endoscopic USG.
–  Selective angiography is best for primary and metastatic gastrinomas
(40–60% accuracy) and with secretin stimulation, the accuracy
increases to 70%.
–   Portal venous sampling for gastrin.
Treatment
Medical
Control acid secretion  using H 2 blockers. Dose: 2 grams ranitidine, 0.3 g famotidine or 80 mg
omeprazole/pantoprazole per day. Parenteral ranitidine may be used.
Surgery
Accurately identification of duodenal or pancreatic tumor by inspection, palpation and if
needed by intraoperative USG or transillumination duodenotomy.
Surgical management
–   Excision, gastrectomy, enucleation based on tumor size, number and location.
Patients with MEN I having gastrinoma:
–   Surgery is not indicated .
–  Four-gland parathyroidectomy with autografts is the initial procedure of choice to control
hyperparathyroidism. Gastric acid hypersecretion is controlled as in sporadic gastrinoma

(mentioned above).
–   If liver metastasis is present and resectable: Resection.
–   Chemotherapy: Doxorubicin, 5-FU, streptozotocin shows 40% response. Interferon and
octreotide may also be used.
Glucagonoma (Alpha Cell Tumor)
Rare α-cell tumor.
Clinical Features
Functional tumors: They produce the glucagonoma syndrome comprising
abnormal glucose tolerance test, normocytic normochromic anemia,
necrolytic migratory erythema (pathognomonic), red tongue, angular
stomatitis, weight loss, tendency to develop infection, and depression.Elevated fasting plasma glucagon >500 pg/mL is diagnostic.
Treatment:  Preoperative control of diabetes, treatment of venous thrombosis and correction of
nutritional status with total parenteral nutrition. Surgical resection is done after localizing the tumor.
Somatostatinoma (Delta Cell Tumor)
Rare malignant D cell tumors of the pancreas and 30% occur in the
duodenum and small bowel. They affects both the sexes equally, with
approximate age of 50 years. They cause diabetes mellitus, gallstones and
diarrhea/steatorrhea.
Diagnosis: High fasting serum somatostatin levels.
Treatment:  Octreotide therapy may be tried and the tumor surgically resected after localization.
Cholecystectomy may be required for cholelithiasis.
VIPoma (WDHA Syndrome; Verner-Morrison Syndrome;
Pancreatic Cholera)Endocrine pancreatic tumor producing vasoactive intestinal polypeptide
(VIP).
Symptoms: Severe secretory diarrhea secondary to the stimulation of
adenyl cyclase within the enterocyte (Verner–Morrison syndrome). Large-
volume diarrhea (>3 L/day), hypokalemia, and hypo- or achlorhydria form
part of the syndrome; hence the term Watery Diarrhea, Hypokalemia,
Achlorhydria (WDHA) syndrome.

Diagnosis: Presence of severe secretory diarrhea, detection of elevated
fasting levels of plasma VIP (>250 pg/mL) and localization of pancreatic islet
cell tumor.
Treatment
Correction of dehydration, hypokalemia and other metabolic abnormalities.
Octreotide may be tried for symptomatic relief.
Surgical removal of the tumor.
For unresectable and metastatic tumors chemotherapy with 5-FU and streptozotocin. Interferon
has also been used. Palliative debulking for incurable and metastatic tumors.

Kidney

CHAPTER
13
FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY OF KIDNEY
Q. Describe the nephron with the help of a diagram. What are the
functions of the kidney?
Unit of Kidney
The nephron is the structural and functional unit of the kidney. It consists
of the glomerulus and its tubule, and the common collecting system. Each
kidney consists of about 1 million nephrons. Different components of a
nephron are shown in Figure 13.1.
Functions of KidneyExcretion  of many metabolic breakdown products (including ammonia, urea and creatinine from
protein, and uric acid from nucleic acids), drugs and toxins.
Regulation of water and electrolyte balance
Maintenance of acid-base balance
Reabsorption  of essential substances
Secretion of hormones like erythropoietin and renin
Metabolism of vitamin D
Regulation of blood pressure

Fig. 13.1:  Different components of the nephron.
Juxtaglomerular Apparatus
Q. Write a short note on the juxtaglomerular apparatus.
Components of juxtaglomerular apparatus (Fig. 13.2): It consists of (1)
macula densa, (2) the extraglomerular mesangium and (3) the terminal
portion of the afferent glomerular arteriole (contains renin-producing granular
cells) and (4) the proximal portion of the efferent arteriole.


Fig. 13.2:  Diagrammatic representation of glomerulus and juxtaglomerular apparatus.
1.  Macula densa: The afferent arterioles and the thick ascending limb of
loop of Henle are in contact for a short distance. The macula densa is a
plaque of tall and columnar cells within this thick ascending limb of the
loop of Henle and contains large, tightly packed cell nuclei (hence termed
macula densa). This anatomical arrangement allows changes in the renal
tubule to influence the behavior of the adjacent glomerulus
(tubuloglomerular feedback).2.  Extraglomerular mesangium.
3.  Terminal portion of the afferent glomerular arteriole: Shows
thickening due to specialized myoepithelioid cells (juxtaglomerular cells)
that contain large secretory granules of renin.
4.  Proximal portion of the efferent arteriole.
Fig. 13.3:  Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system.
Renin
Renin is secreted and stored in the juxtaglomerular cells.
Factors controlling release of renin
Pressure changes in the afferent arteriole
Sympathetic tone
Sodium, chloride and osmotic concentration of the fluid in the distal convoluted tubule at the
macula densa

Local prostaglandin and nitric oxide release.
Mechanism of action of renin
Renin  acts on angiotensinogen in the blood and converts angiotensinogen to angiotensin I.
Angiotensin I (decapeptide) is converted to angiotensin II (octapeptide) by Angiotensin
Converting Enzyme (ACE), which is present in the lung, luminal border of endothelial cells,
glomeruli and other organs.
Angiotensin II has two major systemic effects: Systemic vasoconstriction  and sodium and
water retention  by release of aldosterone from the adrenal cortex.
Aldosterone produces constriction of the efferent arteriole of the glomerulus and thereby increases
glomerular filtration pressure.
Consequences of renin action
By above mentioned mechanisms, the kidneys ‘defend’ circulating blood volume, blood
pressure and glomerular filtration during circulatory shock .
However, the same mechanisms can lead to systemic hypertension in renal ischemia.
Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system is presented in Figure 13.3.
APPROACH TO RENAL DISEASES
Azotemia
Definition: It is a biochemical abnormality characterized by an elevation o f
the blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine levels. It is mainly due to a
decreased glomerular filtration rate (GFR).
Causes: Azotemia can be divided into prerenal, renal and postrenal.
Glomerular Filtration Rate
Measurement of the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) is required to know
the exact level of renal function. It is necessary to calculate GFR when the
serum (plasma) urea or creatinine is within the normal range.
GFR for an average adult is about 125 mL/minute. Formula for calculation
of GFR is presented in Table 13.1.
The most common methods utilized to estimate the GFR are: measurement
of the creatinine clearance; and estimation equations based upon serum
creatinine such as the Cockcroft-Gault equation, the Modification of Diet
in Renal Disease (MDRD) study equations.
Measurement
Renal clearance 
C = Renal clearance, U = Urinary concentration of any substance, P = Plasma

concentration of the same substance, V = Minute volume of urine.
Inulin Clearance
It is the gold standard but is not practical .
Inulin is a polysaccharide that passes freely through the glomerular
capillary wall . It is neither absorbed nor excreted by the tubules and
hence, the quantity of inulin excreted in urine (UV) is identical to the
amount filtered by the glomeruli. Therefore, the renal clearance of inulin
can be used to measure GFR.
Creatinine Clearance
Q. Write short note on creatinine clearance and mention the formula
for its calculation.
The measurement of creatinine clearance, which approximates to that of
inulin is the most commonly used for measurement of GFR.
Principle: Creatinine clearance is based on the fact that daily production
of creatinine (mainly from muscle cells) is remarkably constant and
little affected by protein intake. Thus, serum creatinine and urinary output
vary very little throughout the day and renal creatinine clearance given an
estimate of the glomerular function of the kidney.Cockroft-Gault equation: If serum creatinine level is stable, creatinine
clearance (hence GFR) can also be calculated by using the Cockroft-Gault
formula (Table 13.1):
Table 13.1: Formulas used to estimate eGFR/Creatinine clearance (Cr.Cl).
MDRDGFR = 186 × Serum Cr–1.154 × age–0.203 ×
1.212 (if patient is black) × 0.742 (if female)
Cockroft-Gault CrCl = [(140 – age) × TBW] / (S.cr × 72) (× 0.85
for females)
The Schwartz Equation: It is a simple bedside formula to estimate glomerular filtration rate (GFR) in
children
Cystatin C

Cystatin C is filtered at the glomerulus and not reabsorbed. The serum
cystatin C concentration may correlate more closely with the GFR than the
serum creatinine concentration.
Renal Function Tests (Table 13.2)
Table 13.2: Renal function tests.
Functional integrity Test/s performed
Glomerular functionGFR: Inulin clearance, creatinine clearance,
serum urea and creatinine, serum electrolytes,
uric acid, serum osmolality
Renal blood flow Proteinuria (albumin), para-amino hippuric
acid excretion test
Tubular function Urine osmolality, concentration and dilution
test
Urine electrolytes, e.g. Na, K, Ca, phosphate,
uric acid
Urine HCO 3, ammonia, pH after acid loading
Structural integrity
Plain X-ray KUB (kidney, ureter, bladder) Antegrade and retrograde pyelography
Ultrasound Renal arteriography
IVP (intravenous pyelogram) CT scan, CT urogram, MRI
Renal scan Kidney biopsy
Ultrasonography
Q. Write short essay/note on the role of ultrasonography in the
diagnosis and management of renal diseases.
Ultrasonography has the advantage over X-ray techniques of avoiding
ionizing radiation and intravascular contrast medium. In renal diseases it is
the method of choice for the diagnosis of:
Assessing the renal size and for guiding renal biopsy or other
interventional procedures.
To demonstrate pelvicalyceal dilatation  as an indication of renal
obstruction when chronic renal obstruction is suspected (in suspected
acute ureteric obstruction either intravenous urography or unenhanced
spiral CT are the methods of choice).

To distinguish solid from cystic renal masses.
Diagnosis of polycystic kidney disease.
In malignant renal tumors, it can provide additional information
regarding extension of the tumor to renal veins, vena cava, lymph nodes or
liver.
To detect intrarenal and/or perinephric fluid  (e.g. pus, blood).
To assess size of the prostate and bladder capacity.
Examination of the Urine
Q. Write short essay on routine examination of urine.
Physical Examination
Appearance
Q. Write short note on causes of red colored urine.
Normal  urine is straw to amber colored  due to the presence of
urochrome pigment, excretion of which is generally proportional to the
metabolic rate.
Urine color interpretation (Table 13.3).
Table 13.3: Interpretation of urine color.
Color Interpretation
Straw yellow Normal
Deep yellow Concentrated urine, jaundice
Red urine Hematuria, hemoglobinuria, myoglobinuria,
porphyria, beet root ingestion, drugs (e.g.
rifampicin, pyridium)
Cloudy Infection
Milky Chyluria, pyuria, phosphaturia
Dark on standing Porphyria, alkaptonuria (presence of
homogentisic acid)
Volume
A healthy adult excretes about 600 to 2000 mL of urine in 24 hours. Volume
is measured by collecting 24-hour urine samples in a measuring cylinder.

Q. Write short note on oliguria and anuria.
Oliguria: Decreased production of urine usually <300 mL  of urine per
day 0.5 mL/kg/h (in an adult of average size). On an average diet, about
300 to 500 mL urine/day is required to excrete the solute load at maximum
concentration.
–  Causes of oliguria (Table 13.4).
Anuria: Anuria (no urine) refers to (almost) total absence of urine (<100
mL/day). Anuria more commonly suggests reduced production of urine or
obstruction to urine flow from both kidneys (until proved otherwise).
Bladder outflow obstruction must always be considered first.
–  Causes of anuria (Box 13.1)
Table 13.4: Causes of oliguria.
Non-renal conditions Renal diseasesExcess loss of fluid Acute glomerulonephritis
Hypovolemia Nephrotic syndrome
Shock Acute tubular necrosis (ATN)
Congestive heart failure Acute interstitial nephritis
Cirrhosis Obstructive nephropathy
Pancreatitis, sepsis  
Peritonitis  
Q. Write short note on polyuria and its causes.
Polyuria: Polyuria is defined as persistent large increase in urine
volume of >3 L/day. This term should exclude normal individuals who
take large amount of fluid and therefore, form large volumes of urine.
Polyuria may be either due to (1) increased urinary solute excretion
(osmotic/solute diuresis) or (2) pure water diuresis.
–  Causes of polyuria (Box 13.2).
Box 13.1: Causes of anuria.
Obstruction:
Bilateral ureteric obstruction
Prostatic or urethral obstruction
Renal stones

Tumors
Renal ischemia:  Bilateral renal arterial or venous occlusion
All causes of oliguria can lead to anuria.
Box 13.2: Causes of polyuria.
1. Pathological polyuria:
Increased excretion of solute (osmotic diuresis): Hyperglycemia, administration of mannitol,
hypercalcemia
Defective renal concentrating ability: Diabetes insipidus, papillary necrosis, diuretic phase of
ATN
Failure of production of ADH: Idiopathic (50%), mass lesion, trauma, infection
Drugs/toxins: Diuretics, lithium, alcohol
2. Primary (or psychogenic) polydipsia: Excess fluid intake
Specific gravity and osmolality
Urine specific gravity is used as a measure of the concentrating power of the
kidney. It is a measure of the weight of dissolved particles in urine. Urine
osmolality reflects the number of dissolved particles.
Normal specific gravity of a 24-hour urine sample is 1.003 to 1.035, average
being 1.016.
Use:
Specific gravity provides information about the renal status and hydration.
It is used only in the differential diagnosis of oliguric renal failure or the
investigation of polyuria or inappropriate ADH secretion.
Fixed specific gravity: When specific gravity is fixed  at 1.010, this is
known as isosthenuria. It is indicative of severe renal damage (chronic
renal failure/chronic kidney disease) or acute tubular necrosis with
disturbance of both the concentrating and diluting abilities of the kidney.
Urinary pH
Normal urine is usually acidic with pH varying from 4.6 to 8. Measurement
of urinary pH is not necessary except in the investigation and treatment of
renal tubular acidosis.
Chemical Examination
Urine should be examined for the presence of protein, blood and sugar in all
patients suspected of having renal disease.

Proteinuria
Q. Write short note on proteinuria and microalbuminuria and their
causes.
Healthy adults may daily excrete <150 mg of total proteins and <30 mg/d
of albumin.
Proteinuria is defined as the urinary excretion of >150 mg o f
protein/day. It is one of the most common signs of renal disease. Pyrexia,
exercise and adoption of the upright posture (postural proteinuria) may
also increase urinary protein output. Algorithm approach to proteinuria is
presented in Flowchart 13.1.Amount of pathological proteinuria: It may be ‘mild’ (<1.0 g/day),
‘moderate’ (1.0-3.5 g/day) or ‘massive’/‘heavy’(>3.5 g/day).
Flowchart 13.1:  Algorithm approach to proteinuria.

(UPEP: urine protein electrophoresis)
Microalbuminuria
Normal urine contains <30 mg of albumin/day (<20 μg of albumin per
minute).
Definition: Microalbuminuria is the presence of albumin (small
amounts) in urine about >30 to <300 mg/day. It is defined as the

persistent elevation of the urinary albumin excretion of 30–200 mg/L (or
20–200 mg/min) in an early morning urine sample. It indicates early and
possibly reversible glomerular damage.
It is so named because conventional dipsticks cannot detect albumin levels
of 30 to 300 mg/day (if urine volume is normal). An increase in albumin
excretion between these two levels so-called microalbuminuria.
Significance: The presence of albumin in the urine is a sign of glomerular
abnormality.
–   Diabetes mellitus:
♦   Microalbuminuria is an early indicator of diabetic glomerular
disease. It is widely used as a predictor of the development of
nephropathy in diabetics (Raised fractional excretion of magnesium
is a more sensitive marker than microalbuminuria in detecting early
diabetic nephropathy).
♦   In diabetic patients presence of microalbuminuria is associated with
increased cardiovascular mortality.
–   Essential hypertension: In hypertensive patients, microalbuminuria
predicts cardiovascular morbidity and mortality.
–   Normotensive individuals:
♦   Risk marker for the presence of cardiovascular disease predicts
progression of nephropathy when it increases to frank
albuminuria (>300 mg/day).
♦   Atherosclerosis: Persistent microalbuminuria is also associated
with an increased risk of atherosclerosis and cardiovascular
mortality.
TreatmentMicroalbuminuria can be reduced, and its progress to overt proteinuria can be prevented or
retarded by aggressive reduction of blood pressure (especially with ACE inhibitors or
angiotensin receptor blockers), and control of diabetes mellitus.
Blood pressure should be maintained at or below 130/80 mm Hg in patients with diabetes or
kidney disease.
Albumin: Creatinine Ratio
Measurement of 24-hour urinary excretion rates provides the most precise
measure of microalbuminuria. However, it is often difficult to obtain 24-hour
urine, it is more convenient to measure urinary albumin: creatinine ratio in a

random urine sample and generally albumin: creatinine ratio (ACR) of 2.5
to 20 corresponds to albuminuria of 30–300 mg daily respectively (Table
13.5).
Tamm-Horsfall Mucoprotein (Uromodulin)
Q. Write short note on Tamm-Horsfall mucoprotein.
It is a protein present in normal urine produced in the thick ascending
limb of the loop of Henle. It is excreted at a rate of 25 mg/day.
Function is not known. Probably it may have some immunomodulatory
activity and may protect against urinary tract infection (UTI).
It is a constituent of all types of urinary casts. It is involved in the
pathogenesis of cast nephropathy (observed in renal failure associated
with multiple myeloma) in which intratubular casts occlude the flow or
urine.
Hematuria
Q. Enumerate the common causes of hematuria/the causes of painless
hematuria. How will you clinically localize evaluate the site of
bleeding?
Hematuria may be visible on gross examination and reported by the
patient as bloody urine (macroscopic/ overt hematuria), or invisible and
detected on dipstick/chemical testing of urine (microscopic hematuria—
three or more red blood cells per high-power field).Site of bleeding: Bleeding may occur at any site within the urinary tract
and common causes of hematuria are illustrated in Figure 13.4. Features
that may help to localize the site of bleeding in the urinary tract are
mentioned in Table 13.6.

Fig. 13.4:  Sites and common causes of bleeding from the urinary tract.
Table 13.5: Classification of proteinuria based on albumin-creatinine ratio
(ACR).
Category Albumin creatinine ratio
mg/gAlbumin creatinine ratio
mg/mmol
Normal <30 <2.5
Microalbuminuria 30–300 2.5–25
Clinical albuminuria >300 > 25
Nephrotic >3000 >250
Table 13.6: Probable site of bleeding and its features.
Probable site of bleeding Suggestive features
Urethra Blood is seen at the start of voiding and then the
urine becomes clear
Urinary bladder or above Blood diffusely present throughout the urine

Glomerular origin Cola colored urine
Red-cell casts (glomerulonephritis)
Dysmorphic erythrocytes (irregular outer cell
membrane)
Acanthocytes (erythrocytes with one or more
membrane protrusions of variable size and
shape)
Renal pelvis and lower urinary tract Pink or red colored urine
Prostate or bladder base Blood only at the end of micturition
Lower urinary tract origin Isomorphic erythrocytes in urine
Microscopic clots of clumped erythrocytes in
urine
Table 13.7: Various causes of painless hematuria.
Site of hematuria Causes
KidneyGlomerulonephritis, IgA nephropathy
Pyelonephritis: Severe acute pyelonephritis,
papillary necrosis (more common in diabetes
mellitus and sickle cell trait or disease)Tumors: Renal cell carcinoma
Others: Infective endocarditis, renal
tuberculosis, benign familial hematuria,
microscopic polyangiitis, Wegener’s
granulomatosis
Ureter Neoplasms
Bladder Neoplasms, trauma, schistosomiasis
Prostate Prostatitis, neoplasms
Urethra Trauma
Causes of Painless Hematuria (Table 13.7)
Patient’s Evaluation of Hematuria
Physical examination (Box 13.3)
Box 13.3:  Physical examination required in the evaluation of hematuria.Blood pressure
Cardiovascular examination
Abdominal examination
Prostatic evaluation.
Investigations
Urine examination:

–   Proteinuria
–   Culture of urine for acid fast bacilli
–   Microscopy:
♦   Morphology of RBC (assessed by phase contrast microscopy of fresh urine)
♦   Urine cytology:  For malignant cells especially in patients with risk factors such as smoking,
analgesic abuse, industrial toxin exposure (e.g. aniline, benzidine, aromatic amines), age
>50 years, pelvic irradiation, urinary schistosomiasis.Renal function tests
Blood:
–   Platelet count
–   Coagulation studies
–   Autoantibodies (ANA, ANCA)
Radiological investigations:
–   Ultrasound for kidneys, ureters, bladder and prostate, CT, MRI
–   Intravenous pyelography
Cystourethroscopy.
Glycosuria
Blood glucose level varies between 70 to 120 mg/dL. This may increase to
120 to 160 mg/dL after a meal. Normally, all the glucose in the blood is
filtered through the glomerulus and reabsorbed at the proximal tubules.
If the renal threshold (the lowest blood glucose level that will result in
glycosuria) is exceeded (usually >180 to 200 mg/dL), the excess glucose
will not be reabsorbed into the blood and will be eliminated in the urine as
in cases of diabetes mellitus. The presence of detectable amounts of
glucose in urine is termed glycosuria (for details refer page 84 and Box
3.3).
Bacteriuria
Dipstick tests used for detection of bacteriuria detect nitrite produced from
the reduction of urinary nitrate by bacteria. It is also for the detection of
leucocyte esterase, an enzyme specific for neutrophils.
Microscopy
Microscopic examination of urine should be done in all patients suspected of
having renal disease, on a ‘clean’ midstream sample.
Cells
They are expressed as number of cells per low power or high power field.
Red blood cells (RBCs): Presence of RBCs (more than 3/hpf) in the urine

indicates bleeding at any point in the urinary system from the glomerulus
to the urethra. In glomerular diseases, the urine show red cells with
cellular protrusions or fragmentation and are named as dysmorphic
(distorted morphology) red blood cells.
White blood cells: Increased number of WBCs (mainly neutrophils more
than 5/hpf) in urine is known as pyuria. It is indicative of an inflammatory
reaction within urinary tract such as urinary tract infection (UTI), stones,
tubulointerstitial nephritis, papillary necrosis, tuberculosis and interstitial
cystitis. The causative organism of infection may be identified by
bacteriological examination. When accompanied by leukocyte casts or
mixed leukocyte–epithelial cell casts, increased urinary leukocytes are
considered to be of renal origin.
CastsQ. Write short note on urinary casts.
Casts are one of the organized elements which are formed only in the
kidney and are indicative of a renal disease. They are cylindrical bodies,
moulded in the shape of the distal tubular lumen formed by solidification of
Tamm Horsfall protein, a glycoprotein secreted in the distal convoluted
tubules and collecting tubules. These proteins form a fibrillar meshwork
(basic matrix) and can trap any elements including cells, cell fragments or
granular material.
Types of urinary casts and their significance (Fig. 13.5)
Crystals (Figs. 13.6A to C)
They may be found in patients with renal calculi. Calcium oxalate and urate
crystals can be found in normal urine that has been left to stand.
ACUTE KIDNEY INJURY (ACUTE RENAL
FAILURE)Q. Discuss the classification, causes, pathogenesis, clinical features,
diagnosis, investigations and management of acute renal failure.
Q. Write short essay/note on acute kidney injury.

Renal failure is the failure of renal excretory function due to reduced
glomerular filtration rate. Acute kidney injury (AKI) was previously known
as acute renal failure (ARF). The other term used for this is azotemia.
Definition
AKI is a clinical syndrome, defined as a abrupt, deterioration of kidney
function , which is usually, but not invariably, reversible over a period of
days or rarely over a few weeks. The deterioration in renal function is
sufficiently severe to result in retention of nitrogenous wastes in the body
(uremia) and other waste products normally cleared by the kidneys.It is usually but not invariably accompanied by oliguria.
Conventionally the term ARF is often used in reference to the subset of
patients with a need for acute dialysis support.
Classification of AKI
Acute kidney injury is a medical emergency. It may produce sudden, life-
threatening biochemical disturbances. AKI includes an increase in serum
creatinine by ≥0.3 mg/dL (27 micromol/L) within 48 hours or an increase
to ≥1.5 times the presumed baseline value that is known or presumed to
have occurred within the prior seven days, or a decrease in urine volume to
<3 mL/kg over six hours (Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes
[KDIGO]-AKI).

Fig. 13.5:  Urinary casts and their significance.
Fig. 13.6A:  Normal crystals found in acidic urine.

Fig. 13.6B: Normal crystals found in alkaline urine.
Fig. 13.6C: Abnormal crystals found in urine.

Table 13.8: RIFLE criteria for classification of acute kidney injury.
Grade GFR criteria Urine output criteria
Risk (Stage 1) Increased serum creatinine x 1.5 times
within 48 hoursUrine output <0.5
mL/kg/hour x 6 hours
Injury (Stage 2) Increased serum creatinine x 2 to 3
timesUrine output <0.5
mL/kg/hour x 12 hours
Failure (Stage 3) Increased serum creatinine x 3 times or
serum creatinine (acute rise of = 0.5
mg/dL)Urine output <0.3
mL/kg/hour x 24 hours OR
Anuria for 12 hours
OR
Initiation of renal
replacement therapy
Loss Persistent AKI = complete loss of
renal function >4 weeks
End-stage kidney disease Persistent renal failure >3 months
RIFLE Criteria (Table 13.8)The distinction between acute and CKD or acute on chronic kidney
disease, cannot easily be done in case of uremia. Acute Dialysis Quality
Initiative group proposed the RIFLE  (Risk, Injury, Failure, Loss,
Endstage renal disease) criteria to classify AKI.
These criteria indicate an increasing degree of renal damage are of
predictive value for mortality.
Acute Kidney Injury Network (AKIN) Classification
AKIN has proposed a modification of the RIFLE criteria. It includes less
severe AKI, a time constraint of 48 hours, and gives a correction for volume
status before classification. According to this, AKI is classified into three
stages.Stage 1 is same as Risk category of RIFLE with addition of increase in
serum creatinine by 0.3 mg/dL within 48 hours.
Stages 2 and 3 are same as Injury and Failure categories of RIFLE .
Etiopathogenesis
Causes
Q. Write short essay/note on causes of acute renal failure/acute kidney
injury.

At rest normal kidney receives about 25% of the cardiac output. The etiology
of AKI is diverse.
Classification (Table 13.9 and Fig. 13.7)
Q. Define and enumerate the causes of acute kidney injury/azotemia.
Causes of AKI are traditionally divided into three broad anatomical
categories: Prerenal, intrarenal (intrinsic renal parenchymal disease), and
postrenal causes. Most common cause is ATN followed by prerenal causes.
Prerenal causes:
–   Precipitating event is renal hypoperfusion which may be due to
reduction in the volume of extracellular fluid or disease states
associated with decreased effective arterial volume or other causes.
–   Kidneys are inadequately perfused and the GFR is markedly reduced
and produces oliguria (urine output <400 mL/day).
Renal causes:
–   Intrinsic diseases of kidney causing AKI are classified according to
the primary histologic site of injury: Tubules, interstitium,
vasculature, or glomerulus.
–   Renal tubular epithelial cell injury, commonly known as acute
tubular necrosis (ATN) and occurs more commonly due to ischemia
of any cause, but can also be damaged by specific renal toxins. ATN
results in ischemia and necrosis of the tubular epithelial cells.
However, when the causative factors are removed the tubular cells can
regenerate.Postrenal causes: These include obstruction of the urinary tract at any
point in its course from the tubule to the urethra.
Table 13.9: Classification of causes of acute kidney injury.
Prerenal causes Renal causes Postrenal causes
Systemic
Hypovolemia:  Hemorrhage, severe
vomiting, diarrhea, loss of plasma
(e.g. burn), pancreatitis, diabetic
ketoacidosis, excess of diuretics,
etc.Decreased cardiac output:  Heart
failure, septic shockTubular and interstitial
diseases (acute tubular
necrosis-ATN, acute
interstitial nephritis -AIN)Ischemia:  Due to any
cause
Sepsis/infectionsExtrarenal obstruction:
Enlargement of prostate,
urethral stenosis, tumors,
stones, retroperitoneal
fibrosis, carcinoma cervix,
stricture, phimosis,
congenital valves,
neurogenic bladder

Decreased effective circulating
blood volume:  Congestive heart
failure, liver failure (hepatorenal
syndrome)Nephrotoxins:  Drugs
(cephalosporins,
sulfonamides, NSAIDs,
contrast agents,
aminoglycosides,
rifampicin), infections,
transfusion reactions,
malaria crush injury
(rhabdomyolysis), heavy
metals, septic abortionIntrarenal obstruction:
Uric acid crystals
LocalRenal vessel diseases:  Renal artery
obstruction
Impaired renal autoregulation
Drugs such as ACE inhibitors,
NSAIDs, cyclosporine.Vascular diseases:
Vasculitis, malignant
hypertension, TTP-HUS
Glomerular diseases:
Glomerulonephritis (acute,
rapidly progressive and
others)
Clinical Features (Table 13.10)
General SymptomsIrrespective of the cause ARF present with symptoms related to uremia.
These include anorexia, nausea, vomiting, intellectual clouding,
drowsiness, fits, coma, pruritus, hemorrhagic episodes (e.g. epistaxis
and gastrointestinal hemorrhage) and dyspnea due to fluid overload.
Physical findings include asterixis, myoclonus, pericardial rub, and
evidence of fluid overload in the form of edema, elevated JVP and
crepitation.

Fig. 13.7:  Causes of acute kidney injury.
Q. How will you differentiate renal from prerenal failure?
Q. Describe clinical and laboratory differences between prerenal and
renal azotemia.
ARF Due to a Prerenal Disorder
Clinical features are those of the predisposing conditions together with
those of rapidly developing uremia. Patients usually have a low blood
pressure (hypotension), tachycardia, poor peripheral perfusion and a
decreased urine output.
ARF Due to Renal Causes

Acute tubular necrosis is the most important cause of ARF due to intrinsic
renal diseases. The clinical course in ATN/ARF is divided into 3 phases:
–   Oliguric (initiation) phase:
♦   Clinical features depend on the initiating event that caused the
ischemic form of AKI. Patients develop symptoms due to fluid
overload and azotemia. Fluid overload results in raised jugular venous
pressure, pedal edema, ascites and pulmonary edema.
♦   Mild reduction of urine output and increase in BUN. Hyperkalemia
occurs commonly during this phase. This phase usually lasts for
about 10–14 days. About 40% of the patients may have normal urine
output and is called non-oliguric renal failure. The electrolyte
disturbances are less in these patients.
–   Maintenance phase: During this phase, there is sustained decrease in
urine output in the range of 40 to 400 mL/day ( oliguria), salt and water
overload, rising BUN level, hyperkalemia, metabolic acidosis, and
other features of uremia. This phase lasts for days to weeks.
–   Diuretic (recovery) phase:
♦   During this phase there is a steady increase in urine output and in a
few days the patient develops polyuria with a urine output that may
reach up to 3 L/day. During this phase the tubular concentrating
capacity is defective, and there is uncontrolled loss of large amounts of
water, sodium, and potassium (leading to hypokalemia) in the urine.
Once the renal tubular function returns to normal, BUN, creatinine
levels and urine volume also return to normal.
ARF due to glomerulonephritis presents with hypertension, proteinuria and
hematuria.
Drug-induced acute tubule-interstitial nephritis patients may present with
fever, skin rash and arthralgia.
Table 13.10: Clinical features of acute kidney injury.
Type of acute kidney injury History findings Physical examination findings
Prerenal Volume loss (e.g., history of
vomiting, diarrhea, diuretic
overuse, hemorrhage, burns)
Reduced fluid intakeOrthostatic hypotension and
tachycardia Cardiac disease
Poor skin turgor
Cardiac disease Dilated neck veins, S3 heart sound,

pulmonary rales, peripheral edema
Liver disease Ascites, caput medusae, spider
angiomas
Intrinsic renal
Acute tubular necrosis History of receiving
nephrotoxic medications
(including over-the-counter,
illicit, and herbal),
hypotension, trauma or
myalgias suggesting
rhabdomyolysis, recent
exposure to radiographic
contrast agentsMuscle tenderness, compartment
syndrome, assessment of volume
status
Glomerular Lupus, systemic sclerosis,
rash, arthritis, uveitis,
weight loss, fatigue,
hepatitis C virus infection,
human immunodeficiency
virus infection, hematuria,
foamy urine, cough,
sinusitis, hemoptysisPeriorbital, sacral, and lower-extremity
edema, rash, oral/nasal ulcers,
hypertension
Interstitial Medication use (e.g.
antibiotics, proton pump
inhibitors), rash, arthralgias,
fever, infectious illnessFever, drug-related rash
(Skin) eosinophilia
Vascular Nephrotic syndrome,
trauma, flank pain,
anticoagulation
(atheroembolic disease),
vessel catheterization or
vascular surgerySkin changes, livedo reticularis,
fundoscopic examination (showing
malignant hypertension), abdominal
bruits
Postrenal Urinary urgency or
hesitancy, gross hematuria,
polyuria, stones,
medications, cancerBladder distention, pelvic mass,
prostate enlargementARF Due to Postrenal Causes
ARF due to bilateral postrenal obstruction usually causes anuria. The patient
may give a past history of pain in the loin, renal colic, prostatism and
difficulty in micturition or hematuria.
Investigations
Serum Creatinine and Urea
The rate of rise in serum creatinine and urea is determined by the rate of

protein catabolism (tissue breakdown).
Raised serum creatinine and urea levels are the most consistent
findings. In ARF due to prerenal causes, there is a disproportionate
elevation of serum urea in relation to serum creatinine.
Q. List the causes of raised serum creatinine (Box 13.4).
Drawbacks: Rise in creatinine is an unreliable indicator of early renal
injury because:
–   Normal serum creatinine level is an influenced by several non-renal
factors (age, gender, muscle mass, medications, hydration and
nutrition status and tubular secretion).
–   More than 50% loss of renal function must be lost before serum
creatinine rises.
–   Serum creatinine does not reflect true GFR. This is because several
hours to days must elapse before a new equilibrium between
presumably steady state production and decreased excretion of
creatinine is established.
Box 13.4: Causes of raised serum creatinine.Azotemia: Prerenal, renal and post-renal
Large amount of consumption of meat
Hypothyroidism, acromegaly and gigantism
Rhabdomyolysis
Drugs: Statins, fibrates
Table 13.11: Urine finding in different types of acute kidney injury.
Type of acute kidney injury Urine findings
Prerenal Normal or hyaline casts
Intrarenal
Tubular cell injuryMuddy-brown, granular, epithelial casts
Interstitial nephritis Pyuria, hematuria, mild proteinuria, granular and
epithelial casts, eosinophils
Glomerulonephritis Hematuria, marked proteinuria, red blood cell
casts, granular casts
Vascular disorders Normal or hematuria, mild proteinuria
Postrenal Normal or hematuria, granular casts, pyuria

Table 13.12: Urinary abnormalities in ARF.
Prerenal Renal Postrenal
Sp. gravity >1.020 1.010 —
Urine osmolality
(mOsm/kg)>500 250–300 400
Urine/plasma
osmolality>1.1 1–1.1 1–1.1
Urinary sodium
(mEq/L)<20 >40 <30
FENa <1% >1% Variable
Urine/plasma creatinine >40 <20 <20
Renal failure index <1 >2 >2
Urinary sediment Scanty Active Scanty
Urinary proteins Minimal Moderate to severe Minimal
Newer Novel Biomarkers for AKI
These markers can diagnose early AKI and include (1) neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin
(NGAL), (2) kidney injury molecule-1 (KIM-1), (3) interleukin 18 (IL-18) and (4) cystatin C.
Other Investigations
Other biochemical findings: Include hyperkalemia, hypocalcemia,
hyperphosphatemia and hyperuricemia.
Urine analysis (Tables 13.11 and 13.12):
–   In glomerulonephritis:  Proteinuria, red cells and red cell casts.
–   In ATN: Mild  proteinuria, epithelial cells and coarsely granular casts.
–   In allergic interstitial nephritis: White cells, red cells and eosinophils.
–   In acute tubule-interstitial nephritis: Proteinuria, glycosuria,
aminoaciduria and potassium wasting.
Electrocardiogram: May show features of hyperkalemia.
Chest radiograph: May show pulmonary edema and pleural effusion.
Others
–   In RPGN: Systemic causes (e.g. Wegener’s granulomatosis) must be
excluded by appropriate investigations (e.g. cANCA). A kidney
biopsy may be necessary.
–   In postrenal ARF: Renal imaging by plain abdominal X-ray and

ultrasonography may be useful.
Fractional excretion of sodium (FENa) (Table 13.13): The ratio of
sodium clearance to creatinine clearance, increases the reliability of this
index. However, it may remain low in some renal diseases.
Table 13.13: Values of  FENa (Fractional excretion of sodium) and BUN-to-
serum creatinine ratio in various causes of acute kidney injury.
Etiology of acute kidney injury FENa (Fractional excretion
of sodium)BUN-to–Serum creatinine
ratio
Prerenal <1% >20
Intrarenal
Tubular necrosis
Interstitial nephritis
Glomerulonephritis (early)
Vascular disorders (early)≥1%
≥1%
<1%
<1%<10–15
Postrenal ≥1% >20
Complications of Acute Kidney Injury (Box 13.5)
Box 13.5: Complications of acute kidney injury.
Metabolic:  Hyperkalemia, hypocalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, hypermagnesemia, hyperuricemia,
metabolic acidosis (increased anion gap)
Cardiovascular:  Cardiac arrhythmias, pulmonary edema, pericarditis/pericardial effusion
Gastrointestinal:  Gastrointestinal hemorrhage
Neurologic:  Encephalopathy, neuropathy, seizures
Hematologic:  Anemia, bleeding—platelet dysfunction
Miscellaneous:  Infections (pneumonia, urinary tract infection, septicemia)
Q. Mention the complications of acute kidney injury (acute renal
failure).
Management (Flowchart 13.2)
General measures and management of complications
Fluid balance:  Advisable to restrict fluid intake.
–   Amount of fluid to be given depends upon  the degree of edema, and fluid loss  through urine,
gastrointestinal tract and skin.
–   Usually intake restricted to about 400 mL/day in addition to the above-mentioned fluid losses.
Flowchart 13.2:  Approach to acute kidney injury.

Sodium balance: Sodium is restricted  to avoid volume expansion and overhydration
–   Hyponatremia is common and is usually due to excessive fluid administration .
–   Hypernatremia may occur occasionally, due to excessive administration of sodium bicarbonate
for correction of acidosis.
Potassium balance: Hyperkalemia is the leading cause of death  in ARF. Treatment is discussed
page 927 (refer Table 14.20).

Acid-base balance:  In most patients acidosis  is of moderate degree and does not require
treatment. However, in advanced cases intravenous sodium bicarbonate may be necessary.
Acidosis if accompanied by severe hyperkalemia and fluid overload is best treated with dialysis.
Calcium-phosphorus balance: Both hypocalcemia and hypercalcemia  are observed in the
maintenance phase of ARF and are not serious clinical problems. Phosphate retention  occurs in
patients can be controlled with aluminium hydroxide lanthanum carbonate, sevelamer,
calcium acetate or calcium carbonate (bind phosphate within the GIT and eliminated in stool.
Diet
–   Restrict dietary proteins to about 40 g/day. Suppress endogenous protein catabolism to a
minimum level by giving as much energy as possible in the form of carbohydrates and fats.
Patients treated by blood purification techniques are given 70 g or more protein/day.
–   Hypercatabolic patients may need higher nitrogen intake to prevent negative nitrogen
balance.
–   Restrict the salt intake.
–   Vitamin supplements  are usually necessary.
Systemic complications of ARF: Infections and gastrointestinal bleeding are two important
complications.
–   Infectious complications  (very high (80%)) includes pulmonary, urinary and wound infections
(in post-traumatic and postoperative patients). Infections should be treated promptly by
appropriate antibiotics .
–   Gastrointestinal bleeding (in 40% of patients) may prove fatal and treated by proton pump
inhibitors and gastroprotective agents. Qualitative platelet dysfunction, which results in a
hemorrhagic diathesis.
Use of drugs: Great care is necessary in the use of drugs and nephrotoxic drugs should be
avoided.
Treatment of the underlying cause of the AKI
Identify the cause  (by simple initial investigations such as ultrasound or may require additional
investigations, including renal biopsy) and correct it, if possible.
Specific therapy:
No specific treatment  for ATN, other than restoring renal perfusion.
Intrinsic kidney disease may require specific therapy (e.g. immunosuppressive drugs such as
corticosteroids and cyclophosphamide in some causes of rapidly progressive
glomerulonephritis).
‘Postrenal’ obstruction  requires urgent relief of obstruction . Once the blood chemistry returns
to normal, the underlying cause should be treated whenever possible.
Drug-induced  acute tubule-interstitial nephritis usually recovers after stopping the offending
drug, but sometimes, short course of steroids may be helpful.
If conservative measures fail, dialysis and hemofiltration  may be necessary. These techniques
purify blood and/or remove excess fluid. Main indications of dialysis and hemofiltration in ARF
are listed in Table 13.14.
Q. Write short note on indications for dialysis in acute renal failure.
Table 13.14: Indications of dialysis or hemofiltration in acute renal failure
(ARF).

1.   Fluid overload refractory to diuretics and
refractory pulmonary edema*
2.   Severe metabolic acidosis (pH <7.1)*
3.   Resistant hyperkalemia*
4.   Complications of uremia (e.g. pericarditis,
encephalopathy, neuropathy)*
5.   Increased plasma urea (>180 mg/dL) and
creatinine (>6.8 mg/dL)6.   ESRD (end-stage renal disease)
7.   Severe biochemical derangement in the
absence of symptoms (especially in an
oliguric and hypercatabolic patients)
8.   Removal of drugs causing the acute renal
failure (e.g. gentamicin, lithium, severe
aspirin overdose)
9.   Severe hyperphosphatemia (defined as >12
mg/dL)
10. Tumor lysis syndrome
11. Anuria for >12 hours
*Absolute indications.
Preventive strategies for conditions with high risk of acute kidney injury are presented in Table 13.15.
Table 13.15: Preventive strategies for conditions with high risk of acute
kidney injury.
Risk factors Preventive strategies
Cancer chemotherapy (risk of tumor lysis
syndrome)Hydration and allopurinol administration a
few days before chemotherapy initiation
Exposure to nephrotoxic medications Avoid nephrotoxic medications if possible.
Use appropriate dosing, intervals, and duration
of therapy
Exposure to radiographic contrast agentsAvoid use of intravenous contrast media when
risks outweigh benefits
If use of contrast media is essential, use iso-
osmolar or low-osmolar contrast agent with
lowest volume possibleUse of N-acetylcysteine may be considered
Hemodynamic instability Optimal fluid resuscitation, a mean arterial
pressure goal of > 65 mm Hg is widely used;
isotonic solutions (e.g. normal saline)Vasopressors are recommended for persistent
hypotension (mean arterial pressure <65 mm
Hg) despite fluid resuscitationDopamine is not recommended
Hepatic failure Avoid hypotension and gastrointestinal
bleeding
Early recognition and treatment of
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis; use albumin,
1.5 g per kg at diagnosis and 1 g per kg at 48
hours

Albumin infusion during large volume
paracentesis
Avoid nephrotoxic medications
Rhabdomyolysis Maintain adequate hydration
Alkalinization of the urine with intravenous
sodium bicarbonate in select patients
Undergoing surgery Adequate volume resuscitation/prevention of
hypotension, sepsis, optimizing cardiac
function
Consider holding renin-angiotensin system
antagonists preoperatively
Cause of death: Most common causes of death in ARF (in the absence of dialysis) are hyperkalemia
and pulmonary edema, followed by infection and uremia.
GLOMERULAR DISEASES
The syndromes of glomerular disease are mentioned in Box 13.6.
Box 13.6: Syndromes of glomerular disease.
1. Acute nephritic syndrome
2. Rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis
3. Nephrotic syndrome
4. Chronic nephritis
5. Asymptomatic urinary abnormalities (hematuria, proteinuria or both)
GLOMERULONEPHRITISGlomerulonephritis: Inflammation of glomeruli  and most are due to an
immunologically mediated injury.
Glomerulopathy: Glomerular diseases without apparent inflammation.
There is an overlap between these terms.
Causes of Glomerulonephritis (Table 13.16)
Pathogenesis
Main mechanism is antibody mediated glomerular injury.
1. Immune complex-mediated:
–   Glomerular injury develops due to deposition of circulating antigen-
antibody complexes (immune complexes) in the glomerulus. There is

trapping of circulating antigen-antibody complexes within glomeruli
which results in glomerular damage. The antibodies are not against any
of glomerular constituents, and the immune complexes localize within
the glomeruli.
–   The antigen may be exogenous (e.g. bacteria as in post streptococcal
glomerulonephritis (PSGN) or endogenous (e.g. antibodies to host
DNA in patients with SLE).
2. Anti-GBM antibody–induced glomerulonephritis: It develops due to
injury by antibodies to the insoluble fixed (intrinsic) glomerular
basement antigens. Anti-GBM antibody–induced glomerulonephritis is
responsible for <5% of cases of glomerulonephritis. This type of injury is
caused due to antibodies which are produced against intrinsic fixed
antigens (that are normal components) of the GBM proper.
Characteristics of acute nephritic syndrome are presented in Box 13.7.
Table 13.16: Causes of glomerular diseases.
Primary glomerulonephritis/glomerulopathiesAcute proliferative glomerulonephritis: Post-infectious, others
Rapidly progressive (crescentic) glomerulonephritis
Minimal-change disease
Membranous glomerulopathy
Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis
IgA nephropathy
Chronic glomerulonephritis
Systemic diseases with glomerular involvement
Systemic immunological diseases: Systemic lupus erythematosus
Metabolic diseases: Diabetes mellitus
Vasculitis: Microscopic polyarteritis/polyangiitis, Wegener granulomatosis, Henoch-Schönlein
purpura
Amyloidosis
Goodpasture syndrome
Bacterial endocarditis
Hereditary disorders
Alport syndrome
Thin basement membrane disease
Fabry disease

Terms used in glomerular diseases
Focal:  Some glomeruli, but not all show the lesion.
Diffuse (global):  Most of the glomeruli (>75%) show the lesion.
Segmental:  Only a part of the glomerulus is affected (most focal lesions are also segmental, e.g.
focal segmental glomerulosclerosis).
Proliferative:  Increase in cell numbers due to hyperplasia of one or more of the resident
glomerular cells with or without inflammation.
Membranous:  Capillary wall thickening due to deposition of immune deposits or alterations in
basement membrane.
Crescent formation:  Proliferation of parietal epithelial cell with mononuclear cell infiltration in
Bowman’s space.
Spectrum of glomerular diseases are presented in Figure 13.8 and various
causes of proliferative and non-proliferative glomerulonephritis are shown in
Figure 13.9.
Box 13.7: Characteristics of acute nephritic syndrome.
1. Hematuria (gross or microscopic)
2. Red cell casts in the urine
3. Azotemia (temporary)
4. Temporary oliguria (due to decreased glomerular filtration rate)
5. Hypertension
6. Proteinuria*
7. Edema*(periorbital, leg or sacral)
*Not as severe as in nephrotic syndrome.
Acute Proliferative Glomerulonephritis
These are immune complexes mediated diseases. The inciting antigen may
be:
Exogenous, e.g. postinfectious glomerulonephritis which commonly
follows streptococcal infection, but may also associated with other
infectionsEndogenous, e.g. nephritis of SLE
It is characterized histologically by cellular proliferation (mesangial and
endothelial) associated with infiltration by leukocytes (neutrophils,
macrophages).

Fig. 13.8:  Spectrum of glomerular diseases.
Fig. 13.9: Various causes of proliferative and non-proliferative glomerulonephritis

Poststreptococcal (Postinfectious) Glomerulonephritis (PSGN)
Q. Write short essay/note on acute glomerulonephritis or acute
nephritic syndrome and its causes and clinical features.
Q. Discuss the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features, diagnosis,
complications and management of acute post-streptococcal
glomerulonephritis (acute glomerulonephritis-AGN).
Poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis is specific subtype of postinfectious
glomerulonephritis. It is common in developing countries and one of the
common causes of acute nephritic syndrome.
Age group: Most frequently seen in children between 6 to 10 years of age,
but may be develop in adults.
Etiology and Pathogenesis
The primary Streptococcal infection  usually involves the pharynx
(pharyngitis) or the skin (impetigo/pyoderma). Skin infections are usually
associated with overcrowding and poor hygiene.
Only certain strains of Group A β-hemolytic streptococci  are
nephritogenic. More than 90% are due to types 12, 4, and 1.
Commonly associated with poor personal hygiene, overcrowding and skin
diseases like scabies.
It is an immunologically mediated disease and evidences to support
this are:
–   Latent period: It manifests usually after a latent period of 1 to 4
weeks following primary streptococcal infection. Cutaneous infections
are associated with longer latent period. This latent period is
compatible with the time required for the production of antibodies and
the immune complex formation.
–   Antibodies against streptococcal antigens: Majority of patients show
increased titers of antibodies against one or more streptococcal
antigens. These antibodies include: anti-streptolysin O, anti-
deoxyribonuclease B (anti-DNase B), anti-strepokinase, anti-
hyalurinidase and antinicotinyl adenine dinucleotidase.
–   Hypocomplementemia: Immune complexes activate and utilize
complement components and more than 90% of patients reveal

decreased complement (C3 and C4) levels in the blood
(hypocomplementemia).
–   Immune-complex deposits: Electron microscopy shows glomeruli
with electron dense deposits of immune complexes.
Immunofluorescence shows granular fluorescence to the immune
deposits.
–   Streptococcal antigens in the glomeruli: Many cationic antigens
unique to nephritogenic strains of streptococci can be demonstrated in
the glomeruli. Example, nephritis-associated streptococcal plasmin
receptor (NAPlr), Streptococcal pyogenic exotoxin B (SpeB) and its
zymogen precursor (zSpeB).
Clinical FeaturesOnset is often abrupt.
Usually the affected child suddenly develops malaise, fever, nausea,
oliguria, and hematuria (characteristically, urine appears smoky or red
or cola-colored urine ) 1 to 4 weeks after recovery from a sore throat.
Periorbital edema (causes puffiness of face), and mild to moderate
hypertension is usually observed. Edema initially appears in areas of low
tissue pressure (periorbital areas), followed by involvement of dependent
portions of the body, and may be associated with ascites and/or pleural
effusion.In adults clinical features are atypical. They may present with the sudden
appearance of hypertension or edema, and elevation of BUN.
Investigations (Table 13.17)
Table 13.17: Various laboratory findings in acute PSGN.
Blood findings Urinary findings
Raised antistreptococcal antibody, titers, e.g.
antistreptolysin O (ASO) titer.
Significant reduction in serum
concentration of complement  (C3)
components.
Urea and creatinine: May be elevated and
indicates renal impairment.Oliguria
Mild (variable degree) proteinuria (usually
less than 1 gm/day)
Hematuria (smoky or cola-colored urine)
Urine microscopy
–   Red cells (particularly dysmorphic, i.e.
distorted and fragmented red cells),
–   Red cell casts
Renal Biopsy: Diffuse acute inflammation in the glomerulus with neutrophils and deposition of

immunoglobulin (IgG) and complement. Electron microscopy shows electron-dense deposits in the
subepithelial aspects of the capillary walls.
Q. Write short essay/note on diagnostic criteria and management of
nephritic syndrome.
Q. Write short essay/note on urinary findings in acute
glomerulonephritis.
Management/Treatment
Supportive treatment during acute PSGN: These include rest, salt restriction, diuretics and
antihypertensives.
Dialysis is necessary when there is severe oliguria, fluid overload and hyperkalemia.
Steroids and cytotoxic drugs are of no value. However, if recovery is slow or if RPGN develops,
corticosteroids (methylprednisolone) may be of some help.
Complications
Q. Write short note on the complications of acute post-streptococcal
glomerulonephritis/nephritic syndrome.
(1) Rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis (RPGN), (2) pulmonary edema,
(3) hypertensive encephalopathy and (4) renal failure.
Prognosis
Majority of patients with the epidemic form of PSGN have an excellent
prognosis.
Children: Prognosis is good  and more than 95% totally recover. Minority
may develop a rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis.
Adults: Less benign . They may recover promptly or develop rapidly
progressive glomerulonephritis or progress to chronic glomerulonephritis
(hypertension and/or renal impairment).
Prevention: Pharyngitis caused by Streptococci should be treated promptly
by antibiotics which protects against development of glomerulonephritis.
Rapidly Progressive Glomerulonephritis/Cresentic
Glomerulonephritis
Q. Write short essay/note on the causes, clinical features, investigations
and treatment of rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis.

Q. Write short essay/note on crescentic glomerulonephritis.
Definition: Rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis (RPGN) is a syndrome,
characterized by rapid and progressive loss of renal function  (usually a
50% reduction in the GFR within 3 months) associated with severe oliguria
and signs of nephritic syndrome . If not treated death occurs due to renal
failure within weeks to months. Histologically, it is characterized by
extensive crescents (usually >50%).
Crescent
Crescents are formed by the proliferation of the parietal epithelial cells
lining Bowman capsule along with the infiltration of monocytes and
macrophages.
Classification
RPGN classified into three types based on immunological findings (Table
13.18). Each type may be idiopathic or associated with a known disorder.
Table 13.18: Classification of rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis.
Type of RPGN
TYPE I (ANTI-GBM ANTIBODY) (linear deposits of IgG and C3 on IF)
Goodpasture syndrome
TYPE II (IMMUNE COMPLEX) (granular deposits of immune complex)
Idiopathic immune complex-mediated RPGN
IgA nephropathy
Membranous glomerulopathy
Mesangiocapillary GN
Associated with secondary GN
Post-infectious glomerulonephritis (post-streptococcal GN)
Lupus nephritis
Henoch-Schönlein purpura
Mixed cryoglobulinemia
TYPE III (PAUCI-IMMUNE) (no deposits on IF)
Idiopathic
Wegener granulomatosis
ANCA-associated
Microscopic polyangiitis
Renal-limited necrotizing crescentic glomerulonephritis

Churg-Strauss syndrome
(GBM: glomerular basement membrane; ANCA: antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies).
Table 13.19: Usual clinical features of RPGN .
Hematuria with RBC casts in the urine
Moderate proteinuriaVariable hypertension and edema
Oliguria and uremia
In Goodpasture syndrome patient may present with recurrent hemoptysis or life-threatening
pulmonary hemorrhage
(RPGN: rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis).
Clinical Features (Table 13.19)
Investigations
Blood
–   Leukocytosis and anemia
–   Blood urea and serum creatinine levels: Usually raised.
Urinalysis
–   Moderate proteinuria (1–4 g/day)
–   Microscopic hematuria
–   RBC and WBC casts.Others
–   Complement levels (C3 and C4): May be decreased  in immune-
complex mediated RPGN.
–   Circulating anti-GBM antibodies: In Goodpasture syndrome.
–   ANCA: In pauci-immune RPGN.
–   Serum cryoglobulin levels: May be raised in cryoglobulinemia.Abdominal ultrasound: Normal sized kidneys.
Chest X-ray: Patients with Goodpasture syndrome and vasculitides may
show diffuse opacities if associated with pulmonary hemorrhage.
Renal biopsy: Shows crescents.
Treatment
It depends on the factors involved in the pathogenesis.
Supportive therapy:
–   Control of infection.

–   Control of volume status (dialysis may be needed).
Specific therapy:
–   Plasma exchange to r[emove circulating antibodies and in patients presenting with life-
threatening pulmonary hemorrhage.
–   Steroids methyl prednisolone—500–1000 mg/day for 3 days to suppress inflammation
from antibody already deposited in the tissue.
–   Immunosuppressive therapy (e.g. cyclophosphamide, azathioprine, mycophenolate) such as
cyclophosphamide to suppress further antibody synthesis.
–   Infliximab and rituximab.
Complement Levels in Nephritic Syndrome (Table 13.20)
Algorithm of approach to the patient presenting with acute
glomerulonephritis/nephritic syndrome is presented in Flowchart 13.3.
Table 13.20: Complement levels in nephritic syndrome.
Low complement Normal complement
Post-infectious glomerulonephritis
Mesangiocapillary glomerulonephritis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Infective endocarditis
Essential mixed cryoglobulinemiaIgA nephropathy
Idiopathic crescentic glomerulonephritis
Anti-GBM disease
Vasculitides: Henoch-Schönlein purpura,
Wegener’s granulomatosis, microscopic
polyangiitis
Flowchart 13.3:  Algorithm of approach to the patient presenting with acute
glomerulonephritis/nephritic syndrome.

[NA: antinuclear antibody; ANCA: antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; ASO: antistreptolysin O;
MPO-ANCA: anti-myeloperoxidase (previously called p-ANCA); PR3-ANCA: anti-proteinase-3;
PAN, polyarteritis nodosa]
Nephrotic Syndrome
Q. Discuss the etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features, diagnosis and
management of nephrotic syndrome.
Q. Define nephrotic syndrome. Discuss the differential diagnosis in a 30-
year-old male presenting with anasarca.
Features of nephrotic syndrome are mentioned in Box 13.8
Box 13.8: Characteristics of nephrotic syndrome.
Massive/heavy proteinuria (>3.5 g of protein/24 hours)
Hypoalbuminemia
Generalized edema
Hyperlipidemia and lipiduria

Pathophysiology (Fig. 13.10)
Massive proteinuria is characterized by daily loss of 3.5 g or more of
protein  (less in children) in the urine.
–   Normally, the glomerular capillary wall acts as a size and charge
dependent barrier for the plasma filtrate.
–   Proteinuria in nephrotic syndrome is due to increased permeability o f
glomerular capillary wall to plasma proteins.  This increased
permeability is due to glomerular inflammation, change in the surface
electrical charge, and an alteration in the pore size.
Fig. 13.10: Various characteristic features of nephrotic syndrome and its mechanism.
(GBM: glomerular basement membrane).
–   The major proportion of protein lost in the urine is albumin , and
rarely globulins. Consequences of protein loss are listed in Table
13.21.
Hypoalbuminemia
–   Massive proteinuria decreases the serum albumin levels
(hypoalbuminemia).
–   Hypoalbuminemia decreases the colloid osmotic pressure of the
blood resulting in a disturbance in the Starling forces acting across
peripheral capillaries.
–   The hypovolemia also triggers the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
system. This causes increased reabsorption of sodium and water by
the kidney, resulting in edema.
Generalized edema
–   Soft and pitting

–   Most marked in the periorbital regions (Fig. 13.11) and dependent
portions of the body.
Fig. 13.11:  Facial and periorbital puffiness in nephrotic syndrome.
–   Associated with pleural effusions and ascites.
Hyperlipidemia and lipiduria
–   Hyperlipidemia: Most patients with nephrotic syndrome have raised
blood levels of cholesterol, triglyceride, very-low-density lipoprotein,
low-density lipoprotein, Lp(a) lipoprotein, and apoprotein. It increases
risk of atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease.
–   Causes of hyperlipidemia: Increased synthesis of lipoproteins in the
liver due to low plasma colloid oncotic pressure. Abnormal transport
of circulating lipid. Decreased catabolism  of lipids
Lipiduria: Hyperlipidemia is followed by leakage of lipoproteins across
the glomerular capillary wall → leaked lipoprotein is reabsorbed by
tubular epithelial cells → then shed along with the degenerated cells →
appears in urine either as free fat or as oval fat bodies.

Table 13.21: Consequences of protein loss.
Nature of protein loss Consequences
Hypoalbuminemia Edema and may also produce pleural effusion
and ascites. Subungual edema may manifest as
parallel white lines in the fingernail beds
Increased susceptibility to infections
Urinary losses of plasma proteins like thyroxine
binding globulinAbnormalities in thyroid function tests,
hypothyroidism
Deficiency of antithrombin III (due to urine loss) Hypercoagulable state (consequences include
DVT, pulmonary embolism, myocardial
infarction and stroke) and renal vein thrombosis
Loss of globulins in urine Severe IgG deficiency leading to infections like
spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
Loss of cholecalciferol binding protein Vitamin D deficiency state
Loss of transferrin Microcytic hypochromic anemia
Loss of metal binding proteins Metal deficiency, e.g. zinc, copper
Loss of drug binding proteins Altered drug pharmacokinetics
Causes of Nephrotic Syndrome (Table 13.22 and Fig. 13.12)
Q. Write short essay on causes/etiology, pathogenesis, clinical features,
investigations and treatment of minimal change disease.
Minimal change disease
–   Minimal change disease (MCD) is named so because the glomerular
changes are absent or minimal and glomeruli appear normal under
light microscopy. But under electron microscopy, it shows diffuse
effacement (loss) of foot processes of visceral epithelial cells
(podocytes).
–   MCD is the major cause of nephrotic syndrome in children  (80%),
but it is less common in adults (20%).
–   Age: Peak incidence between 2 and 6 years of age.
Focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS)
–   FSGS is characterized by the sclerosis that involves only part of the
capillary tuft (i.e. segmental) of some glomeruli  (i.e. focal).
–   Accounts for about one-third of cases of nephrotic syndrome in
adults.
–   Usually manifest as nephrotic syndrome or heavy proteinuria,

hypertension, renal insufficiency and occasionally hematuria.
–   Classification (Box 13.9)
Membranous nephropathy
–   Characterized by uniform diffuse thickening of the glomerular
capillary wall. This is due to the accumulation of electron-dense
deposits along the subepithelial side of the glomerular basement
membrane.
–   Common cause (~30%) of the nephrotic syndrome in adults.
–   Gender and age: Male predominance and high incidence between 30
to 50 years of age.
–   Causes (Box 13.10)
–   About 75% of patients present with nephrotic-range proteinuria and
50% present with microscopic hematuria.
Table 13.22: Causes of nephrotic syndrome .
A. Primary (idiopathic) glomerular disease
Membranous glomerulopathy (~30% in adults)
Minimal-change disease (~65% in children)
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS~ 35% in adults)
Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis
IgA nephropathy
Mesangial proliferative
B. Infection-related
Malaria (quatran malaria)
Infective endocarditis
Hepatitis B and C
HIV
Syphilis
C. Systemic diseases
Diabetes mellitus
Amyloidosis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Polyarteritis nodosa
Wegener’s granulomatosis
D. Drug and toxins
Penicillamine, gold, street heroin, captopril
E. Malignancy

Carcinoma
Melanoma
Hodgkin’s disease, chronic lymphatic leukemia
F. Others: Bee-sting allergy, hereditary nephritis
Fig. 13.12:  Etiology of nephrotic syndrome by age.
Box 13.9: Classification of focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis.
Primary (idiopathic)
Secondary
Viruses: HIV infection
Drugs: Heroin addiction
Sickle-cell disease
Massive obesity
Congenital (e.g. unilateral agenesis) and acquired (e.g. reflux nephropathy) reductions in renal
mass
Hereditary forms:  Inherited mutations in genes that encode podocyte proteins, e.g. podocin, α-actinin
4
Box 13.10: Causes of membranous nephropathy.
Primary/idiopathic:  No identifiable cause in about 85% of patients
Secondary (20–30% cases): In association with:
Therapeutic drugs:  Penicillamine, captopril, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs),
gold
Malignant neoplasms, e.g. carcinomas of the lung and colon, lymphomas and melanoma
Autoimmune disease, e.g. SLE, thyroiditis
Infections:  Chronic hepatitis B, hepatitis C, q uatran malaria, syphilis, schistosomiasis

Investigations in Nephrotic Syndrome
Q. Write a short note on urinary findings in nephrotic syndrome.
Urine examination
–   Proteinuria: Twenty-four hour urinary protein estimation.
–   Microscopy: Red cells and red cell casts and waxy casts may be
present. However, in minimal change disease RBCs and red cell casts
are not seen. Shows lipiduria
Serum albumin: Reduced
Serum cholesterol: Raised
Renal biopsy: May be necessary for histological diagnosis.
Other investigations: Depending on the suspected secondary causes
appropriate investigations are to be performed.
Management
A. General measures
Measures to reduce proteinuria:  These measures are necessary if immunosuppressive drugs and other
specific measures against the underlying cause do not benefit.
ACE inhibitors and/or angiotensin II receptor antagonists: They reduce proteinuria in all
types of GN and also slow the rate of progression of renal failure  by lowering glomerular
capillary filtration pressure. Blood pressure and renal function should be monitored regularly
during their administration.
Measures to control complications
Treatment of edema:
–   Initially, it is treated by dietary salt (sodium) restriction, rest and a thiazide diuretic (e.g.
chlorthalidone, bendroflumethiazide). The weight loss should not be more than 1 kg/day.
Aggressive diuretic therapy may precipitate ARF due to reduction in intravascular volume.
–   If not responsive, furosemide 40–120 mg daily with the addition of amiloride (5 mg daily),
and serum potassium concentration should be monitored.
–   Gut mucosal edema in nephrotic syndrome may cause malabsorption of diuretics  (as well as
other drugs). Thus, if there is resistance to oral diuretic treatment parenteral
administration is required.
–   In diuretic-resistant patients and those with oliguria and uremia in the absence of severe
glomerular damage (e.g. in minimal-change nephropathy) edema may be treated by infusion of
salt-poor albumin as a temporary measure combined with diuretic therapy . However,
most of infused albumin will be excreted by the kidneys within 1–2 days.
–   Dietary proteins:  It is advisable to take normal protein and should be about 0.8–1.0 g/kg. A
high-protein diet (approximately80–90 g protein daily) increases proteinuria and may be
harmful in the long term. However, malnutrition should be prevented.Hypercoagulable state: Develops due to loss of coagulation factors (e.g. antithrombin) in the
urine and an increase in production of fibrinogen by liver. It predisposes to venous thrombosis
and thromboembolism. Therefore, avoid prolonged bed rest . Long-term prophylactic

anticoagulant therapy is desirable and it is indicated in patients who have already developed
deep venous thrombosis or arterial thrombosis.
Lipid abnormalities:  They increase in the risk of myocardial infarction or peripheral
vascular disease. Hypercholesterolemia is treated with an HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor and
dietary restrictions of lipids.
Vitamin D supplementation: To be given if there is biochemical evidence of vitamin D
deficiency.
Sepsis:  It is a major cause of death in nephrotic syndrome. The increased susceptibility to
infection is partly due to loss of immunoglobulin in the urine. They are particularly susceptible to
pneumococcal infections and pneumococcal vaccine should be given to these patients. Early
detection and aggressive treatment of infections should be done. Vaccinations prophylactically is
advisable.
B. Treatment of underlying cause
Minimal change diseaseIn children:
–   Initial treatment  by high-dose corticosteroid  therapy with prednisolone 60 mg/m2 daily (up
to a maximum of 80 mg/day) for a maximum of 4–6 weeks.
–   Followed by alternate day prednisolone at a dose of 40 mg/m2 (1 mg/kg in adults) for further
4–6 weeks.
–   More than 95% of children respond  to the above therapy. Children who respond within the
first 4 weeks of corticosteroid therapy are termed ‘steroid responsive’. Those who relapse on
withdrawal of corticosteroid therapy are termed ‘steroid dependent’.
–   Relapse:
♦   One-third of patients relapse on steroid withdrawal, and remission is once more induced
with steroid therapy.
♦   In patients who have frequent relapses or develop unacceptable corticosteroid side effects,
long-term remission can be achieved by a course of cyclophosphamide 1.5–2.0 mg/kg
daily is given for 8–12 weeks with concomitant prednisolone 7.5–15 mg/day. Steroid
unresponsive patients may also benefit by cyclophosphamide. Not more than two courses of
cyclophosphamide should be given because of the risk of side-effects (e.g. azoospermia).
♦   An alternative to cyclophosphamide is ciclosporin  3–5 mg/kg/day, (ciclosporin is
potentially nephrotoxic).
Adults: Response rates are significantly lower  and response may occur late (12 weeks with
daily steroid therapy and 12 weeks of maintenance with alternate-day therapy).
Prognosis: Excellent, although it may show remission and relapses.
Focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis
Steroids:  It is beneficial in only 20–30% patients  and usually prednisolone is given in the dose
of 0.5–2 mg/kg/day.
Cyclosporine  may be effective in reducing or stopping urinary protein excretion.
Cyclophosphamide, chlorambucil or azathioprine may be used as second-line therapy in
adults.
About 50% progress to end-stage renal failure.
Membranous glomerulonephritis
Oral high-dose corticosteroids are not useful for producing either a sustained remission of
nephrotic syndrome or preserving renal function.

Alkylating agents: Cyclophosphamide and chlorambucil  are effective. However, because of
long-term toxicity, these drugs should be reserved for patients who have severe or prolonged
nephrosis (i.e. proteinuria >6 g/day for >6 months), renal insufficiency and hypertension.
Cyclophosphamide, cyclosporine and chlorambucil  in combination with steroids may be
helpful.
Anti-B lymphocyte therapy is more effective  against T lymphocytes than broad-spectrum
immunosuppressive agents. Anti-CD20 antibodies (rituximab, which ablates B lymphocytes)
improve renal function, reduce proteinuria and increase the serum albumi n.
Prognosis:  Spontaneous remission may occur in 40%, 3–40% may develop repeated remissions
and relapses and 10–20% patients may develop progressive renal failure.
IgA Nephropathy (Berger’s Disease)
Q. Write short essay/note on IgA nephropathy.
Characterized by focal and segmental proliferative glomerulonephritis
with predominant IgA deposition in the glomerular mesangium.
Clinical features:
–   Occurs in children and young males.
–   Presents with asymptomatic/painless microscopic hematuria or
recurrent macroscopic hematuria generally within 1–2 days after
an upper respiratory or gastrointestinal viral infection.
–   Proteinuria occurs and in 5% it can be in the nephrotic range.
–   Occasionally, it may present as acute renal failure (ARF) or nephritic
syndrome.
Diagnosis by renal biopsy: Immunofluorescence microscopy shows
prominent IgA deposits in the mesangial regions.
Prognosis:
–   Usually good , especially in patients with normal blood pressure,
normal renal function and absence of proteinuria at presentation.
–   Complete remission uncommon.
–   Risk of development of end-stage renal failure in about 25% of
patients with proteinuria of more than 1g/day, elevated serum
creatinine, hypertension, ACE gene polymorphism and presence of
tubulointerstitial fibrosis on renal biopsy.
Management
Steroids:  Used for patients with proteinuria of 1–3 g/day, mild glomerular changes only and
preserved renal function. They reduce proteinuria and stabilize renal function.
Use of immunosuppressive therapy is controversial .

Combination therapy:  In patients with progressive disease (creatinine clearance <70 mL/min),
prednisolone with cyclophosphamide can be used for 3 months followed by maintenance with
prednisolone and azathioprine.
Tonsillectomy: May reduce proteinuria and hematuria in patients with recurrent tonsillitis.
Combination of ACE inhibitor and angiotensin II receptor antagonist:  Can be given to all
patients, with or without hypertension and proteinuria. This combination therapy reduces
proteinuria and preserves renal function.
Hereditary Nephritis (HN) or Alport’s Syndrome
Most common familial nephropathies, characterized by familial
occurrence of progressive hematuria, nephritis and sensorineural loss
of hearing.
Common in females. Male patients develop severe renal disease with
progressive renal failure occurring before the fourth decade. Most females
have a normal life-span.Pathology: Electron microscopy: Shows irregular thickening of GBM,
splitting and splintering of the lamina densa and small, round, electron-
dense granulations are present within the lucent zones. GBM lesion are the
hallmark but not specific of Alport’s syndrome.Clinical presentation
–   Major presentation: Macroscopic or microscopic hematuria and may be
observed at birth.
–   Other presenting features: Proteinuria, edema, hypertension, renal
failure and deafness.
♦   Microscopic or recurrent episodes of macroscopic hematuria
following upper respiratory infection (or physical exertion) may
resemble postinfective glomerulonephritis.
♦   Incidental leukocyturia and pyuria may lead to erroneous diagnosis
of urinary tract infection.
♦   Nephrotic syndrome can occur with increasing proteinuria.
Hypertension develops with progressive renal insufficiency.
♦   Deafness is more frequent in males and progression of hearing loss
usually indicates poor prognosis.
♦   Ocular changes include anterior lenticonus (most common) and
associated posterior or anterior cataract.
Treatment:  No specific measure to prevent progression of renal disease. Treatment includes renal

replacement therapy, by long-term hemodialysis or renal transplant. Hearing defect can be
temporarily compensated by the use of hearing aid.
TUBULOINTERSTITIAL DISEASES
Tubulointerstitial nephropathy is an inflammatory condition affecting
primarily the renal tubules and interstitium.
Structural changes in the glomeruli develop later  and results in
progressive decline in GFR, glomerular proteinuria and volume-dependent
hypertension.
It accounts for 20 to 40 % of cases of chronic renal failure  and 10 to 25
% of cases of acute renal failure.
Acute Tubulointerstitial Nephropathy (Acute TIN)
Two most common causes of acute TIN are drugs or toxins and infections.
Etiology (Box 13.11)
Drug-induced acute TIN
After exposure to a causative drug, renal dysfunction may occur within
a few hours but can occur after weeks or months.
Preceded or accompanied by the triad of fever (70–100%), skin rash (30–
50%) and eosinophilia (transient).  Skin rash and eosinophilia are not
found in TIN caused by NSAIDs.
Microscopic hematuria, pyuria and proteinuria are present in almost
all cases. Eosinophiluria (> 50% of WBC) is a sensitive marker of
drug-induced TIN.
Patients may need steroids (methylprednisolone 500–1000 mg/day for 3
days).
Box 13.11:  Etiology of acute tubulointerstitial nephropathy.
Drugs
Antimicrobials
Analgesics/NSAIDs
Diuretics
Anticonvulsants
Metabolic salts
Indigenous medication

Infections
Acute bacterial pyelonephritis
Systemic infections
Immunological
Transplant rejection
SLE, Sjögren’s syndrome, sarcoidosis
Metabolic
Hypercalcemia, cystinosis, potassium depletion, hyperoxaluria
Hemopoietic
Myeloproliferative diseases, plasma cell dyscrasias
Miscellaneous
Irradiation, heat stroke
Idiopathic
Analgesic nephropathy
Prolonged analgesic abuse leads to a nephropathic process characterized
by capillary sclerosis, chronic tubulointerstitial diseases and papillary
necrosis.
Imaging reveals shrunken kidneys with calcification of renal papillae.
Risk of developing renal disease is dependent upon the frequency and
duration of analgesic consumption, the cumulative amount of individual
analgesic exceeding 3 kg (phenacetin, acetaminophen, or aspirin).
Treatment of Interstitial Nephritis
Stop the offending agent
Prednisone at a dose of 1 mg/kg per day (to a maximum of 40 to 60 mg) for a minimum of one to
two weeks, beginning a gradual taper after the serum creatinine has returned to or near baseline.
RENAL TUBULAR ACIDOSIS
Q. Write short essay/note on renal tubular acidosis.
Renal tubular acidosis (RTA) is an uncommon disorder. The term RTA is
used for systemic acidosis (accumulation of acid in the body) caused by
impairment of the ability of the renal tubules to excrete acids leading to.
Thus there is failure to maintain acid–base balance. The function of kidneys
is otherwise normal.
Mechanism
RTA can be due to a defect in one of three processes:

1. Impaired acid secretion in the late distal tubule or cortical collecting
duct intercalated cells (classical distal RTA).
2. Impaired bicarbonate reabsorption in the proximal tubule  (proximal
RTA).
3. Impaired sodium reabsorption in the late distal tubule  or cortical
collecting duct. It is associated with reduced secretion of both potassium
and H+ ions (hyperkalemia distal RTA).
Box 13.12 lists types of renal tubular acidosis (RTA).
Box 13.12:  Types of renal tubular acidosis.
Type 1 RTA or distal tubular RTA
Type 2 RTA or proximal RTA
Type 3 RTA or mixed RTA
Type 4 RTA or hypoaldosteronism hyperkalemia RTA
Box 13.13:  Causes of type 1 RTA.
Primary/Hereditary
Nephrocalcinosis (producing damage of cortical collecting duct)
Chronic urinary tract obstruction
Hypergammaglobulinemic states
Drugs and toxins, e.g. ifosfamide, amphotericin B, lithium and toluene
Renal transplant rejection
Autoimmune disease, e.g. Sjögren’s syndrome
Cirrhosis of liver
Sickle cell anemia
(RTA: Renal tubular acidosis).
Types
Type 1 (‘Distal’ Renal Tubular Acidosis)
Most common type of RTA.
Causes (Box 13.13): It occurs due to a failure of H+ (hydrogen ion)
excretion in the distal tubule.
Consequences
Acidosis
Hypokalemia (few exceptions)

Failure to lower the urine pH below 5.3 despite systemic acidosis
Low urinary ammonium production
Renal calculus formation due to hypercalciuria, hypocitraturia (citrate
inhibits calcium phosphate precipitation), and alkaline urine (which favors
precipitation of calcium phosphate). Calculus produces hematuria, pain
and recurrent urinary infections.
Nephrocalcinosis (Fig. 13.13): Deposition of calcium in the kidney
parenchyma.
Depletion/mobilization of calcium (demineralization) from bones causing
rickets in children and osteomalacia in adults.
Diagnosis
Urinary pH >5.3 in presence of systemic acidosis
Plasma bicarbonate (HCO3–) <20 mEq/L mmol/L
Acid load test:
–   Give ammonium chloride by mouth (100 mg/kg) and check pH of
urine hourly and plasma HCO3– at 3 hours.
–   Plasma HCO3– should drop below 21 mmol/L.
–   Diagnosis is confirmed if urine pH remains >5.3 despite a plasma
HCO3 of 21 mmol/L.
Fig. 13.13:  Nephrocalcinosis in type 1 renal tubular acidosis (RTA).
Treatment
Correction of the acidosis:  Oral sodium bicarbonate or sodium citrate reverses bone

demineralization.
Potassium supplements: Potassium citrate in case of hypokalemia, stone formation and
nephrocalcinosis.
Thiazide diuretics: They cause volume contraction and increased proximal sodium bicarbonate
reabsorption.
Type 2 (‘Proximal’) Renal Tubular Acidosis
Very rare and is due to failure of filtered sodium bicarbonate
reabsorption  in the proximal tubule.  It leads to appearance of
bicarbonate in urine and subsequent acidosis.
Causes of type 2 RTA  (Box 13.14): Inherited forms of isolated type 2
RTA may show both autosomal dominant and recessive patterns of
inheritance.
Box 13.14:  Causes of type 2 RTA.
Inherited
Paraproteinemia
Amyloidosis
Hyperparathyroidism
Heavy metal toxicity
Drugs and toxins such as antiretroviral drugs, ifosfamide, lead and cadmium.
Wilson’s disease
Consequences: Type 2 RTA usually occurs as part of a generalized tubular
defect, together with urinary wasting of amino acids, phosphate and glucose
(Fanconi’s syndrome), as well as bicarbonate and potassium.Acidosis less severe than type 1 RTA
Hypokalemia
Inability to lower the urine pH below 5.5 despite systemic acidosis
Appearance of bicarbonate in the urine despite a subnormal plasma
bicarbonate
Bone demineralization due to phosphate wasting.
Treatment
Large / massive doses of sodium bicarbonate: May be required to overcome the renal ‘leak’ of
bicarbonate.
Potassium supplementation: Often necessary because loss of bicarbonate in urine potentiates
hypokalemia.

Type 3 Renal Tubular Acidosis (RTA)
It represents a combination of type 1 and type 2.
Inherited type 3 RTA: It is caused by mutations resulting in carbonic
anhydrase type II deficiency. It is characterized by osteopetrosis, cerebral
calcification, and mental retardation.
Type 4 Renal Tubular Acidosis (RTA)
It is also known as ‘hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism’ and is the most
common RTA. Its features are listed in Box 13.15.
Causes of type 4 RTA is presented in Table 13.23.
Treatment of type 4 RTA
Treatment of aldosterone deficiency: With a mineralocorticoid (e.g. fludrocortisones) and
glucocorticoid for cortisol deficiency (if present).
Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism by fludrocortisones and accompanying hypertension and
edema are treated by thiazide or loop diuretic. Diuretics are also necessary for the control of
hyperkalemia.
Algorithm approach to renal tubular acidosis (RTA) is presented in Figure
13.14.
Table 13.23: Causes of type 4 RTA .
Primary aldosterone deficiency Hyporeninemic
hypoaldosteronismAldosterone resistance
Primary adrenal insufficiency Renal dysfunction (e.g.
diabetic nephropathy)Drugs (e.g. amiloride,
spironolactone,
trimethoprim, pentamidine)
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia ACE inhibitors Pseudohypoaldosteronism
Deficiency of aldosterone synthase HIV
Potassium sparing diuretics NSAIDs
Cyclosporine
(RTA: Renal tubular acidosis).
Box 13.15:  Features of type 4 renal tubular acidosis.Hyperkalemia
Reduced plasma bicarbonate and hyperchloremia
Normal ACTH stimulation test
Low basal 24 hours urinary aldosterone

Reduced response of plasma renin and plasma aldosterone to stimulation
Correction of hyperkalemia by fludrocortisone
Fig. 13.14: Algorithm approach to renal tubular acidosis (RTA).
CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE (CKD) (TABLE
13.24)
Q. Write a short note on chronic kidney diseases.
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) previously termed chronic renal failure or
insufficiency.
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) refers to a spectrum of longstanding  (more
than 3 months), usually progressive processes associated with irreversible
worsening of renal function  and decline in glomerular filtration rate (GFR).
CKD spectrum ranges from abnormalities detectable only by laboratory
testing to uremia.
Revised chronic kidney disease classification based upon glomerular
filtration rate and albuminuria KDIGO 2013 is presented in Figure 13.15.
Table 13.24: Classification of CKD  (The National Kidney Foundation-
Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative NKF-KDOQI)
working group.
Stage Description

GFR (mL/minute/1.73 m2)
1 Chronic kidney damage with normal or
increased GFR>90
2 Mild GFR loss 60–89
3 Moderate GFR loss stage 3A (GFR 45
to 59 mL/min) and stage 3B (GFR 30-
44 mL/min)30–59
4 Severe GFR loss 15–29
5 Kidney failure requiring dialysis (5D)
or transplantation (5T)<15
Fig. 13.15: Revised chronic kidney disease classification based upon glomerular filtration rate and
albuminuria KDIGO 2013.
Definition (Box 13.16)
Q. Write short essay/note on the clinical and biochemical features of
chronic kidney disease (CKD).
Causes of CKD (Table 13.25)
Clinical Approach to CKD
History

Duration of symptoms
Drug intake: These include nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents,
analgesic and other medications (e.g. herbal medicines).
Previous medical and surgical history, e.g. chemotherapy, SLE, malaria.
Previous urinalysis or urea and creatinine values if performed.
Family history of renal disease.
Table 13.25: Important causes of  chronic kidney disease.
I.   Glomerulopathies *
Proliferative GN
Crescentic GN
Membranoproliferative GN
Mesangiocapillary GNIV. Obstructive*
Calculus
Tumors
Retroperitoneal fibrosis
Prostatic enlargement
II.  Systemic and metabolic diseases
Diabetes*
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
Polyarteritis nodosa (PAN)
Amyloidosis
GoutV.  Vascular
Essential hypertension (accelerated)*
Renovascular
Vasculitis (SLE, PAN, scleroderma)
III. Interstitial
Chronic interstitial nephritis*
Chronic pyelonephritis*
Analgesic
Tuberculosis
NephrocalcinosisVI. Congenital
Polycystic kidney*
Medullary cystic disease
Alport’s syndrome
* common causes of chronic renal failure
SymptomsUnfortunately, early stages of CKD may be asymptomatic, despite the
progressive loss of kidney function and accumulation of numerous
metabolites.
Usually there is a rough correlation between serum urea and creatinine
levels and symptoms. Symptoms are common when the serum urea level
exceeds 40 mmol/L.
Clinical Features (Table 13.26 and Fig. 13.16)
Q. Write short essay/note on the clinical features of CKD.

Complications of Chronic Renal Failure
Q. Write short essay/note on the complications of chronic renal failure.
Anemia: Various causes of anemia in CRF are listed in Box 13.17.
Box 13.16:  Definition of chronic kidney disease (CKD).
Glomerular filtration rate (GFR) of <60 mL/minute/1.73 m2 for 3 months or more, with or without
kidney damage or a urinary albumin to creatinine ratio >65 mg/mmol or protein creatinine ratio of
100 mg/mmol.
OR
Kidney damage for 3 or more months with or without decreased GFR, as evidenced by any of the
following:
–   Microalbuminuria:  Albumin excretion rate 30–300 mg/day in urine or urinary albumin >30
mg/day excretion of creatinine.
–   Macroalbuminuria:  Albumin excretion rate in urine > 300 mg/day.
–   Pathologic abnormalities such as abnormal findings on renal biopsy.
–   Radiologic abnormalities such as scarring or polycystic kidneys on renal ultrasound scan.
Box 13.17:  Causes of anemia in CRF.
Deficiency of erythropoietin (most important)
Toxic effects of uremia on bone marrow precursor cells
Bone marrow fibrosis secondary to hyperparathyroidism
Deficiency of hematinic: Iron, vitamin B 12, folate because of reduced dietary intake due to
anorexia. Intestinal absorption of iron is also impaired.
Increased red cell destruction: Abnormal red cell membranes
Increased blood loss
–   Occult gastrointestinal bleeding
–   Blood sampling
–   Blood loss during hemodialysis
–   Capillary fragility
–   Due to platelet dysfunction and capillary fragility
(CRF: chronic renal failure).
Table 13.26: Clinical features of chronic kidney disease (CKD).
System Clinical feature Cause
Renal Nocturia and polyuria Impaired concentrating ability of
kidney
Muscle Generalized myopathy Combination of poor nutrition,
hyperparathyroidism and vitamin D

deficiency
Gastrointestinal Malaise, loss of appetite (anorexia),
nausea, vomiting, diarrheaNitogenous waste products
Metabolic Paresthesia and tetany Hypocalcemia
Endocrine Loss of libido in both sexes
Women: Amenorrhea, menorrhagia
Males: Erectile dysfunction,
oligospermiaHypothalamic-pituitary axis
dysfunction
Skeletal Bone pain Metabolic bone disease
Respiratory Pleural effusion, interstitial lung
disease, calcificationSalt and water retention
Hematologic Symptoms due to anemia: Fatigue,
lassitudeAnemia is normochromic and
normocytic type. Various causes
mentioned in Table 13.35
Skin Pruritus/itching, rash, metastatic
calcificationRetention of nitrogenous waste
products of protein catabolism,
hyperparathyroidism, calcium-
phosphate deposition
Immune system Infections Leukocyte functional defects, reduced
cellular immunity
Cardiovascular Atherosclerosis, heart failure,
hypertensionHypertension, homocysteinemia,
calcification of heart valves
Neurologic Peripheral neuropathy, mental slowing,
clouding of consciousness and seizures
myoclonic twitching, coma, restless
leg syndrome or sensory deficitsUremic toxins
Serosal
inflammationPericardial or pleural pain and fluid,
peritoneal fluidWater retentionQ. Write short essay/note on renal osteodystrophy.
Metabolic Bone Disease: Renal Osteodystrophy
The term ‘renal osteodystrophy’ (bone mineral disorder), constitutes various
forms of bone disease that may develop alone or in combination in chronic
renal failure. It includes (1) hyperparathyroid bone disease (osteitis fibrosa
cystica), (2) osteomalacia, (3) osteoporosis, (4) osteosclerosis, and (5)
adynamic bone disease.Pathogenesis of bone disease (Fig. 13.17)
Phosphate retention owing to reduced excretion by the kidneys release of
fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF 23) and other phosphaturic agents by
osteoblasts as a compensatory mechanism. Actions of FGF 23 are:

–   Causes phosphaturia to normalize the plasma phosphate level.
–   It downregulates 1α-hydroxylase to reduce intestinal absorption of
phosphate.
Decreased production of the lα-hydroxylase enzyme by the kidney results
in reduced conversion of 25-(OH)2D3 (25-hydroxyvitamin D) to the more
metabolically active 1,25-(OH)2D3(1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol). Its
consequences are:
–   Decreased activation of vitamin D receptors (VDR) in the parathyroid
glands leads to increased release of parathyroid hormone (PTH)
causing secondary hyperparathyroidism.
–   Decreased intestinal absorption of calcium causes hypocalcemia which
leads in turn to increased PTH production by the parathyroid glands.

Fig. 13.16:  Various clinical manifestations of chronic kidney disease (CKD).
–   Phosphate retention also indirectly lowers ionized calcium and these
together results in an increase in PTH synthesis and release. The raised
serum phosphate combine with calcium in the extracellular space,
causing ectopic calcification in blood vessels and other tissues.
–   PTH causes reabsorption of calcium from bone and increased
reabsorption of calcium from proximal renal tubules. This prevents
hypocalcemia induced by 1,25-(OH)2D3 deficiency and phosphate
retention.

–   Secondary hyperparathyroidism causes increased osteoclastic
activity, cyst formation and bone marrow fibrosis (osteitis fibrosa
cystica).
–   Long-standing secondary hyperparathyroidism finally causes
hyperplasia of the glands with autonomous or ‘tertiary’
hyperparathyroidism.
–   Osteomalacia: It is due to impaired mineralization of osteoid caused
by deficiency 1,25-(OH)2D3 and hypocalcemia.
–   Osteosclerosis: Literally means ‘hardening of bone’ characterized by
increased bone density and is due to the direct result of longstanding
parathyroid hormone excess. Alternating bands of sclerotic and porotic
bone in the spine give rise to a characteristic ‘rugger jersey’
appearance on X-ray (Fig. 13.17).
–   Osteoporosis is probably related to malnutrition and is commonly
found in CRF, often after transplantation and the use of corticosteroids.
–   Adynamic bone disease is the condition of in which both bone
formation and resorption are depressed.Gastrointestinal complications: (1) reduced gastric emptying and
increased risk of reflux esophagitis, (2) increased risk of peptic ulceration
and acute pancreatitis and (3) constipation (especially in patients on
continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD) and (4) gastrointestinal
bleed.Metabolic abnormalities
–   Gout: Urate retention is a common in CRF.

Fig. 13.17:  Lateral spine X-ray showing Rugger jersy appearance of spine.
[25-(OH)D 3: 25-hydroxyvitamin D; 1,25-(OH) 2D3: 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol; FGF23:

fibroblast growth factor 23; Ca: calcium; PO 4: phosphate; PTH: parathormone]
–   Insulin requirement and resistance: Insulin is catabolized by and to
some extent excreted via the kidneys. Thus, insulin requirements in
diabetic patients reduce as renal failure progresses. By contrast, end-
organ resistance to insulin is observed in advanced renal impairment.
Lipid metabolism abnormalities: Include (1) impaired clearance of
triglyceride-rich particles and (2) hypercholes-terolemia.
Endocrine abnormalities: Include (1) hyperprolactinemia, (2) increased
luteinizing hormone (LH) levels in both sex, (3) decreased serum
testosterone levels, (4) absence of normal cyclical changes in female sex
hormones, resulting in oligomenorrhea or amenorrhea, (5) abnormalities
of growth hormone secretion and action, and (6) abnormal thyroid
hormone levels.Muscle dysfunction proximal myopathy.
Nervous system
–   Central nervous system:
♦   Unusual combination of depressed cerebral function and decreased
seizure threshold.
♦   Dialysis disequilibrium develops if rapid correction of severe
uremia is done by hemodialysis owing to osmotic cerebral swelling.
♦   Dialysis dementia is a syndrome characterized by progressive
intellectual deterioration, speech disturbance, myoclonus and fits.
–   Autonomic nervous system: (1) Increased circulating catecholamine
level, (2) impaired baroreceptor sensitivity, and (3) impaired efferent
vagal function.
–   Peripheral nervous system: (1) Median nerve compression in the
carpal tunnel due to β2-microglobulin-related amyloidosis, (2) restless
legs syndrome and (3) polyneuropathy and (4) psychiatric problems
(anxiety, depression, phobias and psychoses).Cardiovascular disease: Increased (16-fold) incidence o f
cardiovascular disease, particularly myocardial infarction, cardiac
failure, sudden cardiac death and stroke, uremic pericarditis or dialysis
pericarditis. Hypertension develops in about 80% of patients with CRF.Malignancy: Raised  incidence of malignancy. Malignant change can
occur in polycystic kidney disease. Lymphomas, primary liver cancer and

thyroid cancers can also develop.
Box 13.18:  Purpose of investigations in chronic renal failure.
To identify the underlying cause wherever possible.
To identify reversible factors (e.g. hypertension, urinary tract, obstruction, nephrotoxic drugs, and
salt and water depletion).
To screen for complications (e.g. anemia, renal osteodystrophy) and cardiovascular risk factors.
Investigations
Box 13.18 lists the purpose of investigations in chronic kidney disease.
Urinalysis
Physical examination: Fixed specific gravity around 1.010 (isosthenuria) is seen in CRF.
Chemical examination
–   Hematuria may indicate glomerulonephritis.
–   Proteinuria, if heavy, is strongly suggestive of glomerular disease.
–   Glycosuria with normal blood glucose level is common in CRF.
Urine microscopy
–   White cells in the urine usually indicate bacterial urinary infection, sterile pyuria suggests
papillary necrosis or renal tuberculosis.
–   Eosinophils indicate allergic tubulointerstitial nephritis or cholesterol embolization.
–   Red cells source may be from anywhere in the urinary tract between the glomerulus and the
urethral meatus.
–   Red-cell casts are suggestive of glomerulonephritis.
–   Granular casts indicate active renal disease .
–   Broad casts  are seen in CRF.Urine culture should be performed. Early-morning urine samples should be cultured for
tuberculosis.
Urine Biochemistry
24-hour creatinine clearance is useful to know the severity of renal failure.
Urine osmolality is a measure of concentrating ability.
Urine electrophoresis  and immunofixation for the detection of light chains in myeloma.
Serum Biochemistry
Serum urea and creatinine:  The most consistent abnormalities in CRF
are elevated  levels of urea and creatinine. The level of serum creatinine
correlates with the degree of renal damage.
Electrophoresis and immunofixation for myeloma.
Extreme elevations of creatine kinase and a disproportionate elevation in

serum creatinine and potassium compared to urea suggestive of
rhabdomyolysis.
Other biochemical abnormalities include hypocalcemia,
hyperphosphatemia, hyperuricemia and hyperkalemia.
Hematology
Anemia
Eosinophilia suggestive of allergic tubulointerstitial nephritis, vasculitis,
or cholesterol embolism.
Peripheral smear  with fragmented red cells (Burr cells) and/or
thrombocytopenia suggestive of intravascular hemolysis due to
accelerated hypertension, hemolytic uremic syndrome or thrombotic
thrombocytopenic purpura.
Markedly raised ESR is suggestive of myeloma.
Immunology
Low complement components may be seen in active glomerular disease
(e.g. SLE, poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis).
Autoantibody screening helpful autoimmune diseases (e.g. SLE).
Antibodies to streptococcal antigens (ASOT, anti-DNase B) if post-
streptococcal glomerulonephritis is suspected.
Antibodies to hepatitis B and C
Antibodies to HIV when HIV-associated renal disease is suspected.
Malaria can cause glomerular disease in the tropics.
Radiological Investigation
Ultrasound: Ultrasonography to assess the renal size and to exclude
hydronephrosis. Renal ultrasound usually shows shrunken kidneys in
CRF. In diabetic glomerulosclerosis, amyloidosis, polycystic kidney
diseases, HIV nephropathy bilateral hydronephrosis and myeloma, the
kidneys may be of normal size.Plain abdominal radiography and CT  (without contrast) to exclude low-
density renal stones or nephrocalcinosis. CT may also useful for the
diagnosis of retroperitoneal fibrosis and useful in some patients with
suspected obstructive nephropathy.

MRI: Magnetic resonance angiography is useful in renovascular disease.
Renal Biopsy
Aim: To establish the nature and extent of renal disease, which helps in
treatment and predicting prognosis. It should be performed in patient with
unexplained renal failure and normal-sized kidneys (exception diabetic
glomerulosclerosis), unless there are strong contraindications.
Table 13.27: Reversible factors in chronic kidney disease.
1. Hypovolemia: Vomiting, diarrhea, excessive diuresis, congestive heart failure
2. Urinary tract obstruction: Nephrolithiasis, papillary necrosis, bladder outlet obstruction
3. Infection
4. Uncontrolled or accelerated hypertension
5. Nephrotoxic drugs: Aminoglycosides, cephalosporins, tetracycline, amphotericin, radio-contrast
agents, NSAIDs, diuretics
6. Electrolyte and metabolic disorders: Hyperphosphatasemia, hyperuricemia, acidosis
7. Vasculitis: Systemic lupus erythematosus, Wegener’s granulomatosis, microscopic polyarteritis
8. Pregnancy: Eclampsia
Management of Chronic Renal Failure
Management of CRF can be divided into three parts:
1. Establishing the diagnosis and etiology of CKD and to detect any reversible factors.
2. Measures to prevent/slow down the further damage to the kidney (progression of CKD).
3. Supportive measures (e.g. dialysis or transplantation) when necessary.Treatments aimed at specific causes of CKD: Optimization glucose control in diabetes mellitus,
immunomodulatory agents for glomerulonephritis, and emerging specific therapies to retard
cytogenesis in polycystic kidney disease. Any reversible factors should be detected and treated
(Table 13.27).
Measures to Reduce the Symptoms and Progression of CRFFollowing measures may stabilize or slow the decline of renal function.
Control of hypertension and proteinuria:  Goals of treatment include (1) blood pressure should
be reduced <130/80 and proteinuria < 0.3 g/24 hours. If creatinine is below 3 mg/dL, ACE
inhibitors and ARBs (inhibit the angiotensin-induced vasoconstriction of the efferent arterioles of
the glomerular microcirculation) are the drugs of choice.Diet
–   Protein restriction  to 0.60 and 0.75 g/kg per day, i.e. about 40 g/day (with higher amount of
essential amino acids). It reduces symptoms associated with uremia and may also slow the rate
of renal decline at earlier stages of renal disease.
–   Avoid foods with high potassium .
–   Salt restriction  is necessary in most of the patients. However, patients with salt-losing
nephropathy (tubulo-interstitial disease) require a high-salt intake.
Slowing progression of diabetic renal disease  by control of blood glucose and maintaining

HbA 1c in the range of 7.0 to 7.5.
Use of lipid-lowering agents:  Hypercholesterolemia is common in patients with significant
proteinuria, and in patients with CKD. Lipid lowering reduces vascular events in non-dialysis
CKD.
Cessation of smoking.
Exercise and weight reduction.
Avoid nephrotoxic medications.
Corrections of complications
Calcium and phosphate control and suppression of PTH
Treatment of hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia: Both should be treated aggressively.
–   Hypocalcemia:
♦   Treated with calcitriol or alphacalcidol (1-α-hydroxyvitamin D 3) or paricalcitol (19-nor-
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3) and calcium supplementation.
♦   Serum calcium level should be monitored to avoid hypercalcemia. Oral calcium carbonate
also decreases the bioavailability of dietary phosphates.
–   Hyperphosphatemia:  Treated with phosphate binders. Previously, aluminium hydroxide was
used to bind phosphate in the gut and was producing aluminium toxicity. Others include:
♦   Calcium carbonate and calcium acetate (serum calcium should be monitored).
♦   Polymer sevelamer carbonate (an anion-exchange resin).
♦   Lanthanum carbonate (a non-aluminum, non-calcium phosphate-binding agent) has higher
incidence of side effects.Treatment of hyperparathyroidism:  By the use of
–   Calcium carbonate or acetate.
–   Vitamin D analogues.
–   Calcimimetics activate the calcium-sensing receptor in the parathyroid gland, thereby
inhibiting PTH secretion. Cinacalcet is used in patients who are on dialysis.
Maintenance fluid and electrolyte balanceFluid retention: If there is evidence of fluid retention intake of dietary sodium is restricted and
loop diuretics may be necessary.
Hyperkalemia:  Usually responds to dietary restriction of potassium intake. Occasionally, ion-
exchange resins may be necessary to remove potassium in the gastrointestinal tract. If
hyperkalemia occurs during diuretic therapy, reduce or stop potassium-sparing diuretics, ACE
inhibitors and ARBs.Acidosis: Sodium bicarbonate may be effective, but can cause edema and hypertension owing to
extracellular fluid expansion. Calcium carbonate, also used as a calcium supplement and
phosphate binder is useful in treating acidosis.
Q. Write short essay/note on the management of anemia in chronic
renal failure.
Treatment of anemia in chronic renal failure
The anemia of erythropoietin (EPO) deficiency is treated with recombinant (synthetic) human
EPO (erythropoietin-alpha or -beta, or the longer-acting darbepoetin-alpha). Administration of
erythropoietin-alpha through subcutaneous route is contraindicated in CRF and the intravenous

route is used, initially 50 U/kg of epoetin-alpha over 1–5 min three times/week. EPO is less
effective in the presence of iron deficiency, active inflammation or malignancy, and in patients
with aluminium overload (found in dialysis).
Blood pressure, hemoglobin concentration and reticulocyte count are measured every 2 weeks and
the dose adjusted to maintain a target hemoglobin level of 10–12 g/dL.
Hemoglobin >13 g/dL has been associated with increased incidence of cardiovascular mortality.
Specific treatment:  Renal replacement therapy (refer pages 908-12).
Table 13.28 lists the differences between acute kidney injury (AKI) and
chronic kidney disease (CKD).
Table 13.28: Differences between acute kidney injury (AKI) and chronic
kidney disease (CKD).
AKI CKD
Previous history of kidney
diseaseAbsent Present
Previous elevated creatinine
>3 monthsAbsent Present
Anemia Absent Present
Hypertension +/– ++
Kidney Not contracted Contracted
Complications:
Hyperphosphatemia,
hypocalcemia, neuropathy,
osteodystrophy, band
keratopathyAbsent Present
CYSTIC DISEASES OF KIDNEY
Polycystic Kidney DiseasesQ. Write a short essay/note on polycystic kidney diseases.
Types: Two types
1. Autosomal-recessive (childhood) polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD):
A gene for ARPKD has been located on chromosome 6.
All patients also have cysts in the liver and patients who survive
infancy may develop congenital hepatic fibrosis and intrahepatic bile
duct dilatation (Caroli disease).

2. Autosomal-dominant (adult) polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD):
It is more common  hereditary disorder. ADPKD is genetically
heterogeneous disorder caused by mutations in  either PKD1 on
chromosome 16 (85% of cases) or PKD2 gene on chromosme 4 (15%).
It characterized by multiple thin-walled, spherical cysts in cortex
and medulla of both kidneys. These cysts expand and cause
destruction of kidney parenchyma and leads to renal failure.
Associated extrarenal anomalies:
–   Cysts in other organs such as liver (polycystic liver disease  in
more than 75% of cases) spleen, pancreas, thyroid, ovary,
endometrium, seminal vesicles and epididymis.
–   Intracranial berry aneurysms in the circle of Willis (in 10–30%)
which may rupture and cause subarachnoid hemorrhages.
–   Mitral valve prolapse and other cardiac valvular anomalies.
Clinical presentation
Q. Write short note on clinical features and complications of adult
polycystic kidney disease.
–   May be at any age from the second decade and majority of patients
remain asymptomatic until the fourth decade of life.
–   Presenting manifestations
♦   Acute loin/ flank pain (heaviness or dragging sensation), and/or
hematuria (owing to hemorrhage into a cyst), UTI
(pyelonephritis and renal cyst infection) or urinary tract stone
formation and renal colic (due to passage of blood clots in the
urine).
♦   Vague abdominal/loin or discomfort due to increased size of the
kidneys.
♦   Subarachnoid hemorrhage due to rupture of berry aneurysm.
♦   Hypertension and its complications
♦   Complications of associated liver cysts
♦   When sufficient quantity of nephrons are destroyed, patient
develops renal failure  and symptoms of uremia and/or anemia
associated with chronic kidney disease.
♦   Polycythemia (due to increased erythropoietin production) is a

rare complication and presentation of ADPKD.
–   Physical examination: Bilateral large abdominal masses of
irregular kidneys.
Investigation :
–   Abdominal ultrasound  is used for establishing the definitive diagnosis.
–   MRI is more sensitive than ultrasound and can detect small cysts (Fig.
13.18).
–   IVU: Rarely performed nowadays and may demonstrate the characteristic
‘drooping water lilly sign.’
Treatment:  Consists of (1) control of hypertension, (2) control of pain, (3) treatment of infection, (4)
renal dialysis or transplantation (if required) and (5) Vaptans and Somatostatin anologues have been
tried in treament of ADPKD.
Screening: The children of patients with established ADPKD should
undergo screening.
Fig. 13.18:  MRI showing polycystic kidney.
Medullary Sponge Kidney (MSK)
MSK is characterized by non-progressive dilatation of collecting ducts and
tubules.

Usually inherited as autosomal dominant.
May be associated with other developmental and genetic disorders.
Often asymptomatic, and may manifest with hematuria, nephrolithiasis
and infection.
Medullary Cystic Disease (MCD) or Juvenile Nephronophthisis
(JN)
Two distinct genetic and age-related forms with similar renal morphology.
Autosomal recessive manifests during childhood and is frequently
associated with extrarenal abnormalities such as ophthalmologic, mental
retardation, cerebellar ataxia, skeletal anomalies and hepatic fibrosis.The disease progresses to end-stage renal disease (ESRD) before the age
of 25.
OBSTRUCTIVE UROPATHY
Obstructive uropathy is a term used for obstruction in the urinary
passage involving the urethra, bladder, ureters or pelvi-calyceal system. It
leads to impedance to urine flow and consequent damage to renal function.Nature of obstruction: It be acute or chronic.
–   Acute obstruction: The changes in kidney function are completely
reversible after the relief of obstruction.
–   Chronic obstruction: It leads to irreversible structural and functional
changes.
Site and Cause of Urinary Tract Obstruction (Table 13.29)
NEPHROLITHIASIS
Nephrolithiasis (also known as kidney stones or renal calculi) is a
common disorder characterized by the formation of aggregates of
microscopic crystals into solid objects (stones).
Constituent: Usually contain calcium or phosphate along with small
amounts of proteins and glycoproteins.
Size: They vary greatly in size from millimeters to centimeters.
Age and gender: It usually appears during middle age and is more

common in men than women (M : F = 2:1).
Risk of recurrence: Calculi recur in about 50% of cases within 3 to 5
years.
Etiology (Table 13.30)
Q. Write short note on predisposing factors for renal stones.
Normal urine contains inhibitors of crystal formation (citrate, inorganic
magnesium, pyrophosphate, glycosaminoglycans and nephrocalcin) that
prevent the formation of calculi.When the chemical concentration of urine is altered, the calculus forming
substances may exceed their maximum solubility in water and may favor
crystal formation.
Table 13.29: Site and cause of urinary tract obstruction.
Site Cause
Infundibular/pelvis Congenital, calculi, infection, trauma, tumor
Ureteropelvic junction Congenital stenosis*, calculi, trauma
Ureter Obstructive megaureter*, ectopic ureter,
ureterocele, calculi*, retroperitoneal tumor
(lymphoma), inflammatory bowel disease,
retroperitoneal fibrosis, chronic granulomatous
disease (tuberculosis)
Bladder Neurogenic dysfunction*, tumor
(rhabdomyosarcoma), diverticula, ectopic ureter
Urethra Posterior urethral valves*, diverticula, strictures,
atresia, ectopic ureter, foreign body, phimosis*,
priapism prostatic enlargement*, extrinsic
compression due to tumor, lymph nodes
*Relatively common.
Table 13.30: Predisposing factors for renal stones.
Environmental and dietary factorsConditions that favor low volume of urine: High atmospheric temperatures, low intake of fluid
Diet: High protein, high sodium, low calcium
High excretion of sodium, oxalate and urate excretion
Low excretion of citrate
Acquired causes

Hypercalcemia
Ileal disease or resection (increases oxalate absorption and urinary excretion)
Renal tubular acidosis (RTA) type I (distal)
Infection: Urinary infection by urea-splitting organisms like Proteus, Pseudomonas, Klebsiella,
Staphylococcus, and Mycoplasma.
Congenital and inherited disorders
Medullary sponge kidney
Familial hypercalciuria
Cystinuria
Renal tubular acidosis (RTA) type I (distal)
Primary hyperoxaluria
Table 13.31: Types and causes of renal stones.
Type
1.  Calcium oxalate and/or calcium phosphate (~80%)
Idiopathic hypercalciuria: Most common
Hypercalciuria and hypercalcemia
Hyperoxaluria: Enteric (oxalate-containing foods, salt, protein-meat) Vitamin C abuse, primary
Hyperuricosuria
Idiopathic
2.  Uric acid (~7%)
Associated with hyperuricemia
Associated with hyperuricosuria
Idiopathic
3.  Struvite (Magnesium, Ammonium, Phosphate)~10%
Urinary tract infection
5.  Cystine (~2%)
5.  Others/unknown (~1%)
Types
Q. Write short note on types of renal stones.
Calcium Stones (Oxalate Calculus/Calcium Oxalate)
Most (80%) renal stones are composed of calcium complexed with
oxalate (calcium oxalate) or phosphate  (calcium phosphate) or a mixture
of these (calcium oxalate + calcium phosphate). These stones are
radiopaque .

Causes (Table 13.31).
Uric Acid Stones
Commonly found in patients with hyperuricemia (e.g. gout) and diseases
involving rapid cell turnover  (e.g. leukemias). However, more than 50%
of patients have neither hyperuricemia nor increased urinary excretion of
uric acid.
Uric acid is insoluble in acidic urine  and urine pH below 5.5 may
predispose  to uric acid stones.
Uric acid stones are radiolucent stones.
Causes (Table 13.31).
Struvite Stones or (Triple stones/Magnesium, Ammonium,
Phosphate Stones)
They are composed of calcium phosphate often with magnesium and
ammonium phosphate, and are known as struvite stones or triple
phosphate stones.
Causes (Table 13.31): These stones are unique in that they develop after
infections of the urinary tract by urea-splitting bacteria (e.g. Proteus),
which convert urea to ammonia → produces alkaline pH + slowing of
urine flow (people with abnormal urinary drainage, such as those with
ureteral reflux, neurogenic bladder, other forms of bladder dysfunction, or
ureteral diversions) → precipitation of magnesium, ammonium, phosphate
(struvite), and calcium phosphate (apatite).
Cystine StonesCystine stones are uncommon and associated with cystinuria, which is
due to genetic defects in the renal reabsorption of cystine or other amino
acids.
Stones form at low urinary pH (acidic urine).
Cystine stones also are radiopaque.
Recur frequently in most affected individuals.
Diagnosis is suggested by a positive urine nitroprusside test and confirmed
by analysis of the calculus.
Urine sediment: It may show the characteristic hexagonal cystine

crystals and crystal formation is favored in acidic urine (low pH).
Clinical Manifestations
Most common presenting symptoms: (1) Severe colicky flank and/or
abdominal pain  radiating to the anterior abdominal wall and (2)
hematuria (microscopic or gross). This symptom complex termed renal or
ureteric colic. These symptoms are due to partial or full obstruction
produced by stones while passing through the ureter.
Asymptomatic: Stone is incidentally discovered  in an abdominal
computed tomography or ultrasound examination for other purposes.
Symptoms depending on the site of stone:
–   Stones in the renal pelvis usually are painless unless infection or
obstruction is present.
–   Ureteral stones may cause nausea, vomiting, and severe abdominal
and/or flank pain radiating into the groin, urethra, or genitalia.
–   Stones at the ureterovesical  junction may produce dysuria,
frequency, and urgency, even in the absence of infection.
–   Once in the bladder, stones are normally passed out without difficulty,
but they can remain there and grow to very large sizes in patients with
bladder dysfunction.Fever and pyuria suggest associated urinary tract infection and must be
confirmed by urine culture.
Chronic and complete obstruction can result in hydronephrosis and loss of
function in the affected kidney.
Diagnosis/Investigations (Table 13.32)
CT-KUB  (CT of kidney, ureter and bladder) is the gold standard for
diagnosis. It defines the size and location of any stones (including non-
radiopaque stones, such as those containing uric acid and cysteine) in the
urinary tract.Abdominal ultrasound or intravenous pyelograms (IVP) are generally
inferior in sensitivity and specificity compared to the computed
tomography scan.A plain X-ray of the abdomen (Fig. 13.19) has limited diagnostic utility,
but may be useful to track progression of previously diagnosed radiopaque
stones.

Urine analysis: To confirm the presence of blood  and check for evidence
of infection . Urinary sediment should be examined under the microscope
for crystals. Any stones passed in urine should be saved for analysis.
Metabolic evaluation of stones should always be performed before starting
on a therapeutic regimen. Urine culture  should be done when clinically
indicated.
Laboratory tests: These include serum studies for renal function,
electrolytes, calcium, magnesium, phosphate, and uric acid. If there is
hypercalcemia, a parathyroid hormone level should be obtained.
Fig. 13.19: X-ray shows staghorn calculi.
Table 13.32: Important investigations in patients with renal calculi.
1.  Routine urine examination (albumin, RBC, WBC, casts and crystals and pH)
2.  Renal functions (blood urea, serum creatinine)
3.  Imaging (ultrasonography and IV urography)
4.  To find out underlying cause

Chemical analysis of calculus passed in urine
Plasma calcium, phosphate and parathormone
24-hour urine for estimation of calcium, oxalate, urate, cysteine
Treatment
Acute Management
Acute colic should be treated with an effective/powerful analgesic. Diclofenac orally or IV
infusion or as a suppository is very effective. However, opiates may be needed.
Increase the water intake to maintain a daily urine output of 2 L or more. If this is not possible,
intravenous fluids should be given to increase urinary output .
Stone removal strategies are based on the size of the stone .
–   Most small calculi (<5 mm in diameter) usually pass spontaneously.
–   Alpha blockers (e.g. tamsulosin) facilitate spontaneous expulsion of distal ureteral stones of
<6 mm size.
–   Stones >1 cm diameter  usually need urological or radiological intervention. Extracorporeal
shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL) causes fragmentation of most of the stones into pieces <5 mm,
which then pass spontaneously. Ureteroscopy with a YAG laser (for larger stones) and
percutaneous nephrolithotomy also can be used. Open surgery is rarely necessary.
Surgical removal  is attempted only if the stone passage becomes complicated. Complicating
features include failure to pass stone in 3 to 7 days, acute renal failure, gross hematuria with clots,
or infection. Open surgical procedures are very rarely performed. Endoscopic or surgical removal
is recommended for: (a) persistent pain not relieved by analgesia, (b) stone obstructing a single
kidney, or bilateral ureteral obstruction and/or pyonephrosis.
Chronic ManagementFluid: Increase the urine volumes (dilution) so that it reduces supersaturation and prevents new
stone formation. Increase the fluid intake until daily urine output exceeds 2–3 L.
Avoid: Vitamin D supplements (increase calcium absorption and excretion) and vitamin C
supplementation (increases oxalate excretion).
Calcium-containing stones
–   Modification of diet to reduce risks of stone formation in recurrent stone formers (>5 years
between episodes).
–   Thiazide diuretics (e.g. 12.5–25 mg of hydrochlorothiazide) reduce urinary calcium excretion
and are useful in hypercalciuric calcium stone formers.
–   Potassium citrate (60 mEq per day) in divided doses is used in hypocitraturia and also helps to
prevent recurrence in patients with normal urinary citrate levels.
–   Oxalate: Avoid foods rich in oxalate (spinach, rhubarb).
Uric acid stones
–   In patients with hyperuricosuria (>1,000 mg of uric acid per 24 hours) and normal serum
calcium, allopurinol  in the dose of 100 to 200 mg/day reduce uric acid synthesis.
–   Alkalinization of the urine to a pH of 7 or above to increase uric acid solubility and to
dissolve uric acid crystals. This is achieved by supplementation with potassium citrate,
potassium bicarbonate, or sodium bicarbonate in divided doses, or acetazolamide to alkalinize
the nocturnal urine.Cystine stones:  Decrease the urinary concentration of cystine below the solubility limit of 200 to
300 mg/L. Apart from the methods already described, alkalinization of the urine to a pH above 7.5

is critical. This usually can be achieved with Shohl’s solution (contains sodium citrate).
URINARY TRACT INFECTIONS
Q. Discuss the etiopathogenesis, clinical features, investigations and
management of urinary tract infection.
Definition
A urinary tract infection (UTI) is associated with multiplication of organisms
in the urinary tract and is defined as the presence of more than 105
organism/mL  in the midstream sample of urine (MSU).
Table 13.33: Clinical spectrum of urinary tract infection .
Asymptomatic bacteriuria (ABU) Symptomatic (disease)
Presence of bacteriuria (>105/mL or two
occasions in females and on one occasion in
males) indicating UTI but without symptoms.
Common in pregnancy
Occurs in the absence of symptoms
Does not usually require treatmentIncludes
–   Acute urethritis
–   Acute cystitis
–   Acute prostatitis
–   Acute pyelonephritis
–   Renal abscess
–   Septicemia with septic shockRequires antimicrobial therapy
Clinical Presentation (Table 13.33)
Anatomic Classification of Urinary Tract Infections (UTI)
Lower urinary tract infections: Include cystitis (bladder), prostatitis and
urethritis.
Upper urinary tract infections: Include infection of kidneys and their
collecting systems (pyelonephritis) and perinephric abscess.
Etiology
Q. What are the predisposing causes of urinary tract infection? What
antibiotics are commonly used?
Q. Write short note on:
Clinical features and management of cystitis.

Causes of dysuria.
Q. Write short essay on:
Etiology and factors responsible for urinary tract infections.
Risk factors for urinary tract infections.
Causative organisms: Majority (~85%) of urinary tract infection are the
caused by gram-negative bacilli  which are normal inhabitants of the
intestinal tract (enteric origin).
Most common pathogens: Escherichia coli  (80% cases), Proteus,
Klebsiella, Enterobacter, and Pseudomonas.
Less common: Streptococcus faecalis, staphylococci, and fungi.
In immunocompromised patients: Viruses  (polyoma virus,
cytomegalovirus, and adenovirus).
Pathogenesis (Fig. 13.20)
Q. Differences between male and female urinary tract infection.
Route of infection: Bacteria can reach urinary tract via the bloodstream, the
lymphatics or by direct extension (e.g. from a vesicocolic fistula), but in
majority of cases via the ascending transurethral (via the urethra) route.
A.  Ascending infection: It is the most common route  of infection of the
renal parenchyma, i.e. pyelonephritis. It is a form of endogenous
infection, where the source of infecting organisms is the patient’s own
fecal flora. The infection ascends from the lower urinary tract into the
renal parenchyma. Different steps in the pathogenesis of pyelonephritis
are:Colonization of the distal urethra and introitus (in the female): By
enteric or coliform bacteria from the perineum due to poor hygiene and
hormonal effects.Entry from the urethra to the bladder: Organisms may enter the
bladder during urethral catheterization or other instrumentation .
Urinary infections are more common in females, because of:
–   Shorter urethra (4 cm).
–   Absence of prostatic fluid which has antibacterial properties
–   Hormonal changes in women which affect the adherence of bacteria
to the mucosa.

–   Trauma to the urethra during sexual intercourse facilitates entry of
introital bacteria into the bladder.
–   Gram-negative enteric organisms residing around the anal region
also colonize the periurethral region.
Urinary tract obstruction and stasis of urine
Q. Write short note on causes of urinary tract infection in male.
–   Obstruction/bladder dysfunction: Causes incomplete emptying
and increased residual volume of urine. Examples: benign prostatic
hypertrophy, tumors, strictures, or calculi.
–   Neurogenic bladder dysfunction: Diabetes, spinal cord injury,
tabes dorsalis and multiple sclerosis predisposes to UTI.
–   Stasis: Organisms introduced into the bladder can multiply when
there is stasis.
B.  Hematogenous route: It is less common route of infection. Because
of rich blood supply, bacteria can seed the kidneys during the course of
septicemia or infective endocarditis through the bloodstream. It occurs
with nonenteric organisms (e.g. Staphylococci), fungi and viruses.
Hematogenous infections occur in: (i) the presence of ureteral
obstruction, (ii)debilitated patients and (iii) patients receiving
immunosuppressive therapy.

Fig. 13.20:  Pathogenesis of acute pyelonephritis. More common mode is ascending infection.
Hematogenous infection results from bacteremic spread.
Clinical Features (Table 13.34)
Q. Write short essay/note on the symptoms, diagnosis and treatment of
acute urinary infection.
Table 13.34: Clinical features of urinary tract infection (UTI).
Fever with chills and rigors Suprapubic pain and tenderness resulting from
cystitis

Micturition abnormalities
–   Increased frequency of micturition
–   Dysuria (painful voiding) or scalding
micturition
–   Urgency
–   Strangury: Intense desire to pass more
urine after the bladder has been emptied. It
is due to detrusor spasm and occurs in
cystitis.Urine:
–   Hematuria
–   Cloudy urine with an unpleasant odor
(UTI: urinary tract infection).
Uncomplicated versus Complicated Infection (Table 13.35)
Table 13.35: Differences between uncomplicated versus complicated UT
infection.
Features Uncomplicated urinary tract infection Complicated urinary tract infection
Characteristics UTI occurring in patients with
functionally normal urinary tractsUTI occurring in patients with
abnormal urinary tracts (e.g. with
stones, or associated diseases such as
diabetes mellitus) or infection that
extends beyond the bladder
Lesions Includes cystitis or urethritis due to
bacterial colonization of the bladder or
urethraInfection of renal parenchyma and
renal pelvis (pyelonephritis) or
prostate (prostatitis)
Sex affected Much more in females than in males Infection in men often considered
complicated
Predisposing
factorsMay not be obvious Usually occurs in presence of
obstructive lesions or following
instrumentation on urinary tract
Clinical features Burning on urination and frequent
urination without fever or flank painAccompanied by fever or flank painCostovertebral angle tenderness
Pelvic or perineal pain in men
(prostatitis)
Prognosis Responds well to treatment and
persistent or recurrent infection seldom
results in serious kidney damageMay the difficult to treat and relapses
after treatment are common
Sequelae Rare Common like sepsis, metastatic
abscesses and renal failure
Acute urethral syndrome: About one-third of females with dysuria and
pregnancy have either insignificant bacteria in midstream culture or
completely sterile cultures and is known as acute urethral syndrome. It is

often due to infection with usual organisms (culture shows only 102 to 104
bacteria) or due to unusual organism (N. gonorrheae, Chlamydia
trachomatis).
Causes of Dysuria (Box 13.19)
Factors Determining the Symptomatic Infection
Virulence: Ability of the organism to adhere to epithelial cells determines
the degree of virulence.
Innate host defense: The following hosts defence mechanisms are required
for the prevention of UTI:
–   Neutrophils: Activation of neutrophils is necessary for bacterial killing
and their impaired function predisposes an individual to severe UTI.
–   Complement: Complement activation with IgA production by
uroepithelium (acquired immunity) plays a major role in defence
against UTI.
–   Commensal organisms (e.g. lactobacilli): Form part of the normal host
defence and their eradication by spermicidal jelly or disruption by
certain antibiotics results in overgrowth of E. coli.
–   Urine flow  and normal micturition: Wash out bacteria and stasis of
urine predisposes to UTI.
–   Uroepithelium—mannosylated proteins: Such as Tamm-Horsfall
proteins (THP), have antibacterial properties and are present in the
mucus and glycocalyx covering uroepithelium. Normally, they
interfere with bacterial binding to uroepithelium. Thus, disruption of
this uroepithelium by trauma (e.g. sexual intercourse or
catheterization) predisposes to UTI.Pregnancy is associated with an increased incidence of UTI. Factors that
favor UTI include: (1) decreased ureteral tone (progestational activity), (2)
decreased ureteral peristalsis and (3) transient incompetence of the
vesicoureteral valves.
Box 13.19: Causes of dysuria.
Urinary tract infections (e.g. urethritis, cystitis, vagintis, pyelonephritis)
Sexually transmitted infections
Genital herpes
Chlamydia

Gonorrhea
Inflammation and irritation of bladder and urethra: e.g. stones
Honeymoon Cystitis (or ‘Honeymoon Disease’)
Q. Write short note on honeymoon cystitis.
It is cystitis caused as a result of frequent or prolonged sexual activity, as
would typically be expected in the honeymoon period of a marriage. It can
occur when a woman has sex for the first time, or when a woman has sex
after a long period of time without any sexual activity.
Symptoms: Same as with cystitis due to other cause.
During sex, E. coli  on the skin around your anus can be transferred to urethra
of women (for example, via partner’s fingers or penis.)
Investigations
Urine ExaminationDip stick tests: Most gram-negative organisms reduce nitrates to nitrites
and dip stick tests (nitrite test) are used to detect nitrite in urine. Dipsticks
that detect significant pyuria depend on the release of esterases from
leukocyte (leukocyte esterase test). Positive dip stick tests for both nitrite
and leukocyte esterase are highly predictive of acute infection.Microscopic examination: For leukocytes, leukocyte casts and red cells.
Culture and sensitivity of a freshly voided clean-catch midstream
specimen of urine.
Box 13.20 lists causes of sterile pyuria.
Box 13.20: Causes of sterile pyuria.
Partially treated UTI
Tuberculosis of urinary tract
Calculi in urinary tract
Infection with other organisms (e.g. Chlamydia, Corynebacterium, etc.)
Tumors of bladder
Chemical cystitis/drugs
Prostatitis
Interstitial nephritis
Appendicitis

Special Investigations
Prostatitis
–   Per rectal examination of the prostate.
–   Prostatic massage followed by urine culture.
Cystitis: Cystoscopy.
Renal ultrasonography CT-KUB, MR urogram: To identify
obstruction, cysts and calculi.
Intravenous urography (IVU), including a post-void film of bladder: To
identify physiological and/anatomical abnormalities of urinary tract.
Dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA) renal scan: For pyelonephritis.
Micturating cystourethrogram (MCU)  to identify vesicoureteric reflux and
disturbed bladder emptying.
In females with recurrent UTI, pelvic examination  to exclude cystocele,
rectocele and uterine prolapse.
Treatment
Antibiotic therapy: The choice of antibiotic depends on the result of urine culture and sensitivity
of urine.
–   The commonly employed antibiotics include cotrimoxazole (Trimethoprim and
sulfamethaxazole 1 double strength tablet two times daily), ampicillin (250 mg three times
daily), amoxicillin (250 mg 250 mg 8-hourly three times daily), oral cephalosporin,
nitrofurantoin (50 mg three times daily), and quinolones. Treatment is over 3–5 days in
uncomplicated infections (nitrofurantoin for 7 days) and for 7–10 days in complicated
infections.Hospitalized patients:
–   ##No risk factors for infection with a multidrug-resistant organism → ceftriaxone (1 gram IV
once daily) or piperacillin-tazobactam (3.375 grams IV every six hours)
–   ##At least one risk factor for infection with a multidrug-resistant organism → antipseudomonal
carbapenem (imipenem 500 mg IV every six hours, meropenem 1 gram IV every eight hours,
or doripenem 500 mg IV every eight hours).
–   ##Enterococcus  species or MRSA are suspected → add vancomycin, daptomycin, or linezolid.
–   ‘Single-shot’ treatment with 3 g of amoxicillin or 1.92 g of co-trimoxazole can be used in
patients with bladder symptoms of less than 36 hours duration and without any previous
history of UTI.
–   If patients has a calculi, catheter or other obstructions, no antibiotic is necessary unless
symptomatic.Fluid intake:  A high (2 L daily) fluid intake during treatment and for some subsequent weeks to
initiate water diuresis, so as to maintain a high rate of urine flow.
Other measures:
–   Regular complete emptying of urinary bladder at 2- to 3-hour intervals.
–   Alkalinization of urine

–   Urinary analgesics (e.g. phenazopyridine) and antispasmodics (e.g. hyoscyamine) to be given
for detrusor spasm.
–   If patients presents for the first time with high fever, loin pain and tenderness, urgent renal
ultrasound examination is performed to exclude an obstructed pyonephrosis. If this is present
percutaneous nephrostomy is performed to drain it.
–   Cranberry juice inhibits adherence of uropathogens to uroepithelial cells, hence advisable to
prevent recurrent UTI.
–   In females: The incidence of UTIs can be reduced by (1) adequate perineal hygiene, (2)
emptying the bladder before bedtime and before and after intercourse and (3) application of
0.5% cetrimide cream to periurethral area before intercourse. Atrophic vaginitis should be
identified and treated in post-menopausal women.
–   Avoidance of constipation (may impair bladder emptying).Asymptomatic bacteriuria: It requires treatment (1) if a patient is pregnant, (2) in case of renal
transplantation or (3) before planning for a urologic surgery. Treatment of asymptomatic
bacteriuria in pregnant women decreases the occurrence of pyelonephritis.
ACUTE PYELONEPHRITIS
Q. Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations, diagnosis and
management of acute pyelonephritis.
Q. Write short essay/note on common causes, diagnostic features and
management of upper urinary tract infections.
Definition: Acute pyelonephritis is an acute suppurative inflammation of
upper urinary tract affecting the tubules, interstitium, and renal pelvis.
There is often coincident cystitis.
Clinical Features
Classic triad: (1) loin pain, (2) fever and (3) tenderness over the kidneys.
Presence of this triad and significant bacteriuria usually indicates acute
pyelonephritis.
–   Sudden onset of pain in one or both loins (costovertebral/renal angle),
radiating to the iliac fossa and suprapubic area.
–   Fever with chills and rigors, and malaise.
–   Tenderness and guarding in the renal angle.
–   Dysuria, frequency, and urgency. Frequent passage of small amount of
urine accompanied by scalding. Cloudy urine.
–   Acute pyelonephritis caused by the presence of obstruction (e.g. stone,
tumor, bladder neck obstruction, enlarged prostate), can be very severe

and may progress to renal abscess.
–   Rarely, acute pyelonephritis may be associated with necrotizing
papillitis /papillary necrosis. Causes include diabetes mellitus, chronic
urinary obstruction, analgesic nephropathy and sickle-cell disease.
Investigations
Q. Write short note on urinary abnormalities in acute pyelonephritis.
Peripheral blood: Characteristically shows leukocytosis.
Urine examination
–   Microscopy shows numerous pus cells and organisms, WBC casts,
some red cells and epithelial cells.
–   Culture of midstream urine (MSU) shows growth the causative
organism.
Other investigations: When the diagnosis is uncertain, other investigation
are required to exclude anatomical abnormalities of the urinary tract.
When acute pyelonephritis is severe, the possibility of any obstruction or
abscess formation must be excluded. It is also necessary, if there is
inadequate response or rapid recurrence of pyelonephritis following
appropriate therapy.
–   Ultrasonography: Most frequently done, but is relatively insensitive.
–   Computerized tomography (CT) is performed if ultrasound is
normal. It can detect calculi, obstruction, hemorrhage, gas,
enlargement of kidney and inflammatory masses (damaging renal
function).
–   IVU is usually not done at present.
–   Radionuclide scan: The radionuclide agent is injected into bladder
through suprapubic route may be useful to detect reflux.
–   Dimercaptosuccinic acid  (DMSA) renal scan: If performed within 2
days DMSA can help diagnosing acute pyelonephritis. It is advisable
to scan after 4–6 months of an acute episode to detect renal
parenchymal damage.
Management
Intravenous antibiotics: Intravenous ampicillin, amoxicillin plus aminoglycosides (e.g. tobramycin),
cephalosporin (e.g. Cefuroxime), quinolone (e.g. ciprofloxacin) or a combination beta-lactam/beta
lactamase inhibitor (piperecillin-tazobactum) or carbapenem (meropenem) (discussed above on page

904).
Persistent or Recurrent UTI
Q. Write short essay/note on persistent or recurrent urinary tract
infection and its management.
In some patients with UTI, the causative organism persists on repeat
culture of urine in spite of treatment, or re-infection develops with any
organism after an interval. Such cases, there is more probably an
underlying cause is present and hence a more detailed investigation is
necessary.Recurrent infections are common in females.
Recurrent UTI, especially in the presence of an underlying cause may
produce permanent renal damage. If an underlying cause cannot be
treated, suppressive antibiotic therapy can prevent recurrence and reduce
the risk of septicemia and renal damage.Culture and sensitivity of urine should be at regular intervals.
Treatment:  Two or three antibiotics in sequence, rotating every 6 months often reduces the
emergence of resistant organisms. Other methods discussed above on page 904.
Emphysematous Pyelonephritis
Q. Write short note on emphysematous pyelonephritis
It is a type of severe acute pyelonephritis most often caused by E. coli  and
K. pneumoniae .
The major risk factors for emphysematous UTIs are diabetes and urinary
tract obstruction.
The infections primarily occur in women at a mean age of about 60 years.
Abdominal pain is the major clinical manifestation with renal angle
tenderness. Pneumaturia may be seen after bladder catheterization.
The diagnosis of emphysematous UTIs is made by abdominal imaging;
computed tomography is more sensitive than plain films and can detect
obstructing lesions.Treatment: Parenteral antibiotics, percutaneous drainage/nephrectomy.

CHRONIC PYELONEPHRITIS
Q. Write short essay on the clinical features, investigations and
management of chronic pyelonephritis (reflux nephropathy).
Chronic pyelonephritis is a chronic inflammation of tubulointerstitial tissue
leading to scarring of calyces, pelvis and renal parenchyma.
Types
Reflux nephropathy (chronic reflux-associated pyelone-
phritis/atrophic pyelonephritis): It results recurrent UTIs from a
combination of factors like:
–   Congenital vesicoureteral reflux and intrarenal reflux: Chronic
pyelonephritis is so often associated with vesicoureteric reflux and
some feel that it is better named ‘reflux nephropathy’. Reflux may be
unilateral or bilateral and accordingly causes scarring of one or both
the kidney.
–   Superimposition of a urinary infection acquired in infancy or early
childhood.Chronic obstructive pyelonephritis: Develops due to recurrent
infections superimposed on obstructive lesions, which lead to renal
inflammation parenchymal atrophy, and scarring.
Chronic pyelonephritis is an important cause of renal damage and end-
stage renal disease. Morphological changes are depicted in Figure 13.21.

Fig. 13.21: Morphological changes in reflux nephropathy compared with normal
Clinical Features
Reflux pyelonephritis may be of silent onset. Clinical features includes
back pain, lassitude, or symptoms of uremia or hypertension. Other
symptoms include frequency of micturition, dysuria, pyuria and
bacteriuria.Xanthogranulomatous pyelonephritis (XGP): Predominantly affects
elderly women. The condition is commonly associated with renal calculi
or obstructive uropathy and is usually unilateral. The kidney is enlarged,
and non-functioning and may even mimic a tumor.
InvestigationsCulture of the urine: E. coli  is the most common organism causing
infection. Other organisms include Proteus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and
staphylococci.

Ultrasound of kidneys
CT scan of the kidneys: Diagnostically, it reveals irregular renal outlines,
clubbed calyces and a variable decrease in the size of kidney. The
condition may be unilateral or bilateral and may affect entire or part of the
kidney.DMSA scan is more accurate than IVU.
Intravenous urogram: Shows localized contraction of the renal substance
associated with clubbing of the adjacent calyces.
Micturating cystourethrogram (MCU): Reveals vesicoureteric reflux,
but has been replaced by radionuclide cystography scan.
Cystoscopy and urography: May detect any abnormality causing
obstruction to the flow of urine.
Management
Eradicating predisposing factors:
–   Examples include treatment of calculi and malformations.
–   Surgery is performed if the vesicoureteric reflux persists and is indicated only when the disease
is confined to one kidney. Most cases of childhood reflux likely to disappear spontaneously.
Patients with end-stage renal failure require renal replacement.
Treatment of infection: Meticulous early detection and control of infection can prevent further
scarring and allow normal growth of the kidneys. Unfortunately, once the parenchyma is scarred it
becomes susceptible to blood borne reinfection sometimes with a different and resistant organism.
Thus, antibiotics may be of temporary benefit and progressive renal damage is common.
–   Use of appropriate antibiotics for 7 days.
–   If the infection cannot be eradicated suppressive therapy may be given several months with
trimethoprim (100 mg at bed time) or nitrofurantoin (50 mg at bed time).Other measures:
–   Complete emptying of the bladder should be advised.
–   Double micturition is advised if reflux. This consists of emptying of the bladder and then again
second time attempt to empty the bladder, after about 10–15 minutes.
Control of hypertension because severe hypertension is a relatively common cause of end-stage renal
failure in childhood or adult life.
TUBERCULOSIS OF THE URINARY TRACT
Q. Describe renal tuberculosis.
Q. Briefly outline the clinical features, investigations and treatment of
tuberculosis of the urinary tract.

Tuberculosis of the urinary tract results from hematogenous spread from a
distant primary focus of infection that is often impossible to identify.
Types of lesions in renal tuberculosis (Fig. 13.22 and Table 13.36).
Etiology and Pathology (Figs. 13.22A to H)
Tuberculosis usually involves one kidney. Rarely, tuberculosis may be
bilateral as part of the generalized process of military tuberculosis.
Tuberculous granulomas in the region of renal pyramid may coalesce to
form an ulcer and discharge mycobacteria and pus cells into the urine.
Untreated lesions of renal tuberculosis may enlarge and form tuberculous
abscess in the parenchyma.
Fibrosis at the necks of the calyces and the renal pelvis may cause
tuberculous pyonephrosis.
Extension of tuberculous pyonephrosis or renal abscess may result in
perinephric abscess and the kidney may be progressively replaced by
caseous material (putty kidney). This may become calcified (cement
kidney).Renal tuberculosis is often followed by infection of the ureters and bladder
leading to ureteral stricture and contraction of bladder.
Rarely, cold abscesses may form in the loin. In male, tuberculous
epididymo-orchitis may develop even without any lesion in bladder.
Table 13.36: Types of lesions in renal tuberculosis.
Types
Tuberculous papillary ulcer Tuberculous perinephric abscess
Cavernous form Pseudocalculi
Hydronephrosis Caseous (putty) kidney
Pyonephrosis Miliary

Figs. 13.22A to H:  Various types of lesions in tuberculosis of kidney.
Clinical Features
Usually occurs between 20 and 40 years of age.
Affects males more commonly than females (2:1).
Affects right kidney more commonly than the left.
Symptoms
These include a dull ache in the renal angle, increased frequency of
micturition, dysuria and constitutional symptoms such as fever (evening rise
of temperature) malaise and weight loss. Tuberculous cystitis present with
hematuria and painful micturition.Physical examination: Shows an enlarged palpable kidney and tenderness
in the renal angle.
Investigation
Urine examination:
–   Microscopic examination: Sterile pyuria  is characterized by urine
containing pus cells, but fails to grow any organism on routine culture.
This is the characteristic feature.

–   Urine examination for tubercle bacilli: Five early morning
consecutive samples of urine should be examined (because there is
usually intermittent excretion of tubercle bacilli). Alternatively, a 24-
hours urine collection can be examined for acid-fast bacillus (AFB).
–   Culture of the urine: Diagnosis of active tuberculous infection
depends on culture of mycobacteria from early-morning urine samples.
Radiography
–   Plain KUB radiograph: It may show calcification (pseudocalculi) in
the renal parenchyma and ureter.
–   Chest X-ray: Should be done in all cases to exclude active or previous
evidence of pulmonary tuberculosis.
IVU: May reveal irregular contour of the kidney, hydrocalyx, cold
abscess, displacement of adjacent calyces, and small contracted bladder
(systolic or thimble bladder).Ultrasonography: May show dilated calyces, hydronephrosis, small
abscesses and areas of calcification.
Excretion urography: May show cavitating lesions in the renal papillary
areas with calcification. May also show ureteral obstruction with
hydronephrosis.Cystoscopy: May show a characteristic ‘golf hole’ appearance of the
ureteric orifice due to sclerosing periureteritis.
Treatment
Antituberculous chemotherapy:  Similar to that for pulmonary tuberculosis. Renal
ultrasonography or excretion urography should be done 2–3 months after initiation of treatment as
ureteric strictures may first develop in the healing phase.
Surgical treatment may be required in selected cases.

RENAL REPLACEMENT THERAPIES (RRT)
Q. Write short essay/note on renal replacement therapy.
Requirement
RRT may be required on a temporary measure in patients with AKI or on a
permanent measure for CKD.
Main options of renal replacement therapy (Table 13.37 and Box 13.21):
(1) peritoneal dialysis, (2) intermittent hemodialysis (HD) combined with
ultrafiltration, if necessary, (3) intermittent hemofiltration, (4) continuous
arteriovenous or venovenous hemo-filtration, and (5) hemodiafiltration and
(6) renal transplantation.
Box 13.21: Aim of renal replacement techniques.
To replace all the excretory functions of the normal kidney namely excretion of nitrogenous wastes
Maintenance of:
–   Plasma biochemistry
–   Normal electrolyte concentrations
–   Normal extracellular volume (fluid balance)
Note:  They do not replace the endocrine and metabolic functions of the kidney
Table 13.37: Options of renal replacement therapy.
Options
Dialysis
Hemodialysis
Peritoneal dialysisClearance of small molecules and toxins using
diffusion occurring across a membrane
Dialysis with clearance occurring across a
synthetic membrane
Dialysis with clearance occurring across a native
peritoneal membrane
Ultrafiltration Fluid removal across a semipermeable membrane
during dialysis by convection (solutes are moved
under pressure across a membrane)
Hemofiltration Continuous dialysis therapy which involves
removal of plasma water and its dissolved
constituents (e.g. K+, Na+, urea, phosphate) by
convection flow across a high-flux
semipermeable membrane, and concurrent
reinfusion of an electrolytic solution of the

desired biochemical composition
Hemodiafiltration Combination of hemodialysis and hemofiltration
Continuous renal replacement therapies Include hemofiltration and hemodiafiltration
Hemodialysis
Q. Write short note on hemodialysis.
Q. Describe the types and indications for dialysis. Enumerate
complications of hemodialysis.
Hemodialysis (Fig. 13.23) is the most common form of RRT used in end
stage renal disease (ESRD) and also in acute kidney injury (AKI).
Basic Principles
In hemodialysis, blood from the patient is pumped through an array of
semipermeable membranes (the dialyser, often called an ‘artificial
kidney’).This brings the blood into close contact with dialysate (dialysis fluid)
flowing countercurrent to the blood on the other side of membrane.
This allows accumulated uremic toxins (e.g. urea and creatinine) and
electrolytes (e.g. potassium) to diffuse across a semipermeable membrane
(Fig. 13.24) from the blood (where they are in high concentrations), to the
dialysis fluid on the other side (where they are in low concentrations).
This in turn results in changes in the plasma biochemistry towards that of
the dialysate due to the diffusion of molecules down their concentration
gradients.

Fig. 13.23:  Hemodialysis unit.
Access for Hemodialysis
Usually for adequate dialysis, required blood flow is 200–300 mL/minute and
the dialysate flow is 500 mL/minute. Hemodialysis involves gaining access to
the circulation through:
Arteriovenous fistula (Fig. 13.25): For long-term dialysis access to the
blood stream is achieved by surgical construction of an arteriovenous
fistula, usually in the forearm using the radial or brachial artery and the
cephalic vein.Arteriovenous shunt: In patients with poor-quality veins or arterial
disease (e.g. diabetes mellitus) access is obtained by interposing a piece of
synthetic material (polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) grafts) between native
artery and native vein.Central venous catheter: If immediate dialysis is required, a large bore
double lumen cannula may be inserted into a central vein (subclavian,
jugular or femoral).

Each session of hemodialysis usually lasts for 4–5 hours. Two or three
sittings/week may be required. Indications of RRT discussed under AKI.
Fig. 13.24:  Hemodialysis showing changes across a semipermeable dialysis membrane.
Fig. 13.25:  Arteriovenous fistula (AV) created for dialysis.
Types of hemodialysis are depicted in Figure 13.26.
Complications
Q. Write short essay/note on complications of hemodialysis.

Hypotension during dialysis:  It is the major complication and its contributing factors include: (1)
excessive removal of extracellular fluid and hypervolemia, (2) shift of fluid into intracellular
compartment (due to rapid reduction in urea in the extracellular compartment) and inadequate
‘refilling’ of the blood compartment from the interstitial compartment, (3) abnormalities of venous
tone, (4) autonomic neuropathy, (5) acetate toxicity that causes vasodilatation, and (6) left
ventricular failure.Other complications:
–   Cardiac arrhythmias due to potassium and acid-base shifts.
–   Hemorrhage due to anticoagulants and venous needle discontinuation.
–   Air embolism due to disconnected or defect lines and equipment malfunction.
–   Anaphylactic reactions to the dialyser may rarely occur to ethylene oxide (used to sterilize most
dialysers) or in patients receiving ACE inhibitors (with polyacrylonitrile dialysers).
–   Hard-water syndrome due to failure to soften water resulting in a high calcium concentration
prior to mixing with dialysate concentrate.
–   Hemolytic reactions
–   Infections usually occur with vascular access devices (catheter or fistula).
–   Pulmonary edema due to fluid overload. Other features include hypothermia, platelet
consumption and electrolyte disturbances.Dialysis disequilibrium syndrome:  May develop following a dialysis session. It is characterized
by nausea, vomiting, restlessness, headache, hypertension, myoclonic jerks and in severe case,
seizures and coma. This is because of rapid changes in plasma osmolality leading to cerebral
edema.
Dialysis dementia:  May develop in patients on long-term hemodialysis. It is characterized by
speech dyspraxia, myoclonic jerks, dementia, seizures and later, death. It is mainly due to
aluminium toxicity and some may be due to viral infection.


Fig. 13.26:  Types of hemodialysis
The rate of death from cardiac disease is higher in patients on hemodialysis
when compared to patients on peritoneal dialysis or after renal
transplantation.
Acute Dialysis in Critically Ill Patients
Continuous Renal Replacement Therapy (CRRT)
Advantages
It is used in critically ill patients who cannot tolerate large fluid shifts and
hypotension that frequently occurs during standard hemodialysis.
It allows slow and isotonic fluid removal. Thus produces excellent
hemodynamic tolerance, even in patients with shock or severe fluid
overload.Since dialysis is continuous, volume removal and correction of metabolic
abnormalities can be modified at any time. This allows rapid adjustment in
critically ill patients.
CRRT modalities
The most common is continuous veno-venous hemodiafiltration (Fig. 13.27).
This combines convective and diffusive clearance through a dialyser with
reinfusion of electrolyte-rich solutions.
Indications
CRRT is of choice in patients with ARF combined with hemodynamic
instability, cerebral edema, severe fluid overload and encephalopathy.
Complications
Embolization, arteriovenous fistula formation, hemorrhage and infection
from catheter access.
Peritoneal Dialysis
Q. Write a short note on peritoneal dialysis and its indications. (Box
13.22).
In peritoneal dialysis, the peritoneal membrane of the patient acts as a
semipermeable membrane. Through this diffusion of water and solutes

takes place and this avoids the need of extracorporeal circulation of blood.
Very simple, low-technology treatment when compared to hemodialysis.
Principle (Fig. 13.28A): Solutes diffuse from blood across the peritoneal
membrane to peritoneal dialysis fluid down a concentration gradient and
water diffuses through osmosis.
Fig. 13.27:  Principles of hemofiltration.
Box 13.22: Indications for peritoneal dialysis.
1. Preferred mode of dialysis for infants and young children
2. Patients with severe hemodynamic instability on hemodialysis
3. Patients with difficult vascular access
Procedure
A plastic or silicone tube /catheter is placed into the peritoneal cavity
through the anterior abdominal wall (Fig. 13.28B).
Dialysate is instilled into the peritoneal cavity, usually under gravity.
Urea, creatinine, phosphate, and other uremic toxins pass across the
peritoneal membrane into the dialysate because of their concentration
gradients.Water (with solutes) is attracted into the peritoneal cavity by osmosis.
The fluid is removed by gravity after 30–60 minutes, and the fluid is
changed regularly to repeat the process several times. This is called as
intermittent peritoneal dialysis and is mainly used in ARF.
When chronic peritoneal dialysis required, a soft catheter is inserted, with its

tip in the pelvis with an exit site in the lateral abdominal wall.
Complications
Technical complications: Catheter-related exit site infection, tunnel
infection, peritonitis, pericatheter leakage, poor drainage, catheter
migration rarely bowel perforation.
Raised intra-abdominal pressure: Hernias, fluid leaks, rectal prolapse,
vaginal prolapse, low back pain, scrotal edema, and decrease in appetite,
sclerosing encapsulating peritonitis.
Forms of Peritoneal DialysisContinuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD)
–   In this type of peritoneal dialysis, dialysate is present within the
peritoneal cavity continuously, except when dialysate is being
exchanged.
–   Dialysate exchanges are performed three to five times a day.
–   About 1.5–3 L bags of dialysate are infused into the peritoneal catheter
using a sterile no-touch technique.
–   Each exchange takes 20–40 minutes.
–   This technique is useful for maintenance of peritoneal dialysis in
patients with end-stage renal failure (CRF).
Figs. 13.28A and B:  (A) Principle of peritoneal dialysis; (B) Peritoneal dialysis.
Nightly intermittent peritoneal dialysis (NIPD):
–   In this type of peritoneal dialysis, an automated device is used to
perform exchanges each night (while the patient is asleep).
–   Apart from that night, sometimes dialysate is left in the peritoneal
cavity during the day, to increase the time during which biochemical
exchange is occurring.

Tidal dialysis: In this type of peritoneal dialysis, a residual volume of
dialysate is left within the peritoneal cavity with continuous cycling of
smaller volumes in and out.
Differences between hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis are presented in
Table 13.38.
Table 13.38: Differences between hemodialysis and peritoneal dialysis.
Features Hemodialysis Peritoneal dialysis
Efficiency Efficient Less efficient
Duration and time interval 4 hours three times per week
is usually adequate4 exchanges per day are usually
required. Each taking 30–60 minutes
(continuous ambulatory peritoneal
dialysis) or 8–10 hours each night
(automated peritoneal dialysis)
Interval between dialysis 2–3 day between treatments A few hour between treatments
Conduction of dialysis Needs visits to hospital
(although home treatment is
possible for some patients)Performed at home
Requirement Requires adequate venous
circulation for vascular
accessRequires an intact peritoneal cavity
without major scarring from previous
surgery
Diet and fluid restriction Required between
treatmentsDiet and fluid less restricted
Speed of removal of fluid
and associated symptomsFluid removal compressed
into treatment periods. May
cause symptoms and
hemodynamic instabilitySlow continuous fluid removal.
Usually asymptomatic
Infections Infections related to vascular
access may occurPeritonitis and catheter-related
infections may occur
Dependency of patient Patients are usually
dependent on othersPatients can take fully responsibility
for their treatment
Renal TransplantationQ. Write a short essay/note on renal transplantation.
Successful renal transplantation offers the best chance of long-term survival
with almost complete rehabilitation in ESRD.
Advantages
Treatment of choice for most patients with advanced (end-stage) renal

failure.
Method of renal replacement therapy having significant survival
advantage when compared to dialysis patients.
Freedom from dietary and fluid restriction.
Corrects anemia and infertility in CRF patients.
Reduces the need for parathyroidectomy.
Donor is usually a living close relative or a cadaveric donor.
Factors Determining the Success
Donor: Living donors should be healthy and should be free o f
hypertension, diabetes, or malignant disease. With the acceptance of the
concept of brain death in India, cadaveric transplants are being also
performed at present.
ABO (blood group) compatibility between donor and recipient is
required.
Matching donor and recipient for HLA type:
–   It is preferable to have a donor with a HLA-identical that of the
recipient. Matching for HLA-DR antigens (class II) appears to be most
important for graft survival. Matching at the HLA-B locus (class I) has
only a minor effect on graft outcomes.
–   Complete compatibility at HLA-A, HLA-B and HLA-DR offers the
best chance of long survival of the graft, followed by a single HLA
mismatch (i.e. antigen possessed by the donor and not possessed by the
recipient).
–   Class I antigens (HLA-A, B and C) are detected by a lymphocyte assay
and class II (HLA-DR) by mixed lymphocyte culture.Cross-matching: Pre-sensitization (i.e. presence of antibodies against
donor ABO blood group and HLA class I antigens) is detected by a cross-
matching. Transplantation is contraindicated if it is positive.
Table 13.39: Absolute and relative contraindications for renal
transplantation.
Absolute contraindications Relative contraindications
RenalReversible renal involvementAge: Very young children (<1 year) or older
people (> 75 years)

Active glomerulonephritis
Active vasculitis or recent anti-GBM disease
Previous sensitization to donor tissueIliofemoral occlusive disease
Diabetes mellitus
Severe diseases of lower urinary tract: Bladder
dysfunction or urethral abnormalities
Chronic liver disease
Treated malignancy
Significant comorbidityNon-renal
Disseminated or active untreated cancer
Severe occlusive aorto-iliac vascular disease
Severe psychiatric disease
Persistent substance abuse
Severe mental retardation
Severe heart disease/refractory congestive
heart failure
Active infection
Contraindications (Table 13.39)
Technique
Before transplantation, the recipient receives a hemodialysis to ensure a
relatively normal metabolic state.
In transplantation, donor human kidney (either from a cadaveric donor or
from a living close relative) is placed in an extraperitoneal pouch in the
iliac fossa of the recipient (Fig. 13.29).The renal artery and vein of donor kidney are anastomosed to the
recipient’s iliac vessels. The donor ureter is placed into the recipient’s
bladder. The recipient’s original kidneys are left undisturbed.Eighty percent of grafts now survive for 5–10 years in the best centers,
and 50% for 10–30 years.

Fig. 13.29:  Renal transplantation.
Immunosuppressive Therapy
Unless the donor is genetically identical (i.e. an identical twin),
immunosuppressive treatment is required to prevent rejection.
Immunosuppressive therapy varies from center to center and combination
of drugs is often used.
Commonly used drugs include corticosteroids, antiproliferative agents
(e.g. azathioprine, mycophenolate mofetil), calcineurin inhibitor (e.g.
ciclosporin, tacrolimus, sirolimus), and antibodies (polyclonal anti-
thymocytic globulin (ATG) and anti-lymphocytic globulin (ALG) and
monoclonal (OKT3) antibodies). Newer drugs include basiliximab and
daclizumab (antibodies against interleukin-2 receptor).
ComplicationsAcute tubular necrosis (ATN): It is the commonest cause of cadaveric
graft dysfunction (up to 40–50%).
Technical failures: These include (1) occlusion or stenosis of the arterial
anastomosis, (2) occlusion of the venous anastomosis, and (3) urinary
leaks owing to damage to the lower ureter, or defects in the anastomosis

between ureter and recipient bladder.
Transplantation rejection: In spite of prophylactic use of immune
suppressants before or at the time of transplantation, most recipients
undergo one or more type of rejection.
–   Hyperacute rejection.
♦   A special type of compliment mediated rejection occurs if the host has preformed anti-
donor antibodies (for example, anti-ABO blood type antibodies) in the circulation before
transplantation. These antibodies bind to endothelium of graft organ, activates complement
followed by vascular thrombosis.
♦   Occurs within minutes. The transplanted kidney must be removed immediately to prevent a
severe systemic inflammatory response and generalized clotting.
–   Acute rejection
♦   Time of occurrence: Within days to weeks after transplantation in
the non-immunosuppressed host.
♦   Type: Either cellular or humoral immune mechanisms may
predominate.
◊   Acute cellular rejection: Occurs within few months after
transplantation and develops renal failure.
◊   Acute humoral rejection (rejection vasculitis): Main target of the
antibodies is the graft vasculature àmanifest as vasculitis.
Caused by anti-donor antibodies
◊   Features: Acute rejection is characterized by deterioration of
renal function, hypertension, weight gain, tenderness and
swelling of the graft, fever and appearance of protein,
lymphocytes and renal tubular cells in the urine sediment.
◊   If the diagnosis is not clear, percutaneous needle biopsy is
performed for histopathological examination.
TreatmentUse additional immunosuppressant including intravenous pulses of methylprednisolone and
antilymphocyte antibody.
Antibody-mediated rejection is less likely to respond to corticosteroids and may be treated with
plasma exchange (to remove the antibody) and intravenous immunoglobulin.
–   Chronic rejection: Few patients may Cdevelop irreversible chronic
graft rejection.
Other Complications

–   Infection  is the most important cause of morbidity and mortality. Risk
of infections can be divided into three distinct time periods.
1. First month post-transplant:  These include (a) infections present in the recipient before
transplant and aggravated by immunosuppressive therapy (e.g. tuberculosis, systemic fungal
infections, hepatitis B or C, HIV or smouldering bacterial infections); (b) infections
transmitted through contaminated allograft; and (c) routine post-surgical bacterial infections
of the wound, IV lines and urine catheters.
2. 1–6 months post-transplant:  These include: (a) viral infections (e.g. cytomegalovirus,
Epstein-Barr virus, hepatitis viruses and HIV) and (b) superinfection with opportunistic
bacteria or fungi (e.g. Pneumocystis carinii, Listeria monocytogenes  and aspergillus).
3. More than 6 months post-transplant:  These include (a) chronic progressive disease due to
viral infections acquired earlier (e.g. progressive CMV chorioretinitis, progressive liver
disease due to hepatitis B or C virus, and EBV-associated lymphoproliferative disorders); (b)
opportunistic infections with pathogens such as Pneumocystis carinii, Cryptococcus , Listeria
monocytogenes and Nocardia asteroides in patients with chronic graft dysfunction who have
received multiple courses of anti-rejection therapy; and (c) infections similar to those in the
community.
–   Post-transplantation lymphoproliferative disorders: Epstein-Barr
virus-associated malignancies are common in those who received
biological agents and in children.
–   Malignancy: Immunosuppressive therapy is associated with increases
the risk of skin tumors (e.g. basal and squamous cell carcinoma).
Incidence is 5–6% in Western countries and lower (2%) in India.
–   Cardiovascular disease is responsible for deaths in 20–30% of
patients, especially the elderly and diabetics.
–   Post-transplant hypertension  develops in up to 80% of patients early
in the postoperative course and in 50% of stable recipients on
maintenance immunosuppression.
–   Post-transplant osteoporosis is common due to treatment with
steroids.
–   Recurrent and de novo renal disease is common (e.g. primary FSGS,
type II membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis, diabetic
nephropathy and IgA nephropathy, hyperoxaluria).
–   Vascular: Renal artery thrombosis and renal artery stenosis.
–   Urologic: Ischemic necrosis of the lower end of the ureter may
produce urinary leak, calyceal-cutaneous fistula. Vesico-ureteric reflux
into the graft may lead to increased frequency of urinary tract
infections.

RENAL BIOPSY
Q. Write short note on renal biopsy and its indications.
It is used to establish the nature and extent of renal disease. Biopsy is
performed transcutaneously with ultrasound guidance. Biopsy material is
examined under light microscopy, electron microscopy and by
immunofluorescence. Indications for renal biopsy are presented in Table
13.40 and contraindications and complications of renal biopsy are presented
in Table 13.41.
Table 13.40: Indications for renal biopsy.Nephrotic syndrome/glomerular proteinuria in adults
Nephrotic syndrome in children with atypical presentation/not responding to treatment (steroids)
Chronic renal failure with normal sized kidney
Unexplained acute renal failure
Differential diagnosis of acute nephritic syndrome
Isolated hematuria/ non-nephrotic proteinuria. Unexplained renal insufficiency when kidney
dimensions are near normal on ultrasonography
Impaired functioning of renal transplant
Asymptomatic hematuria when other diagnostic tests cannot detect the cause
Involvement of kidney in systemic diseases (e.g. systemic lupus erythematosus, amyloidosis)
Table 13.41: Contraindications and complications of renal biopsy.
Contraindications Complications
Coagulation disorders
Thrombocytopenia
Uncontrolled hypertension
Solitary kidney
Renal neoplasms (to avoid spread along
needle track)
Large and multiple renal cysts
Acute urinary tract infections
Urinary tract obstructions
Kidney less than 60% predicted sizePain
Infection
Bleeding into the urine
Bleeding around kidney
Arteriovenous fistula
Accidental biopsy of other organ or
perforation of organs such as liver, spleen
Rarely death

Fluid and Electrolyte Disturbances

CHAPTER
14
DISORDERS OF SODIUM AND WATER
BALANCE
Q. Write short note on the normal distribution of water in the body of
an average adult male.
Composition of Body Fluids
Water is the most abundant constituent of the body (50% of body weight
in women and 60% of the body weight in men is water).
Total body water is distributed in two major compartments:
1. Intracellular fluid compartment (IFC) = 55–75%
2. Extracellular fluid compartment (ECF) = 25–45%. ECF consists of:
♦   Intravascular (plasma water) compartment
♦   Extravascular (interstitial) compartment: Ratio between
intravascular and extravascular compartment is 1:3.
Distribution of water and electrolytes in the body are shown in Figure 14.1.
Electrolytes (Table 14.1)
Electrolytes are ions either positively (cations) or negatively (anions)
charged.
The electrolyte composition of intracellular and extracellular fluid is
different and is shown on Table 14.1 and Figure 14.1.
Sodium (Na+) and chloride (Cl–) are the important electrolytes in the ECF
compartment.
Potassium (K+) and phosphate are the important electrolytes in the
intracellular fluid (ICF) compartment.
Osmolarity: It is number of osmoles per liter of solution. It depends on

the volume of various solutes and temperature of the solution.
Osmolality: It represents the solute or particle concentration of a fluid. It
indicates the number of osmoles per kg of the solvent and it does not
depend on the temperature or the solutes. It is expressed as milliosmoles
per kilogram of water (mOsm/kg):
–   Osmolality of plasma = 2 × Na+ (mEq/L) + glucose (mg/dL)/18
+ blood urea (mg/dL)/6.
Fig. 14.1:  Normal distribution of water and electrolytes in the body.
Table 14.1: Normal range of various electrolytes, pH and osmolality of
blood.
Component Normal range Component Normal range
Sodium (Serum) 136–145 mmol/L Calcium (Plasma) 9–10.5 mg/dL
Potassium (Serum) 3.5–5.0 mmol/L pH of blood 7.35–7.45
Chloride (Serum) 98–106 mmol/L Bicarbonate (Blood) 21–28 mmol/L
Magnesium (Serum) 2–3 mg/dL Osmolality (Serum) 285–295 mOsm/kg
waterPhosphorus (Serum) 3–4.5 mg/dL
VOLUME DEPLETION (HYPOVOLEMIA)
Q. Describe the causes, clinical features, laboratory features and

treatment of volume depletion.
Volume depletion or hypovolemia generally refers to combined salt and
water loss leading to contraction of the extracellular fluid volume (ECFV).
Dehydration is defined as relatively pure water deficit (hypernatremia).
Causes (Table 14.2)
Table 14.2: Causes of volume depletion (hypovolemia).
Extrarenal losses Renal losses
Gastrointestinal losses:
–   Diarrhea
–   Vomiting
Sequestration in the abdomen:
–   Peritonitis
Loss from skin:
–   Excessive sweating
–   BurnsExcessive use of diuretics:
–   Osmotic diuresis
–   Glycosuria in uncontrolled diabetes
–   Excessive use of mannitolRenal disease:
–   Salt-wasting tubular diseases
–   Diuretic phase of acute renal failure
–   Chronic renal failureDeficiency of mineralocorticoids:
–   Addison’s disease
Clinical Features
Features of volume depletion (Table 14.3): Dry skin and mucous
membranes, reduced skin turgor, reduced or absent tears, tachycardia,
shock, depressed fontanelle (in infants) and altered mental status.
Features due to extrarenal losses: Decreased urine output.
Table 14.3: Signs of dehydration depending on the degree of dehydration.
Features Degree of dehydration
Mild Moderate Severe
Peripheral pulses Normal Slightly decreased Difficult to palpate
Heart rate Normal Slightly increased Significant increased
with tachycardia
Capillary refill Normal About 2 seconds > 3 seconds
Mucus membranes and
skinNormal Dry Extremely dry
Eyes Normal Normal Shrunken
Production of tears Normal Decreased Absent
Amount of urine Normal Decreased Little or none

excreted
Fontanelle (in infants) Flat Soft Shrunken
Laboratory Features
Sodium concentration: Normal, reduced or elevated depending on the
proportion of loss between water and sodium.
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine: Often raised, especially in
severe volume depletion.
Urinary sodium: Helps in differentiating between renal from extrarenal
losses. In renal causes, urinary sodium is usually more than 20 mEq/L, and
it is less than 10 mEq/L in extrarenal losses.
TreatmentMild-to-moderate volume depletion (often due to gastroenteritis) should be corrected by
increasing oral intake of sodium and water by an oral rehydration solution.
In severe volume depletion, administer intravenous fluids (normal saline or Ringer’s lactate).
DISORDERS OF SODIUM BALANCE
Sodium (Na+)
Majority of the body’s sodium is in the ECF (where it is by far the most
abundant cation); total body sodium is the main determinant of ECF volume.
Regulation of sodium excretion by the kidney is crucially important in
maintaining normal ECF volume, and plasma volume (Fig. 14.2).

Fig. 14.2:  Regulation of sodium excretion by kidney.
Sodium intake: It is recommended that people over the age of one year eat
between 1000–1500 mg sodium per day.
Absorption  of sodium from intestine is via two mechanisms, first by being
freely permeable across the interstitial cell and secondly by import with
glucose and amino acids.
Sodium excretion: The regulation of sodium excretion is the major
determinant of sodium balance. Mainly Na+ is absorbed at three main regions
in the nephron.
1. Proximal convoluted tubule (PCT): ~65% of Na+ reabsorbed.
2. The loop of Henle: About 25–30% is reabsorbed via apical Na+ K+ 2Cl–
transporter.
3. Distal convoluted tubule (DCT): About 5% by thiazide sensitive Na+ Cl–
cotransporter. Finally, Na+ reabsorption also occurs in cortical and
medullary collecting ducts.
Sodium excretion is regulated at four major steps:

1. Circulating levels of aldosterone: It primarily acts on cortical collecting
ducts especially T-cell to increase ENaCs (Epithelial sodium channels) in
apical membrane.
2. Circulating number of ANP and other natriuretic hormones: ANP causes
increase cGMP and this inhibits transport via ENAC.
3. Amount of angiotensin II, prostaglandins levels in kidney: They cause
increase reabsorption of Na+ and HCO3 by action on PCT. PGE2 causes
natriuresis by inhibition of sodium transport via ENACs.
4. Rate of tubular secretion of K+ and H+: Na+ reabsorption is coupled with
H+ and K+ secretion in tubules and play important role in acid-base
metabolism.
Hyponatremia
Q. Write short essay/note on definition, pathophysiology, causes, clinical
features and treatment of hyponatremia.
Definition: Hyponatremia is defined as a condition in which the plasma
concentration of sodium is <135 mEq/L (mild 130 to 134 mEq/L/ moderate
120 to 129 mEq/L/ severe <120 mEq/L).
Generally, considered a disorder of water as opposed to disorder of salt,
i.e. it usually results from increased water retention.
Hyponatremia is the most common electrolyte disorder in hospitalized
patients (seen in 15–22% patients at admission).
Normal physiologic measures allow a person to excrete up to 10 liters of
water per day which protects against hyponatremia. Thus, in most cases,
some impairment of renal excretion of water is present.
PathophysiologyMechanism of hyponatremia is almost always the result of an increase in
circulating arginine vasopressin (AVP) and/or increase in renal
sensitivity to arginine vasopressin, combined with any intake of free
water.Depending on clinical history and volume status, hyponatremia is
subdivided into three groups, namely: (1) hypovolemic type I; (2)
euvolemic type IIa, IIb; and (3) hypervolemic type III (Fig. 14.3).

Fig. 14.3:  Types of hyponatremia.
Hypovolemic hyponatremia
Hypovolemic hyponatremia is characterized by sodium deficit with a
relatively smaller water deficit.
Hypovolemia → causes neurohumoral activation → increasing level of
AVP → increase AVP leads to BP preservation via vascular and
baroreceptors V1a receptors and increase water reabsorption via renal V2
receptors. Activation of V2 receptor can lead to hyponatremia in setting of
increased free water intake.
Causes of hypovolemic hyponatremia (Table 14.4)
Table 14.4: Causes of hypovolemic hyponatremia.
Renal (urinary sodium is more than 20 mmol/L) Extrarenal (urinary sodium is less than 20
mmol/L )Renal losses, excess diuretics
Mineralocorticoid deficiency (Addison)
Salt losing deficiency
Bicarbonaturia with renal tubular acidosis and
metabolic alkalosis
Osmotic diuresis
Cerebral salt wasting syndromeDiarrhea
Vomiting
Third space loss
Burn
Pancreatitis
Trauma

Hypervolemic hyponatremia
Hypervolemic hyponatremia characterized by disproportionate excess of
sodium with relatively less water retention.
It leads to increase in body water as compared to total body sodium,
leading to a reduced plasma Na concentration.
Causes (Table 14.5)
Table 14.5: Causes of hypervolemic hyponatremia.
Urine Na is less than 20 mEq Urine Na is more than 20 mEq
Nephrotic syndrome
Cirrhosis
Cardiac failureAcute or chronic renal failure
Euvolemic hyponatremia
Normovolemic/euvolemic is characterized by pure water deficit.
Causes (Table 14.6)
Table 14.6: Causes of euvolemic hyponatremia
Primary polydipsia
Decreased solute intake (e.g. beer potomania)
SIADH
Glucocorticoid deficiency
Hypothyroidism
Pain, stress, nausea, psychosis (stimulates
ADH)
Positive pressure ventilation
PorphyriaDrugs:  ADH, nicotine, sulfonylureas,
morphine, barbiturates, NSAIDs,
acetaminophen, carbamazepine,
phenothiazines, tricyclic antidepressants,
colchicine, clofibrate, cyclophosphamide,
isoproterenol, tolbutamide, vincristine,
monoamine oxidase inhibitorEssential (reset osmostat or sick cell syndrome
—usually in the elderly)
Pseudohyponatremia
Characterized by spuriously low plasma sodium concentration.
Causes (Table 14.7)
Clinical Features

Depends on rate of development, age of the patient and severity.
Symptoms universal, if Na < 120 is acute.
Chronic hyponatremia is less likely to be symptomatic.
Fig. 14.4:  Algorithm for types and causes of hyponatremia.
Types and causes of hyponatremia are shown in Figure 14.4.
Effect of hyponatremia on brain
Hyponatremia induces generalized cellular swelling due to entry of water
from ECF to ICF. The symptoms of hyponatremia are primarily neurological
and are due to the development of cerebral edema within a rigid skull.
Swelling and reduced osmolality: Within minutes of hyponatremia,
water enters the brain → causes swelling and reduced osmolality.
Rapid adaptation: Brain volume is partially restored within a few hours
due to loss of electrolytes (major intracellular ions Na+, K+, and Cl–) from
the brain cells due to rapid adaptation.
Slow adaptation: Within next several days, the brain volume is
normalized due to loss of organic compounds (creatine, betaine,
glutamate, myoinositol, and taurine) from the brain cells and is due to
slow adaptation. This response reduces intracellular osmolality and the
osmotic gradient favoring water entry.

Slow versus rapid correction of correction of hypotonicity: Loss of
solutes the brain osmolality is low. Slow correction of hypotonicity causes
gradual rise in brain osmolality without any damage. However, rapid
correction of hyponatremia causes loss of brain water leading to brain
damage.
Table 14.7: Causes of pseudohyponatremia.
Normal plasma osmolality Increased plasma osmolality Hyperlipidemia
Hyperproteinemia
Post-transurethral resection of prostate/bladder
tumorHyperglycemia
Mannitol
Signs and symptoms of hyponatremia
Acute:
–   Sodium level 121–130 mEq/L: Nausea, hiccoughs, malaise, headache,
lethargy, muscle cramps, disorientation, restlessness.
–   Sodium level <120 mEq/L: Obtundation, seizures, respiratory arrest,
coma, death.
Chronic (developed over days):
–   Usually asymptomatic/non-specific.
–   Nausea, gait disturbance, forgetfulness, muscle cramps, confusion,
lethargy, fatigue.
Investigations (Table 14.8)
Differences between various types of hyponatremia is indicated in Table
14.9.
Table 14.8: Investigations in hyponatremia.
Serum sodium PLUS 4 mandatory laboratory
testsAdditional labs depending on clinical suspicion
Serum osmolality
Urine osmolality
Urine specific gravity
Urine sodium concentrationTSH, cortisol (hypothyroidism or adrenal
insufficiency)
Albumin, triglycerides, glucose
(pseudohyponatremia, cirrhosis)
Plasma urea, creatinine and uric acid
Acid-base balance

Table 14.9: Differences between various types of hyponatremia.
Clinical findings Type I,
HypovolemicType IIA,
EuvolemicType IIB,
Euvolemic
(SIAD)Type III,
Hypervolemic
History
CHF, cirrhosis, or
nephrotic
syndromeNo No No Yes
Salt and water loss Yes No No No
Physical examination
ACTH–cortisol
deficiency and/or
nausea and
vomitingNo Yes No No
Generalized
edema, ascitesNo No No Yes
Postural
hypotensionMay be May be No May be
Laboratory
BUN, creatinine High-normal Low-normal Low-normal High-normal
Uric acid High-normal Low-normal Low-normal High-normal
Serum potassium Low-normal Normal Normal Low-normal
Serum albumin High-normal Normal Normal Low-normal
Serum cortisol Normal-high Low Normal Normal-high
Plasma renin
activityHigh Low Low High
Urinary sodium Low High High Low
Management
Step 1 (V) Volume status
First assess volume status (extracellular fluid volume) namely hypovolemic, euvolemic and
hypervolemic hyponatremia.
Step 2: (O) Osmolality approach to hyponatremia is listed in Box 14.1Second assess osmolality (hyper, iso, or hypo).
Hypotonic hyponatremia = warrants further workup, especially when there is no obvious fluid
overload or depletion.
Serum osmolality:  Lab value or calculation in mOsm/kg.
Hypertonic—> 295: Hyperglycemia, mannitol, glycerol.
Isotonic—280–295: Pseudo-hyponatremia from elevated lipids or protein.
Hypotonic—< 280: Excess fluid intake, low solute intake, renal disease, SIADH, hypothyroidism,
adrenal insufficiency, CHF, cirrhosis, etc.

Step 3: (U) Urine studies
For euvolemic hyponatremia, check urine osmolality.
–   Urine osmolality < 100—excess water intake: Primary polydipsia, tap water enemas, and post-
TURP.
–   Urine osmolality > 100—impaired renal concentration: SIADH, hypothyroidism, cortisol
deficiency.
Check urine sodium and calculate FeNa%.
–   A low urine sodium (< 10) and low FeNa (< 1%) implies the kidneys are appropriately
reabsorbing sodium.
–   A high urine sodium (> 20) and high FeNa (> 1%) implies the kidneys are not functioning
properly.
Box 14.1:  Approach to hyponatremia.
First:  Assess Volume status, is the patient volume overloaded, depleted, or euvolemic?
Second:  Assess O smolality (hyper- iso- or hypo-), is the blood concentrated? For hypotonic
hyponatremia, continue to 3rd step:
Third:  Assess Urinary sodium excretion and FeNa%, is the urine concentrated?
(*Remember VOU—volume status, osmolality, and urine studies)
Aquaretics (e.g. Vaptans) is a class of drug that is used to promote the excretion of water without
electrolyte loss. Strictly speaking they are not diuretics and is preferable to diuresis in the treatment of
hyponatremia.
Q. Write short note on VAPTANS.
Vasopresin V 2-receptor antagonists (VAPTANS)
Vasopressin receptor antagonists (VRA)
Nonselective (mixed V1A/V2)
Conivaptan. Intravenous:
–   V1A selective (V1RA):  Relcovaptan.
–   V1B selective (V3RA):  Nelivaptan,
–   V2 selective (V2RA):  Lixivaptan, Moxavaptan, Satavaptan, Tolvaptan. can cause an electrolyte-
free aquaresis, reduce urine osmolality and raise serum Na. Their mechanism of action is
presented in Figure 14.5.
Use in euvolemic/hypervolemic hyponatremia (heart failure, cirrhosis).
Contraindicated in hypovolemic hyponatremia.
Vaptans are not suitable for hyponatremia due to cerebral salt wasting and psychogenic polydipsia
where the ADH level is appropriate.
Adverse effects:
Thirst 8–16%; dry mouth 4–13%.
Hypernatremia develops in 5%.
Contraindicated in pregnancy and severe liver dysfunction.
Other uses of Vaptans:
Polycystic kidney disease

–   Polycystin defects may promote cyst development b/c they → increase intracellular cAMP (a
second messenger for AVP acting at the V2R) → therefore, V2R antagonists may reduce cyst
volume.
Congenital nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.
–   Type 2 V2R mutations cause misfolding and interfere with trafficking of the receptor from the
endoplasmic reticulum to the cell membrane—VRA can bind to misfolded intracellular V2R
and improve transport to the cell membrane.
Fig. 14.5:  Mechanism of action of vaptans.
Treatment of Hyponatremia (Tables 14.10 and 14.11)
Table 14.10: Treatment of hyponatremia.
GOALS OF THERAPY
Prevent a further decline in serum sodium
Prevent brain herniation
Relieve symptoms of hyponatremia
Avoid overcorrection
ACUTE HYPONATREMIA

Generally symptomatic. The risk of brain herniation is high and rapid correction is needed
CHRONIC HYPONATREMIA
It is generally asymptomatic or has mild symptoms. However; it may present with seizures, if
hyponatremia is very severe
Mild-to-moderate symptoms:
In patients at low risk for herniation: 3% NaCl
infused at 0.5–2 mL/kg/hour
Reassess using serum and urinary electrolytes
every 4–6 hoursSevere symptoms:
100 mL of 3% NaCl infused intravenously over
one hour
Can be repeated based on clinical assessment
hourly
(100 mL of 3% hypertonic saline, the serum
sodium concentration will increase by
approximately 2 mmol/L)
Hypovolemic
hyponatremia:isotonic saline to
patients who are
hypovolemic to
replace the
contracted
intravascular
volumeHypervolemic hyponatremia:Salt and fluid restriction, plus loop diuretics
Correction of the underlying condition.
Use of a V2 receptor antagonistNormovolemic
(euvolemic)
asymptomatic
hyponatremia:Free water
restriction (<1
L/day)Vaptans
Overtly symptomatic
euvolemic
hyponatremiaHypertonic (3%)
saline
Intravenous normal
saline and diuresis
with a loop diuretic
Total Body [Na+] Deficit  = (desired plasma [Na+] – measured plasma [Na+]) × total body water
(TBW)TBW is 0.6 × body weight in kg in men and 0.5 × body weights in kg in women
Example:  The amount of Na needed to raise the Na from 106 to 112 in a 70-kg man can be
calculated as follows: (112 mEq/L − 106 mEq/L) × (0.6 L/kg × 70 kg) = 252 mEq
Water deprivation /Fluid restriction  is the main stay of treatment for chronic hyponatremia and
hypervolemic hyponatremia
This can be calculated by urine: plasma electrolyte ratio (urinary [Na] + [K] / Plasma [Na]
If it is more than 1, then the fluid can be aggressively restricted up to less than 500 mL/day
For approx, 1 then the fluid can be restrict up to 500–700 mL
For ratio less than 1, fluids can be restricted up to 1 liters
Be CAUTIOUS with correction.0.5 mEq/L increase per every hour initially.
Do not increase Na more than 10 mEq/L in 24 hours or 18 mEq/L in 48 hours.
Sodium content of various intravenous fluid is mentioned in Table 14.11.

Table 14.11: Sodium content of various intravenous fluid.
Intravenous fluid Sodium content
7.5% NaHCO 3
3% NaCI
0.9% NaCl Normal saline
Ringer Lactate
0.45% NaCl Half NS
Isolyte G
Isolyte M
5% Dextrose900 mEq/L
512 mEq/L
514 mEq/L
130 mEq/L
77 mEq/L
65 mEq/L
40 mEq/L
Nil
Syndrome of Inappropriate Antidiuretic Hormone Secretion
(SIADH/SIAD)
Q. Write short note on syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone
secretion.
Normally, hypotonicity of the ECF stops the secretion of antidiuretic
hormone (ADH) (Box 14.2). In syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis
(SIAD), the secretion of ADH continues ‘inappropriately’ in spite of
hypotonicity of the ECF.
Plasma levels of arginine vasopressin (AVP) in various types of SIADH are
shown in Figure 14.6 and Box 14.3.

Fig. 14.6:  Types of SIADH (syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone).
(AVP: arginine vasopressin)
Box 14.2: Bartter’s criteria for diagnosis of syndrome of inappropriate
antidiuretic hormone secretion.
Hyponatremia and true hypo-osmolality by definition
Euvolemia clinical
Urine less than maximally dilute (urinary osmolality usually > 200 mOsm/kg of H 2O)
Normal renal, cardiac, hepatic, adrenal, pituitary, and thyroid function
No history of antidiuretic drugs
No emotional or physical stress
Urinary sodium >20 mEq/L (Urinary sodium may be <20 mEq/L if the patient is volume depleted
or on low sodium intake)
Box 14.3: Four types of SIADH.
Type A:  Characterized by unregulated secretion of vasopressin

Type B:  Elevated basal secretion of vasopressin despite normal regulation by osmolality
Type C: A ‘reset osmostat’
Type D:  Undetectable vasopressin (AVP) levels (these patients may have a gain of function mutation
of the V 2-receptor)
Etiology (Box 14.4)
Box 14.4: Various causes of SIADH.
Neoplasm:  Carcinomas of lungs (small cell carcinoma), duodenum, ovary, bladder
Infection:  Abscess, cavitation, pneumonias, TB, AIDS, meningitis
Vascular:  CVA, cavernous sinus thrombosis
Neurological:  GBS, multiple sclerosis (MS), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and
hydrocephalus
Respiratory:  (Positive pressure ventilation) (PPV), pneumothorax, asthma
Drugs:  Chlorpropamide, SSRI, MAOI, oxytocin, vasopressin, desmopressin, carbamazepine,
cyclophosphamide, vincristine
Clinical Features
Nausea, hiccoughs, irritability, confusion, seizures and coma. No edema
observed. Differentiating features of diabetic insipidus, SIADH and cerebral
salt wasting are presented in Table 14.12.
Treatment
Treat the underlying cause.
Restrict the fluid intake to 500–1000 mL/day. Oral salt tablets can be advocated.
In severe hyponatremia, there may be need of slow infusion of hypertonic saline and furosemide.
Vasopressin-2 receptor antagonists (aquaretics: tolvaptan, conivaptan)
Demeclocycline, urea and lithium have been used for treatment of SIADH.
Table 14.12: Differentiating features of diabetic insipidus, syndrome of
inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH) and
cerebral salt wasting (CSW).
Diabetic insipidus SIADH CSW
Urine output Polyuric Decreased Polyuric
Serum Na High Low Low
Urine Na Low High High
Serum osmolality High Low Can be low or normal
Urine osmolality Low High Can be low or normal
CVP Can be normal or low High Low

Cerebral Salt Wasting
Causes: CNS damage due to closed head injury, CNS surgery, CNS tumors,
CNS infections, meningitis.
Signs/Symptoms: Polyuria, weight loss, dehydration/hypovolemia,
hypotension, low CVP.
Lab Values
Hyponatremia due to excessive renal Na loss
High urine Na >20 mmol/L
Increased plasma ANP (atrial natriuretic peptide), because of low volume
status
Inappropriately normal or low aldosterone and ADH levels despite high
ANP.
Treatment
Volume for volume replacement of urine Na losses.
Salt supplementation to the diet.
Table 14.13:  Causes of primary Na+ gain/primary water deficit.
1. Extrarenal:
Skin and respiratory tract (insensible water loss) due to evaporation
GI loss:  Diarrheas
i.   Osmotic:  Lactulose, sorbitol, malabsorption, viral gastroenteritis—in all these conditions,
water loss > Na+ loss—hypernatremia.
ii.  Secretory:  Cholera, carcinoid syndromes, VIPomas. In these conditions fecal osmolality is
almost same as plasma osmolality. Thus, plasma Na+ concentration remains same or
decreases with ECV contraction.
2. Renal loss: Most common cause of hypernatremias.
Drug induced:  Loop diuretics produces iso-osmotic, solute diuresis
Osmotic diuresis:  The presence of nonreabsorbed organic solutes in the tubular lumen in
osmotic diuresis water loss > Na+ K+ loss, e.g. hyperglycemia, IV mannitol increased urea in
body.
Primary Water Depletion (Hypernatremia)
Q. Write short note on primary water depletion or hypernatremia or

dehydration.
Definition: It is defined as plasma Na+ concentration >145 mmol/L.
Hypernatremia is generally mild unless thirst mechanism is abnormal or
access to water is limited, e.g. infants, physically challenged, impaired mental
status, postoperative patient, intubated patients in ICU.
Causes (Table 14.13)
Clinical features and investigations in hypernatremia are presented in Table
14.14.
Table 14.14: Clinical features and investigations in hypernatremia.
Clinical features Investigations
Marked thirst
Muscle weakness, rigidity
Dry mouth
Mental confusion, coma
Intracranial hemorrhage (in acute
hypernatremia)
Tachycardia and low systolic blood pressureHematocrit usually 50%
Raised blood urea levels
Raised plasma sodium
Polyuria and urine specific gravity < 1.010 in
diabetes insipidus
Diagnosis and Management of Hypernatremia
Complete history and physical examination often provide clues to the underlying cause of
hypernatremia.
Measurement of urine volume and osmolality.
Calculation:
Rapid correction of hypernatremia is dangerous because sudden decrease in osmolality can cause
rapid shift of water into the cells resulting in swelling of brain cells.
Treatment of hypovolemic hypernatremia is listed in Box 14.5.
Box 14.5:  Treatment of hypovolemic hypernatremia.
Treatment of hypovolemic hypernatremia is by restoring volume by intravenous normal saline
Treatment of hypervolemic hypernatremia is by removing sodium excess by diuresis
In cases of euvolemic patients D-5%, DNS are given as preferred solutions for free water
correction
Treatment of diabetes insipidus
In the treatment of central diabetes indipidus (CDI) desmopression intranasally plays important

role. It can be given 1–2 µg qd or bid injection or 10–20 µg by BID or TID by nasal spray.
Besides chlorpropamide, clofibrate, carbamazepine can also be given for treatment of CDI.
Thiazide diuretic and low Na+ diet is given for management of nephrogenic diabetes indipidus
(NDI).
Besides in the management of NDI—NSAIDs, amiloride and lithium can also be given in selected
patients.
Requirement of fluids depending on degree of depletion is presented in Table
14.15.
Table 14.15: Requirement of fluids depending on degree of depletion.
Degree of depletion Type of fluid and route of
administrationQuantity and time for
replacement
Mild (1–2 L deficit) Water by mouth or 5% glucose
IV2 L, over 6–12 hours
Moderate (2–4 L deficit) 5% glucose IV 2–4 L, over 24 hours
Severe (4–10 L deficit) 0.9% NaCl IV
5% dextrose IV
5% dextrose IV1 L, over 1 hour
3 L, over 2 hours
4 L, over 24–48 hours
Indicators of adequate correction: Relief of thirst, urine output of more
than 1500 mL/24 hours and normal plasma sodium levels.
Diabetes Insipidus (Discussed on pages 37-39)
Osmotic Demyelination Syndrome or Central Pontine
Myelinolysis
Q. Write short note on osmotic demyelination.
First described by Adams et al. in 1959.
Risk factors: Alcoholism, chronically ill patients, elderly/malnourished,
cirrhosis predisposes to demyelination (due to depletion of intracellular
organic solutes).
Hypokalemia is a strong predictor
Demyelination can be diffuse and not involve the pons. Extrapontine areas
include cerebellar and neocortical white/gray junctional areas, thalamus,
subthalamus, amygdale, globus pallidus, putamen, caudate and lateral
geniculate bodies.Rate of correction over 24 hours more important than rate of correction in

any one particular hour.
More common, if sodium increases by more than 20 mEq/L in 24 hours
Very uncommon, if sodium increases by 12 mEq/L or less in 24 hours
Symptoms generally occur 2–6 days after elevation of sodium and usually
either irreversible or only partially reversible.
Clinical Features
Dysarthria, dysphagia, Parkinsonism, catatonia, locked-in syndrome, lethargy
and coma, seizures, nystagmus, ataxia, emotional lability, akinetic mutism,
gait disturbance, myoclonus, behavioral disturbances, paraparesis or
quadriparesis. MRI with diffusion-weighted imaging will be helpful in early
detection.
Treatment
No effective therapy. Changes are permanent. Mortality is very high. Case reports of improvement
with aggressive plasmapheresis immediately after diagnosis. Case reports of treatment with
thyrotropin-releasing hormone. Infusion of myoinositol (a major osmolyte lost in the adaptation to
hyponatremia) protects against mortality and myelinolysis from rapid correction of hyponatremia.
DISORDERS OF POTASSIUM BALANCE
PotassiumQ. Write short note on the normal physiology of potassium in the body.
Potassium is the major intracellular cation. Potassium is essential for a
number of normal body functions of tissue such as nerve, muscle and
heart.
Distribution of potassium: Normal plasma level of potassium is 3.5–5.0
mmol/L (mEq/L) whereas inside the cells (Potassium is the principle
intracellular cation, i.e. ICF) it is about 150 mmol/L. The extra cellular
intracellular ratio being 1:38. Therefore, the amount of K+ in ECF (30–70
mmol) constitutes less than 2% of total body K+ content (2500–4500
mmol).
PhysiologyThe concentration gradient between ECF and ICF is maintained by the
Na+ K+ stimulated ATPase system.

Total dietary intake of K+ is 40–120 mmol/day or 1.5 mmol/kg/day. About
90% of it is absorbed in GI tract.
Sudden rise in plasma K+ is prevented by: (i) shift of K+ into the cell by
insulin and (ii) excess K+ excreted in urine.
Excretion through kidney is the major route of elimination of dietary and
other sources of excess K+.
About 90% of filtered potassium is absorbed in proximal convoluted
tubule. It is absorbed passively with sodium and water.
Hypokalemia
Q. Write short note on:
Normal serum potassium level and causes of hypokalemia
Hypokalemia.
An abnormally low level (<3.5 mmol/L) of plasma potassium (K+) is called
hypokalemia.
Causes (Table 14.16)
Table 14.16: Various causes of hypokalemia.
1. Decreased intake
a. Starvation
b. Clay ingestion (geophagia): It binds
dietary K+ and iron.
2. Redistribution into cell
a. Metabolic alkalosis:  Due to K+
redistribution into the cell as well as
increased K+ loss (renal)
b. Hormonal
i. Insulin
ii. β2 adrenergic agonist:  it causes K+
influx into the cell as well as stimulates
insulin release
iii. α-adrenergic antagonist
c. Anabolic states:
i. Vitamin B 12 or folic acid (red blood
cell production)
ii. Granulocyte macrophage colonyb.  Renal:  Increased distal flow
i. Diuretic
ii. Osmotic diuretic
iii. Salt-wasting nephropathy
c.  Increased renal secretion of  K+
i. Mineralocorticoid excess
ii. Primary hyperaldosteronism: Adenoma
(Conn’s syndrome), hyperplasia,
carcinoma
iii. Secondary hyperaldosteronism
iv. Malignant hypertension
v. Hypovolemia
vi. Renal artery stenosis
d.  Apparent mineralocorticoid excess:
i. Tobacco chewing, liquorice consumption
ii. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
iii. Cushing’s syndrome
iv. Bartter’s syndrome

stimulating factor
iii. Total parenteral nutrition
d. Others:
i. Pseudohypokalemia
ii. Barium toxicity
iii. Hypothermia
iv. Hypokalemic periodic paralysis.
3. Increased loss
a. Nonrenal:
i. Gastrointestinal:  Diarrhea, vomiting
ii. Integumentarye.  Distal delivery of nonreabsorbed anion:
i. Vomiting, nasogastric suction, type 2
(proximal) RTA, toluene abuse, penicillin
derivatives
ii. Others:  Amphotericin B, Liddle’s
syndrome, hypomagnesemia
Clinical Features of Potassium Depletion (Table 14.17)
Table 14.17: Clinical manifestations of potassium depletion.
1. Neuromuscular:
Skeletal muscle weakness, fatigue,
myalgia, muscular weakness in extremities
—quadriparesis (Periodic Paralysis)Smooth muscles—paralytic ileus.
Respiratory muscle weakness—
hypoventilation
Tetany
Rhabdomyolysis
2. Renal:
Polyuria (Nephrogenic) diabetic insipidus.
Increased ammonia production.
Increased bicarbonate reabsorption.3.  Hormonal:
Decreased insulin secretion
Decreased aldosterone secretion
Insulin resistance
4.  Metabolic:
Negative nitrogen balance
Encephalopathy in patients with liver
disease.
5.  Cardiovascular:
ECG changes/dysrhythmia
Myocardial dysfunction
Investigations
Measurement of plasma electrolytes, bicarbonate, urine potassium, plasma
calcium and magnesium.
ECG changes (Fig. 14.7 and Table 14.18): The electrocardiographic
changes of hypokalemia are due to delayed ventricular, repolarization and
do not correlate well with plasma-potassium concentration.

Fig. 14.7:  Various ECG changes depending on plasma potassium levels.
Table 14.18: Electrocardiographic changes in hypokalemia.
Early changes Changes due to severe potassium depletion
Flattening or inversion of the T wave
Prominent U wave
ST segment depression
Prolonged QU intervalProlonged PR interval
Decreased voltage and widening of the QRS
complex
An increased risk of ventricular, arrhythmias
especially in patients with myocardial
ischemia or left ventricular hypertrophy.
ManagementCareful history, e.g. diuretic and laxative abuse, vomiting.
Exclude pseudohypokalemia, e.g. with marked leukocytosis (AML) and normokalemia patients
with low plasma K+ (It is due to WBC uptake of K+ at room temperature).
Eliminate decrease intake (e.g. starvation, geophagia) and intracellular cause (e.g. metabolic
alkalosis, insulin therapy, beta 2 agonist administration stress, hypokalemic periodic paralysis,
anabolic states, and massive transfusion.
Assess urinary excretion (to clarify source of K+ loss).
Transtubular potassium gradient or TTKG (Box 14.6):
Rule out magnesium deficiency, if hypokalemia not getting corrected.
Therapeutic goals:  To correct the potassium deficit and to minimize the ongoing losses.
It is generally safer to correct hypokalemia via oral route.
A decrement of 1 mmol/L in the plasma-potassium concentration (from 4.0 to 3.0 mmol/L) may
represent a total body potassium deficit of 200 to 400 mmol.

For every 1 mmol/L potassium depletion—A potassium deficiency is 10% of total body potassium
stores (2500–4500 mmol).
Patients with plasma levels under <3 mmol often require in excess of 600 mmol of potassium to
correct the deficit.
Oral therapy:
Potassium chloride (15 mL = 20 mEq) is preferred agent . Especially useful in Cl-responsive
metabolic alkalosis.
Potassium phosphate useful when coexistent phosphorus deficiency.
Potassium bicarbonate, acetate, gluconate, or citrate useful in metabolic acidosis.
IV therapy:
Patients with severe hypokalemia or those unable to take anything by mouth require intravenous
replacement therapy with KCl (Potassium chloride).
IV 15% potassium chloride  1 mL = 2 mEq/L, 10 mL = 20 mEq/L.
The maximum concentration of administered potassium should be no more than 40 mmol/L via a
peripheral vein or 60 mmol/L via central vein.
The rate of infusion should not exceed 20 mmol/hour unless paralysis or malignant ventricular
arrhythmia is present.
Do not give more than  10–20 mEq/hr or 40 mEq/L or 240 mEq/L/day.
Box 14.6:  Transtubular potassium gradient or TTKG.
This is ratio of K+ concentration in lumen of cortical collecting duct (CCD) to that of potassium
concentration in plasma.
TTKG = Urinary K+ × Plasma osm/Serum K+ × Urinary osm
Significance of TTKG:  During hypokalemia—TTKG should fall < 3—indicating appropriately
reduced urinary excretion of K. TTKG > 4– indicates renal K loss is due to increased distal K
secretion.
Hyperkalemia
Q. Write short essay/note on:
Causes and treatment of hyperkalemia
ECG changes in hyperkalemia
Clinical features, diagnosis and treatment/management of
hyperkalemia
Drugs used to treat hyperkalemia.
Definition: Hyperkalemia is defined as plasma potassium greater than 5.0
mmol/L  occurs as a result of either potassium release from cells or decreased
renal loss.
Causes of Hyperkalemia (Table 14.19)

Pseudohyperkalemia (factitious, spurious) represents an artificially elevated
plasma-potassium concentration.
Table 14.19: Causes of hyperkalemia.
Renal failure
Decreased distal flow (i.e. decreased effective
circulatory arterial volume.
Decrease K+ potassium secretion:
A. Impaired Na+ reabsorption:
1. Primary hypoaldosteronism
Adrenal insufficiency
Adrenal enzyme deficiency: 21-
hydroxylase, 3 β-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase, corticosteronemethyl
oxidase.
2. Secondary hypoaldosteronism
Hyporeninemia
Drugs (ACE inhibitors, NSAIDs,
Heparin)
3. Resistance to aldosterone
Pseudohypoaldosteronism
Drugs (K+ sparing diuretics,
trimethoprim, pentamidine)B.   Enhanced BCl– reabsorption:
1. Gordon’s syndrome
2. Cyclosporine
3. Type IV RTA
C.   Shift of potassium out of cell:
1. Tissue damage (ischemia or shock)
severe exercise.
2. Metabolic acidosis.
3. Uncontrolled diabetes due to insulin
deficiency.
4. Aldosterone deficiency.
5. Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis,
succinyl choline.
D.   Tissue breakdown:
1. Bleeding into soft tissue, GI tract or
body cavities.
2. Hemolysis, rhabdomyolysis
3. Catabolic state
Clinical FeaturesHyperkalemia is often asymptomatic until plasma K+ concentration is
greater than 6.5 to 7.0 mEq/L and may lead to fatal cardiac arrhythmia,
hence it is called as silent killer.
Vague muscular weakness is usually first symptom of hyperkalemia.
Severe hyperkalemia can lead to hyporeflexia, gradual paralysis effecting
initially legs, then trunk and arms and at last face and respiratory muscle
(Periodic paralysis).Paralysis usually spares the muscles supplied by cranial nerves and
patients remain alert and apprehensive until cardiac arrest and death
occurs.The most serious effect of hyperkalemia is cardiac toxicity, which does
not correlate well with plasma potassium concentration. Various
approaches of hyperkalemia is listed in Box 14.7.

Investigations
Measurement of electrolytes, creatinine and bicarbonate.
ECG changes (Figs. 14.8 and 14.9): The earliest electrocardiographic
changes: increased T-wave, amplitude or peaked T-wave.
Treatment
The urgency and aggressiveness of treatment of hyperkalemia depends on its degree clinical
status.
–   Emergency treatment (Table 14.20)
Potentially fatal hyperkalemia (serum potassium > 7.5 mmol/L).
Profound weakness, absence of P wave, QRS widening or ventricular arrhythmia on ECG needs
urgent treatment.
Box 14.7: Approach to hyperkalemia.
Exclude pseudohyperkalemia.
Exclude transcellular K+ shift.
Exclude oliguric renal failure.
Stop NSAIDs and ACE inhibitors.
Fig. 14.8:  ECG changes in hyperkalemia in relation to serum potassium.

Fig. 14.9A: ECG changes in hyperkalemia in relation to serum potassium (increased T-wave,
amplitude or peaked T-wave).
Fig. 14.9B:  ECG of severe hyperkalemia showing sine wave pattern.
ACID-BASE BALANCE
Q. Write short essay/note on:
Physiology of acid-base balance.

Different terminologies used in assessment of acid-base status of a
patient.
Definitions
Acid: Any compound which forms H+ ions in solution (proton donors),
e.g. carbonic acid releases H+ ions.
Base: Any compound which combines with H+ ions in solution (proton
acceptors), e.g. bicarbonate (HCO3–) accepts H+ ions.
Table 14.20: Drugs used in the treatment of hyperkalemia.
Therapeutic goal Intervention Dose and method of administration
Myocardial membrane
stabilization, if ECG changes
are +ve)Calcium chloride or 1 g IV over 10 minutes non-
emergent setting
Calcium gluconate 1 g IV push in cardiac arrest or
significant dysrhythmia
Intracellular potassium
shiftingDextrose/InsulinDextrose 50 g IVP (intravenous
push)
Insulin (regular) 10 units IVP
Sodium bicarbonate 1 mEq/kg ideal body weight
IV over 10–20 minutes non-
emergent setting
IVP in cardiac arrest or significant
dysrhythmia
Magnesium sulfate 1–2 g IV over 10 minutes non-
emergent setting
IVP in cardiac arrest or significant
dysrhythmia
Sympathomimetic agents Albuterol-standard metered
‘respiratory dose’ via nebulizer
non-emergent/emergent (significant
dysrhythmia) settingEpinephrine- cardiac arrest only: 1
mg IVP (1:10,000 concentration)
Potassium removal from
body (excretion from the
body)Sodium polystyrene30–60 g PO or PR
Normal saline Volume determined by clinical
setting
Furosemide 20 g IV for furosemide-naïve
patients
Hemodialysis Best way of removal

Regulation of Acid-Base Balance
Maintenance of blood pH is an important homeostatic mechanism of the
body. The pH of the blood is maintained between 7.35 and 7.45.
Normal pH and its variation is indicated in Box 14.8.
Maintenance of Acid-Base Balance/pH
Many physiological mechanisms maintain pH of the ECF within narrow
limits (Box 14.9).
Box 14.8: Normal pH and its variation.
Normal pH: 7.35–7.45
Acidosis: Physiological state resulting from abnormally low plasma pH.
Alkalosis:  Physiological state resulting from abnormally high plasma pH.
Acidemia:  Plasma pH <7.35
Alkalemia:  Plasma pH >7.45
Box 14.9: Response of the body to acid base challenge.
1. Buffering:  Two most common chemical buffer groups
a. Bicarbonate
b. Nonbicarbonate (Hemoglobin, protein, phosphate)
♦   Blood buffer systems act instantaneously
♦   Regulate pH by binding or releasing H+
2. Respiratory acid-base control mechanisms
3. Renal acid-base control mechanisms
Classification of Acid-Base Disorders (Table 14.21)
Table 14.21: Classification of acid-base disorders.
Disorder pH[H+]Primary
disturbanceSecondary
response
Metabolic acidosis ↓ ↑↓ [HCO 3–]↓ pCO 2
Metabolic alkalosis ↑ ↓↑ [HCO 3–]↑ pCO 2
Respiratory acidosis ↓ ↑ ↑ pCO 2 ↑ [HCO 3–]
Respiratory alkalosis ↑ ↓ ↓ pCO 2 ↓ [HCO 3–]
Anion Gap

Q. What is anion gap? Enumerate conditions associated with increased
anion gap.
Anion gap denotes the concentration of the unmeasured anions in the
plasma, namely—phosphates, sulfates, organic acids and protein anions.
Anionic gap = {[Na+] + [K+] } – { [HCO3–] + [Cl–]}
–   Normal cations in plasma: Na+, K+, Ca2+, Mg2+.
–   Normal anions in plasma are Cl–, HCO3–, negative charges present on
albumin, phosphate, sulfate, lactate, and other organic acids.
–   The sums of the positive and negative charges are equal.
Calculation of the anion gap helps to decide whether metabolic acidosis
due to:
–   Loss of bicarbonate
–   Accumulation of non-volatile acids
It is an index of the relative concentration of plasma anions other than
chloride, bicarbonate [serum Na+ – (serum Cl– + serum HCO₃–)].
–   Unmeasured anions—unmeasured cations
–   Normal anionic gap is 8–16 mEq/L (in new techniques it is 5–11).
–   Mostly represent albumin.
Increased anionic gap: Usually found in some forms of metabolic
acidosis (Box 14.10).
Reduced anionic gap: Lithium and bromide intoxication, multiple
myeloma marked hyperlipidemia.
Box 14.10: Causes of high anion gap metabolic acidosis (HAGMA).
Lactic acidosis
Ketoacidosis
Diabetic
Alcoholic
Starvation
Renal failure (acute and chronic)Toxins
Ethylene glycol
Methanol
Salicylates
Propylene glycol
Causes of Metabolic Acidosis (Box 14.10)
(High anion gap metabolic acidosis, HAGMA) → (Normochloremic)

Causes of normal anion gap metabolic acidosis are listed in Table 14.22.
Table 14.22: Normal anion gap metabolic acidosis—NAGMA
(Hyperchloremic).
Gastrointestinal bicarbonate loss
Diarrhea
External pancreatic or small-bowel drainage
Ureterosigmoidostomy, jejunal loop, ileal loop
Drugs:
1. Calcium chloride (acidifying agent)
2. Magnesium sulfate (diarrhea)
3. Cholestyramine (bile acid diarrhea)
Renal acidosis
Hypokalemia
–   Proximal RTA (type 2)
–   Distal (classic) RTA (type 1)
HyperkalemiaDrug-induced hyperkalemia (with renal
insufficiency)
Potassium-sparing diuretics (amiloride,
triamterene, spironolactone)
Trimethoprim
Pentamidine
ACE-Is and ARBs
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Cyclosporine and tacrolimus
Others
Acid loads (ammonium chloride,
hyperalimentation)
Loss of potential bicarbonate: Ketosis with
ketone excretion
Expansion acidosis (rapid saline
administration)
Combined elevated anion gap and hyperchloremic acidoses: Diarrhea,
ketoacidosis and progression of kidney disease,
Urine Net Charge/UAG
Distinguish between hyperchloremic acidosis due to diarrhea and renal tubular acidosis (RTA)
UAG (in mEq/L or mmol/L) = Urine (Na + K - Cl)
Provides an estimate of urinary NH₄+ production
Normal UAG = –25 to –50
Negative UAG – Diarrhea (Hyperchloremic acidosis)
Positive UAG – RTA
‘Delta Ratio’/‘GAP-GAP’
Ratio between ↑ in anionic gap (AG) and ↓ in bicarbonate
Used in the assessment of elevated anion gap metabolic acidosis to
determine, if a mixed acid-base disorder (metabolic acidosis) is present.
Equation for calculating


Fig. 14.10:  Mechanism and response to acidosis.
Metabolic Acidosis
Q. Write short note on:
Causes of metabolic acidosis.
Clinical features and management of metabolic acidosis.
Metabolic acidosis is a primary acid-base disorder characterized by fall in
both pH of blood (↓ pH) and bicarbonate level in the plasma (↓HCO₃–).
Metabolic acidosis can develop when there is an imbalance between net
acid production and net acid excretion (Fig. 14.10). Metabolic acidosis
occurs when an acid other than carbonic acid (due to CO2 retention)
accumulates in the body, leading to fall in the plasma bicarbonate. Thus, it
is due to gain of strong acid or loss of base (HCO₃–).
Clinical features (Box 14.11)
Symptoms are specific and a result of the underlying pathology.
Treatment
Correct the underlying disorder.
Sodium bicarbonate may be administered in severe acidosis.

Tromethamine (tris-hydroxymethyl aminomethane; THAM) is an alternative to NaHCO 3.
Dialysis may be necessary in renal failure with metabolic acidosis.
Box 14.11: Clinical features of metabolic acidosis.
Respiratory effects:  Hyperventilation. In severe cases, there is deep sighing respiration (Kussmaul’s
breathing or ‘air hunger’).
CVS:  ↓ myocardial contractility, sympathetic over activity, resistant to catecholamines
CNS:  Lethargy, disorientation, stupor, muscle twitching, coma, cranial nerve palsies
Others:  Hyperkalemia
Metabolic Alkalosis
Q. Write short note on metabolic alkalosis.
Metabolic alkalosis is characterized by rise in both plasma bicarbonate level
and plasma pH. The primary event is elevation of pH due to raised plasma
bicarbonate concentration (HCO₃–) or decreased acid (Fig. 14.11).
Types: Metabolic alkalosis may be hypovolemic or normovolemic. Causes of
metabolic alkalosis are listed in Table 14.23.
Fig. 14.11:  Mechanism and response to alkalosis.
Table 14.23: Causes of metabolic alkalosis.
Exogenous HCO 3− loads:
–   Acute alkali administrationChloride-responsive alkalosis
Low urinary chloride concentration (<15
mEq/L)

–   Milk-alkali syndrome
Gastrointestinal origin:
–   Vomiting
–   Gastric aspiration
–   Congenital chloridorrhea
–   Villous adenoma–   Gastric acid loss
–   Diuretic therapy
–   Volume depletion
–   Renal compensation for hypercapnea
Renal origin:
–   Diuretics
–   Posthypercapnic state
–   Hypercalcemia/hypoparathyroidism
–   Recovery from lactic acidosis or
ketoacidosis
–   Non reabsorbable anions including
penicillin, carbenicillin
–   Mg2+ deficiency
–   K+ depletionChloride-resistant alkalosisElevated urinary chloride  (>25 mEq/L)
–   1° mineralocorticoid excess
–   Severe potassium depletion
Associated with volume expansion
Clinical features (Table 14.24)
Management
Metabolic alkalosis with hypovolemia:  Corrected by intravenous infusions of 0.9% saline with
potassium supplements. This reverses the secondary hyperaldosteronism and the kidney excretes
the excess alkali in the urine.
Metabolic alkalosis with normal or increased volume:  Treatment of the underlying endocrine
cause.
Respiratory Acidosis
Q. Write short note on respiratory acidosis.
Respiratory acidosis is a primary acid-base disorder characterized by ↑ PCO₂
→ ↓pH.
Acute (<24 hours)
Chronic (>24 hours)
Causes of respiratory acidosis (Table 14.25)
Table 14.24: Clinical features of metabolic alkalosis.
Decreased myocardial contractility
Arrhythmias
↓ cerebral blood flowMental obtundation
Neuromuscular excitability
Hypoventilation

Confusion Pulmonary microatelectasis
Table 14.25: Causes of respiratory acidosis.
CNS depression
Drugs:  Opiates, sedatives, anesthetics
Obesity hypoventilation syndrome
StrokeChest wall restriction
Pleural:  Effusions, empyema, pneumothorax,
fibrothorax
Chest wall:  Kyphoscoliosis, scleroderma,
ankylosing spondylitis, obesity
Neuromuscular disorders
Neurologic:  Multiple sclerosis, polio, GBS,
tetanus, botulism, high cord lesions
End plate:  Myasthenia gravis, OP poisoning,
aminoglycoside toxicity
Muscle: Hypokalemia, hypophosphatemia
muscular dystrophy
Airway obstruction
COPD, acute aspiration, laryngospasmSevere pulmonary restrictive disorders
Pulmonary fibrosis
Parenchymal infiltration:  Pneumonia, edema
Abnormal blood CO ₂ transport
Decreased perfusion:  Heart failure, cardiac
arrest, pulmonary embolism
Severe anemia
Acetazolamide-Ca inhibition
Red cell anion exchange: Loop diuretics,
salicylates, NSAID
Clinical features (Box 14.12)
Treatment:  The underlying causes should be corrected. Rapid infusion of alkali is justified only in
prolonged cardiopulmonary arrest.
Respiratory Alkalosis
Q. Write short note on respiratory alkalosis and its causes.
Most common acid-base abnormality in critically ill characterized by
↓PCO₂  → ↑pH.
Primary process: Hyperventilation
–   Acute: PaCO₂ ↓, pH-alkalemic
–   Chronic: PaCO₂ ↓, pH normal/near normal
Box 14.12: Clinical features of respiratory acidosis.
RS (Respiratory system)
–   Stimulation of ventilation (tachypnea)
–   Dyspnea
CNS (Central nervous system)
–   ↑cerebral blood flow → ↑ ICT, papilledema

–   CO 2 NARCOSIS (Disorientation, confusion, headache, lethargy)
–   COMA (arterial hypoxemia, ↑ ICT, anesthetic effect of ↑ PCO₂ >100 mm Hg)
CVS:  Tachycardia, bounding pulse
Others:  Peripheral vasodilatation (warm, flushed, sweaty)
Causes of respiratory alkalosis (Table 14.26)
Table 14.26: Causes of respiratory alkalosis.
A.  Central nervous system
stimulation:
1.  Pain
2.  Anxiety, psychosis
3.  Fever
4.  Cerebrovascular accident
5.  Meningitis, encephalitis
6.  Tumor
7.  Trauma
B.  Hypoxemia or tissue
hypoxia:
1.  High altitude
2.  Septicemia3.  Hypotension
4.  Severe anemia
C.  Drugs or hormones:
1.  Pregnancy, progesterone
2.  Salicylates
3.  Cardiac failure
D.  Stimulation of chest
receptors:
1.  Hemothorax
2.  Flail chest
3.  Cardiac failure
4.  Pulmonary embolismE.  Miscellaneous:
1.  Septicemia
2.  Hepatic failure
3.  Mechanical ventilation
4.  Heat exposure
5.  Recovery from
metabolic acidosis
Clinical features of respiratory alkalosis (Table 14.27)
TreatmentElimination of the underlying disorder.
In acute hyperventilation syndrome, sedation and re-breathing into a bag may terminate the attack.
Table 14.27: Clinical features of respiratory alkalosis.
CNS
–   ↑ neuromuscular irritability (tingling,
circumoral numbness)
–   Tetany
–   ↓ ICT
–   Light headedness, confusionCVS
–   CO and SBP ↑ (↑ SVR, HR)
–   Arrhythmias
–   ↓ myocardial contractilityOthers
–   Hypokalemia, hypophosphatemia
–   ↓ Free serum calcium—tetany
–   Hyponatremia, hypochloremia
Primary and Compensatory Responses in Various Acid-base

Disorders (Tables 14.28)
Table 14.28: Primary and compensatory responses in various acid-base
disorders.
Disorder pH Primary response Compensatory
response
Metabolic acidosis
Metabolic alkalosis
Respiratory acidosis
Respiratory alkalosisDecreased
Increased
Decreased
IncreasedDecreased HCO 3
Increased HCO 3
Increased CO 2
Decreased CO 2Decreased pCO 2
Increased pCO 2
Increased HCO 3
Decreased HCO 3
Q. What are primary and compensatory responses to various acid-base
disturbances?
Compensatory Responses in Acid-base Disorders (Tables 14.29)
Table 14.29: Compensation in various acute or chronic acid-base disorders.
Respiratory Acidosis
Acute:  for every 10 increase in pCO 2 → HCO 3 increases by 1  and there is a decrease of 0.08 in
pH
Chronic:  for every 10 increase in pCO 2 → HCO 3 increases by 4  and there is a decrease of 0.03 in
pH
Respiratory Alkalosis
Acute:  for every 10 decrease in pCO 2 → HCO 3 decreases by 2  and there is an increase of 0.08 in
PH
Chronic:  for every 10 decrease in pCO 2 → HCO 3 decreases by 5  and there is an increase of 0.03
in pH
Metabolic Acidosis
Winter’s formula: pCO 2 = 1.5[HCO 3] + 8 ± 2
If serum pCO 2 > expected pCO 2 → additional respiratory acidosis
Metabolic Alkalosis
For every 10 increase in HCO 3 → pCO 2 increases by 6
EDEMA
Q. What are the common causes of generalized edema?

Q. Discuss the mechanism of edema formation. How will you
differentiate between cardiac, renal and hepatic edema.
Definition
An abnormal (increased) accumulation of fluid in the interstitial space within
tissues.
Special forms of edema are listed in Table 14.30.
Table 14.30: Special forms of edema.
Terminology Body cavity involved
Hydrothorax Pleural cavity
Hydropericardium Pericardial cavity
Hydroperitoneum (ascites) Peritoneal cavity
Anasarca: Severe and generalized edema with profound subcutaneous
tissue swelling and fluid in the body cavities.
Causes of Pitting Dependent Edema (Table 14.31)
Pathogenesis of systemic edema from congestive heart failure, renal failure,
or reduced plasma osmotic pressure is shown in Figure 14.12.
Pitting edema may be divided into two categories:
1. Rapid pitting recovery within <40 seconds and is due to
hypoproteinemia
2. Slow pitting edema (>40 seconds) and is due to normal albumin level
(normoalbuminemia) (Fig. 14.13).
Table 14.31: Causes of pitting dependent edema.
Mechanism Causes
Increased hydrostatic/systemic venous pressure Systemic venous hypertension
Congestive heart failure
Pericardial diseases, constrictive pericarditis,
tricuspid valve disease
Regional venous hypertension
Inferior vena cava syndrome
Obstruction (e.g. venous thrombosis) or
compression of veins (e.g. external mass)
Lower extremity venous insufficiency

Decreased plasma osmotic pressure (decreased
serum protein/hypoproteinemia)Impaired protein synthesis
Decreased protein intake: Starvation,
kwashiorkor, malnutrition
Decreased absorption of proteins:
Malabsorption
Impaired hepatic synthesis due to liver
disease
Increased loss of protein
Skin loss:  Burns, weeping skin diseases
Urinary loss:  Nephrotic syndrome
Fecal loss:  Bowel disease, malabsorption,
protein-losing gastroenteropathy
Inflammation Acute* and chronic inflammation*
Increased capillary permeability Vasculitis*, idiopathic cyclic edema of women
(varies with menstrual cycle) and postanoxic
encephalopathy
Sodium retention Excessive salt intake with renal insufficiency
Increased tubular reabsorption of sodium, e.g.
increased renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
secretion
* Causes of painful edema
Fig. 14.12:  Pathogenesis of systemic edema from congestive heart failure, renal failure, or reduced

plasma osmotic pressure.
Fig. 14.13:  Pitting edema in congestive heart failure.
Treatment (Box 14.13)
Box 14.13: Treatment of pitting edema.
Rapid/Fast-recovering Pitting edema
Treatment the cause of hypoalbuminemia:
–   Treat underlying disease
–   Treat malnutrition
–   Treat protein loss
♦   Urinary loss:  Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor
–   Treat underlying cause of malabsorption
–   Treatment of edema due to cirrhosis.Judicious use of diuretics and aldosterone antagonist can alleviate edema
Slow Pitting Edema
Treat congestive heart failure:
–   Bed rest and elevation of legs useful for acute edema
–   Loop diuretics, digoxin, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, beta-blocker, if tolerated
Treat venous insufficiency:
–   Diuretics, compression, leg-elevating exercises.
Treat underlying obstruction of veins:
–   Anticoagulants, leg elevation for thrombosis
Lymphedema: Nonpitting Edema
Characteristics: Nontender, painless and does not vary much during the day.
Ulceration rare and skin shows hyperkeratosis and thickening (Fig. 14.14).

Causes (Table 14.32)
Table 14.32: Causes of lymphedema.
Upper extremity:
–   Breast cancer or surgery/radiation for
breast cancer
–   Newborn baby, Turner’s syndrome (X0)
Lower extremity:
–   Idiopathic:  Aplasia/dysplasia of
lymphatics
♦   3 types:  Congenital, praecox, form
tarde
♦   Associated with yellow nails, pleural
effusions
–   Secondary:
♦   Inflammatory:
◊   Tropical:  Filariasis + recurrent
streptococcal infection
◊   Nontropical:  Recurrent
streptococcal cellulitis♦   Obstructive: Unilateral in 95%
◊   Usually due to malignancy:
◊   Prostate cancer most common in men
◊   Lymphoma most common in women
◊   Any pelvic tumor or major pelvic
surgery/irradiation
Fig. 14.14:  Massive nonpitting edema with elephantiasis caused by filariasis of the leg.

Complications of Lymphedema
Infection: Recurrent cellulitis, lymphangitis
Lymphangiosarcoma (Stewart-Treves syndrome).
Treatment (Box 14.14)
Box 14.14: Treatment of nonpitting edema.
Fluid mobilization:
–   Diuretics
–   Elevation
–   Exercise
–   Compressive, elastic stockings
–   MassageControl of infection:
–   Treatment of dermatophytes
–   Prophylaxis against streptococcal infections: Amoxicillin,
amoxicillin/clavulanate
Other therapies:
–   Coumadin
–   Flavonoids, water soluble vitamin
Surgery: Liposuction
Medication That Causes Edema (Table 14.33)
Table 14.33: Medication that causes bilateral swollen extremities.
Type of medication Class of medication
Antihypertensive medications Calcium-channel blockers (Nifedipine,
felodipine, amlodipine, verapamil)
Direct vasodilators (hydralazine,
diazoxide)
Antiadrenergics (clonidine, reserpine,
methyldopa)
Chemotherapy Gemcitabine, docetaxel
Diabetic medications Thiazolidinediones (rosiglitazone)
Hormones Estrogen, progesterone, testosterone,

corticosteroid
Pain relief medications NSAIDs
Nonselective cyclo-oxygenase inhibitor
Selective cyclo-oxygenase-2 inhibitor
Psychiatric medications Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Antipsychotics (olanzapine)
Immunological/Immunosuppressant Cyclosporine, interleukin 2, OKT3
monoclonal antibody
Localized Edema (Box 14.15)
Box 14.15: Various type of localized edema.
Facial edema:  Trichinosis, hypothyroidism, allergies, nephrotic syndrome, angioedema
Pretibial myxedema:  Graves’ thyrotoxicosis
Neurogenic edema:  Secondary to autonomic dysfunction
Lipedema:  Adiposity of the legs
Pseudothrombophlebitis: It is unilateral edema with raised venous pressure caused by a popliteal
cyst

Neurology

CHAPTER
15
INTRODUCTION AND SYMPTOMATOLOGY
WEAKNESS AND PARALYSIS
Categories
Upper motor neurons: Consist of corticospinal interneurons which arise
from the motor cortex and descend to the spinal cord where they activate
the lower motor neurons (anterior horn cells) through synapses.
Lower motor neurons: The term ‘motor neuron’ is usually used only to
the efferent neurons that actually innervate muscles (the lower motor
neurons). A motor neuron consists of nerve cell (neuron) which is located
in the anterior horn cell of the spinal cord and its fibers (axon) projects
outside the spinal cord to directly or indirectly control effector organs,
mainly muscles and glands. Motor neuron axons are efferent nerve fibers
and carry signals from the spinal cord to the effectors to produce effects.
Signs of Upper and Lower Motor Neuron Disease (Table 15.1)
Table 15.1: Signs of upper and lower motor neuron disease.
Sign Upper motor neuron Lower motor neuron
Atrophy None (rarely disuse atrophy) Severe wasting
Fasciculations None Common
Tone Hypertonia-
rigidity/spasticityDecreased (hypotonia)
Distribution of weakness Distal predominant/regional Predominantly proximal (except
neuropathy)/ segmental
Tendon reflexes Exaggerated/ hyperactive Hypoactive/lost
Babinski sign Present Absent

Flexor spasms, clonus Present Absent
Q. Write a short note on:
Signs of upper motor neuron lesion/disease.
Signs of lower motor neuron lesion/disease.
Tone
Muscle tone is a partial state of contraction of a skeletal muscle to
maintain its optimal length during resting condition, even when a force is
applied to elongate the muscle. It is accomplished by the asynchronous
discharge of nervous impulse in the motor neurons in the anterior gray
horn of the spinal cord.Clinically, it may be defined as the resistance that is encountered when the
joint of relaxed muscle is moved passively.
Increased tone: Associated with disease of upper motor neurons due to
loss of inhibition of γ -motor neurons above the site of lesion.
Hypotonia: Causes of hypotonia is listed in Table 15.2.
Q. Write a short note on causes of hypotonia.
Table 15.2: Causes of hypotonia.
Lesions of the motor side of the reflex arc:
Poliomyelitis, polyneuritis, peripheral nerve
injuries
Lesions of the sensory side of the reflex arc:
Tabes dorsalis, herpes-zoster, carcinomatous
neuropathyCombined motor and sensory lesion:
Syringomyelia, cord or root compression,
gross cord destructionLesions of the muscle (myopathies), NMJ
(myasthenia)State of neuronal shock in upper motor neuron
lesion
Cerebellar lesions
Chorea
Periodic paralysis
REM (rapid eye movement) sleep
Benzodiazepine overdose, neuromuscular
blockers
Q. Write a short note on differences between spasticity and rigidity.
Differences between Spasticity and Rigidity (Table 15.3)
Table 15.3: Differences between spasticity and rigidity.

Spasticity Rigidity
Lesion Pyramidal tract lesion Extrapyramidal tract lesion
Tone Tone is more in the
antigravity group of muscles
than in the gravity assisted
group of musclesTone is equally raised in the gravity
assisted and antigravity group of
muscles
Character Clasp knife type of
spasticityLead pipe or cog wheel type of rigidity
Relation to velocity Velocity dependent, better
appreciated when passive
movement of the joint is
carried out rapidlyRigidity is not velocity dependent
Abdominal reflexes Lost Preserved
Plantar reflex Plantar is extensor Plantar is flexor
Deep tendon reflexes Brisk or exaggerated Normal or decreased
Clonus May be associated sustained
clonusClonus is absent
Features in limbs The limb does tend to return
toward a particular fixed
posture or extreme joint
angleThe limb does not tend to return
toward a particular fixed posture or
extreme joint angle
Reason Increased gamma motor
activityIncreased alpha and gamma motor
activity
Other causes of hypertonia: Tetanus, seizure (tonic phase), tetany,
catatonia, paratonia (Gegenhalten, Mitgehen).
Fasciculation and FibrillationQ. What is fasciculation and fibrillation?
When a motor unit (group of muscle fibers) becomes diseased, especially in
anterior horn cell diseases, it may discharge spontaneously, producing
fasciculations that may be seen or felt clinically or recorded by
electromyography (EMG). Fasciculations are visible, fine and fast,
sometimes vermicular contractions of fine muscle fibers that occur
spontaneously and intermittently.
When motor neurons or their axons degenerate, the denervated muscle fibers
also may discharge spontaneously. These single muscle fiber discharges, or
fibrillation  potentials, cannot be seen or felt but can be recorded with EMG.
Causes of fasciculation: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, progressive spinal
muscular atrophy, post-polio syndrome, hyperthyroidism,

organophosphorous poisoning, drugs (e.g. atropine, lithium), mercury, benign
fasciculation.
Myotonia
Q. What is myotonia?
Myotonia is characterized by continued, involuntary muscle contraction
even after cessation of voluntary effort (i.e. muscle contraction continues
beyond the period of time required for a particular movement to be made
and there is failure of normal muscle relaxation).It is best seen in the face and hand muscle. When the patient is asked to
smile and then relax his facial muscle, a delay in relaxation of the muscle
is noted and the smile remains fixed for a longer duration (transverse
smile). Similarly when the patient is asked to grip the examiner’s fingers
and then let go immediately, a delay in the relaxation of the grip is noted.Myokymia is a vermicular or continuous rippling movement of a group of
muscle fibers that can be seen in neuropathies (GBS), plexopathies, Isaac
syndrome.
Causes of myotonia (Box 15.1)
Box 15.1: Causes of myotonia.
Myotonic dystrophy type 1
Myotonic dystrophy type 2/proximal myotonic myopathy
Myotonia congenital
Paramyotonia congenita
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis
Ataxia
Q. Write a short note on causes of ataxia.
Ataxia is a disorder characterized unsteadiness and impaired coordination of
regulating body posture and the rate, range, force and direction of movement.
Types of ataxia are listed in Table 15.4.
Table 15.4: Types of ataxia.
Cerebellar: vasculitis, multiple sclerosis, Vestibular

infection bleeding, infarction, tumors, direct
injury, toxins (e.g. alcohol), genetic disorders
Sensory: Posterior column diseases, large fiber
neuropathy
OpticFrontal lobe ataxia (Bruns ataxia)
Mixed
Psychogenic
Pseudoataxia
Reflexes
Plantar Response/Reflex
Q. Write a short note on plantar reflex and extensor plantar
reflex/Babinski sign.
Plantar response/reflex is nociceptive, superficial reflex. Its segmental
innervation is S1 segment of the spinal cord. First described by Babinski.
Technique
Position the patient in supine with hip and knee extended.
Fix the ankle joint by holding it and stroke (gentle but firm pressure) the
outer aspect of sole with a blunt point (tip of a key). The stroke is directed
forwards and then curves inwards along the metatarsophalangeal joints
from the little to the big toe and stopped short of the base of great toe (root
value S1).Interpretation
Normal response is great toe will flex at the metatarsophalangeal joint
accompanied by flexion of other toes. Normal response should not be termed
‘negative Babinski’s sign’.
Abnormal responses
Absent: No response is seen. Plantar response/reflex may be absent when
there is loss of sensation of the sole (L5-S1), thick sole, paralysis of the
extensor hallucis and lesions of reflex arc.
Extensor: Extension (dorsiflexion) of the great toe with or without fanning
of others toes (abduction) is known as Babinski’s sign (mediated by L5).
Fanning of toes without great toe extension has no significance. When
fully developed it is accompanied by dorsiflexion of ankle, flexion of hip
and knee joint and slight abduction of thigh with contraction of the tensor
fascia lata. Its causes are:
–   Physiological: It may be normally extensor in infants below 6 months,

during deep sleep, under general anesthesia.
–   Pathological: Lesion of corticospinal (pyramidal) tract above S1
segment, deep coma, transiently after seizure, alcohol intoxication,
hypoglycemia and metabolic encephalopathy.
Alternative ways to elicit Babinski’s sign
Chaddock’s (lateral malleolus), Gordon’s (Calf), Oppenheim’s (anterior
tibia), Schaffer’s (Achilles Tendon), Gonda’s (press down 4th toe),
Stransky’s (adduct little toe), Bing’s (pinprick on dorsolateral foot).
Deep Tendon Reflex (Table 15.5)
Table 15.5: Commonly elicited superficial releases and deep tendon
reflexes.
Superficial reflexes Deep tendon reflexes
Corneal (Cranial nerve V & VII)
Abdominal
Epigastric (T6-T9)
Mid abdominal (T9-T11)
Hypogastric (T11-L1)
Cremasteric (L1, L2)
Anal reflex (S2, S3)
Plantar reflex
Reflexogenic zone-S1
Afferent nerve- tibial nerveJaw jerk (afferent and efferent both 5th nerve
center mid pons)
Biceps (C5, C6)
Brachiradial/supinator/radial periosteal (C5,
C6)
Triceps (C6, C7, C8)
Knee jerk/quadriceps/patellar reflex (L2, L3,
L4)
Ankle jerk (L5, S1, S2)
Latent reflexes (suggest pyramidal lesion if
present unilaterally)
Tromner’s/finger flexor reflex/Hoffman’s sign
Wartenberg’s sign
VERTIGO
Q. Write a short note on causes of vertigo.
Definition: Vertigo is defined as an abnormal perception
(hallucination/illusion) of movement (a sensation of rotation or tipping) of
either the environment or self (body or part of it). The individual feels that
the surroundings are spinning or moving.The perceived movement may be falling down, or rotating or there is a
sensation of spinning of the outside world. It is often accompanied by

nausea or vomiting.
Mechanism: It develops because of conflicting visual, proprioceptive and
vestibular information about a person’s position in space. Lesions causing
vertigo are listed in Table 15.6.
Table 15.6: Lesions causing vertigo— The most common cause is Benign
paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV).
Site of lesion Example
Labyrinth Ménière’s disease
VIII cranial nerve Acoustic neuroma
Vestibular neurons Vertebral artery ischemia, vestibulitis, drugs
Cerebellum/brainstem Tumor, infarct, multiple sclerosis, drugs, toxins
Temporal lobe Epilepsy, tumor
Others Migraine, epilepsy, neurodegenerative diseases
Gait
Observation to be noted while the patient walks: (1) Posture of the body
while walking, (2) the regularity of the movement, (3) the position and
movement of the arms, (4) the relative ease and smoothness of the movement
of the legs, (5) the distance between the feet both in forward and lateral
directions, (6) the ability to maintain a straight course, (7) the ease of turning
(8) stopping and (9) position of feet and posture just before initiation of gait.Abnormalities of Gait (Fig. 15.1)
Q. Write a short note on gait abnormalities with examples.
Neurogenic gait disorders should be differentiated from those due to skeletal
abnormalities (characterized by pain producing an antalgic gait, or limp). Gait
abnormalities incompatible with any anatomical or physiological deficit may
be due to functional disorders.Pyramidal (circumduction/hemiplegic) gait
Lesions of the upper motor neuron lesions produce characteristic
extension of the affected leg. There is tendency for the toes to strike the
ground on walking and outward throwing/swing of lower limbs. This
movement occurring at the hip joint is called circumduction. There is
leaning towards the opposite normal side. The arm of the affected side is

adducted at the shoulder and flexed at the elbow, wrist and fingers.
In hemiplegia/hemiparesis, there is a clear asymmetry between affected
and normal sides on walking, but in paraparesis both lower legs swing
slowly from the hips in extension and are stiffly dragged over the ground
(walking in mud).
Foot drop (high stepping/slapping gait)
In normal walking, the heel is the first part of the foot to hit the ground. A
lower motor neuron lesion affecting the leg will cause weakness of ankle
dorsiflexion, resulting in a less controlled descent of the foot, which makes
slapping noise as it hits the ground. In severe cases, the foot will have to be
lifted higher at the knee to allow room for the inadequately dorsiflexed foot
to swing through, resulting in a high-stepping gait. Cause: e.g. common
peroneal nerve palsy.Myopathic gait/waddling gait (primary muscle disease)
During walking, alternating transfer of the body’s weight through each
leg, needs adequate hip abduction.
Causes:
–   Weakness of proximal lower limb muscles (e.g. polymyositis,
muscular dystrophy) causes difficulty rising from sitting. The hips are
not properly fixed by these muscles and trunk movements are
exaggerated, and walking becomes a waddle or rolling. The pelvis is
poorly supported by each leg. This may be seen with bilateral
congenital dislocation of hip (Trendelenburg gait). The patient walks
on a broad base with exaggerated lumbar lordosis. Ataxic gait (cerebellar ataxia: broad-based gait)
In this type of gait, the patient, unstable, tremulous and reels in any
direction (including backwards) and walks on a broad base. Ataxia
describes this incoordination. The patient finds difficulty in executing
tandem walking.Causes: Lesions of the cerebellum, vestibular apparatus or peripheral
nerves. When walking, the patient tends to veer to the side of the affected
cerebellar lobe. When the disease involves cerebellar vermis, the trunk
becomes unsteady without limb ataxia, with a tendency to fall backwards
or sideways and is termed truncal ataxia.

Fig. 15.1: Abnormal gait.
Apraxic gait
In an apraxic gait, the acquired walking skills become disorganized. On
examination of the legs the power, cerebellar function and proprioception
are normal. Leg movement is normal when sitting or lying and the patient
can carry out complex motor tasks (e.g. bicycling motion). But patient
cannot initiation and organization the motor act of walking. The feet
appear stuck to the floor and the patient cannot walk.Causes: Diffuse bilateral hemisphere disease or diffuse frontal lobe
disease (e.g. tumor, hydrocephalus, infarction).
Marche à petits pas
It is characterized by small, slow steps and marked instability. In contrast
to the festination found in Parkinson’s disease, it lacks increasing pace and
freezing.Cause: Small-vessel cerebrovascular disease, and accompanying bilateral
upper motor neuron signs.
Extrapyramidal gait (shuffling gait) Festinant gait
It is characterized by stooped posture and gait difficulties with problems
initiating walking and controlling the pace of the gait. Patients make a
series of small, flat footed shuffles and become stuck while trying to start
walking or when walking through doorways (‘freezing’). The center of

gravity will be moved forwards to aid propulsion and difficulty stopping.
It is characterized by muscular rigidity throughout extensors and flexors.
Power is preserved, pace is shortened and slows to a shuffle, and its base
remains narrow. There is a stoop and diminished arm swinging and gait
becomes festinant (hurried) with short rapid steps. Patient will be having
difficulty in turning quickly and initiating movement. Retropulsion, i.e.
small backward steps are taken involuntarily when a patient halts.Cause: Parkinsonism.
Scissoring gait
Seen classically with cerebral palsy due to bilateral spasticity.
Sensory ataxia: Stomping gait
It is characterized by broad based, high stepping, stamping gait and ataxia
due to loss of proprioception (position sense). This type of ataxia become
more prominent by removal of sensory input (e.g. walks with eyes closed)
and become worse in the dark. Romberg’s test is positive.
Cause: Peripheral sensory (large fiber) lesions (e.g. polyneuropathy),
posterior column lesion (vitamin B12 deficiency or tabes dorsalis).
Choreiform gait (hyperkinetic gait)
The patient will display irregular, jerky, involuntary movements in all
extremities. Walking may accentuate their baseline movement disorder.
Cause: Sydenham’s chorea, Huntington’s Disease and other forms of
chorea, athetosis or dystonia.
ABNORMAL SPEECH AND LANGUAGE
Definitions
Phonation: It is the production of vocal sounds without word formation.
Speech: It consists of words which are articulate vocal sounds that
symbolize and communicate ideas. Speech is the articulation and
phonation of language sounds.Language: refers to the selection and serial ordering of words according
to learned rules by which a person can use spoken or written modalities to
communicate with others and to express cerebral activities involved with

thinking and learning. It can be by speech (auditory symbols), writing
(graphic symbols), or by gestures and pantomime (motor symbols).
Aphasias
Q. Write a short note on aphasia.
Aphasia is loss or defective language content of speech resulting from
damage to the speech centers within the dominant (usually left in 97%)
hemisphere. A language disturbance occurring after a right hemisphere
lesion in a right hander is known as crossed aphasia.It includes defect in or loss of the power of expression by speech, writing
or gestures or a defect in or loss of the ability to comprehend spoken or
written language or to interpret gestures.Aphasia may be categorized according to whether the speech output is
fluent or nonfluent.
–   Fluent aphasias (receptive aphasias) are impairments mostly due to
the input or reception of language, with difficulties either in auditory
verbal comprehension or in the repetition of words, phrases or
sentences spoken by others. For example, Wernicke’s aphasia.
–   Nonfluent aphasias (expressive aphasias) are difficulties in
articulating, with relatively good auditory, verbal comprehension. For
example, Broca’s aphasia.
Categories/Varieties of Aphasia (Table 15.7)Definitions
Alexia: It is the impairment of visual word recognition, in the context of
intact auditory word recognition and writing ability.
Agraphia: It is the inability to write, as a language disorder resulting from
brain damage.
Anomia: In this, word approximates the correct answer but it phonetically
inaccurate (plentil for pencil)—phonemic paraphasia. When the patient
cannot say the appropriate name when an object is shown but can point the
object when the name is provided is known as one way or retrieval based
naming deficit.

APRAXIA
Q. Write a short note on apraxia.
Apraxia is impaired ability (inability) to carry out (perform) skilled, complex,
organized motor activities in the presence of normal basic motor, sensory and
cerebellar function. Examples of complex motor activities: dressing, using
cutlery and geographical orientation.
TypesIdeomotor apraxia: Most common. It is the inability to perform a
specific motor command/act (e.g. cough, lighting a cigarette with a
matchstick) in the absence of motor weakness, incoordination, sensory
loss or aphasia. Site of lesion is bilateral parietal lobe. Buccofacial apraxia
involves apraxic deficits in movements of the face and mouth. Limb
apraxia encompasses apraxic deficits in movements of the arms and legs.
Dressing apraxia: Site of lesion is non-dominant parietal lobe. It is
inability to wear his/her dress.
Constructional apraxia: It is inability to copy simple diagrams or build
simple blocks. Site of lesion is non-dominant parietal lobe.
Ideational apraxia: It is a deficit in the execution of a goal-directed
sequence of movements even with real object. (e.g. asked to pick up a pen
and write, the sequence of uncapping the pen, placing the cap at the
opposite end). This is commonly associated with confusion and dementia
rather than focal lesions associated with aphasic conditions.Gait apraxia (Bruns ataxia): Seen in normal pressure hydrocephalus

(NPH).
Gaze apraxia: Part of Balint syndrome.
Other apraxias: Speech apraxia, conceptual apraxia, and conduction
apraxia.
Gerstmann’s syndrome:  The combination of acalculia (impairment of simple arithmetic),
dysgraphia (impaired writing), finger anomia (an inability to name individual fingers such as the
index or thumb), and righ-left confusion (an inability to tell whether a hand, foot, or arm of the
patient or examiner is one the right or left side of the body) is known as Gerstmann’s syndrome.
Site of lesion : Inferior parietal lobule (especially the angular gyrus) in the left (dominant)
hemisphere.
AGNOSIA
Q. Write a short note on agnosia.
Agnosia is failure to recognize objects (e.g. places, clothing, persons, sounds,
shapes or smells), despite the presence of intact sensory system.
Site of lesion: Contralateral parietal lobe.
Visual agnosia: Failure to recognize what is seen with eyes despite the
presence of intact visual pathways. The individual can describe the shape,
color and size without naming it. Site of lesion is in the posterior occipital
or temporal lobes.Prosopagnosia: A type of visual agnosia in which patient cannot identify
familiar faces, sometimes the reflection of his or her own face in the
mirror even including their own. Site of lesion is parieto-occipital lobe.Simultanagnosia is inability to perceive more than one object at a time.
Autotopagnosia is a form of agnosia, characterized by an inability to
localize and orient different parts of the body.
Anosognosia
Q. Write a short note on anosognosia.
Anosognosia is an inability or refusal to recognize a defect or disorder that is
clinically evident. Site of lesion is predominantly in non-dominant (right)
parietal lesions.
DYSARTHRIAS

Dysarthrias involve the abnormal articulation of sounds or phonemes. Types
of dysarthria are listed in Table 15.8.
Table 15.8: Types of dysarthria.
Type Cause
Flaccid (lingual, buccal, guttural) LMN weakness of facial, lingual or pharyngeal
muscles.
Facial paralysis causes difficulty with labials
such as b p m w.
Tongue paralysis affects a large number
sounds, particularly l, d, n, s, t, x.
Palatal paralysis produces a nasal twang in
speech
Spastic (hot potato voice) UMN weakness (bilateral) e.g. pseudobulbar
palsy
Ataxic (staccato speech) Cerebellar
Hypokinetic Extrapyramidal (Parkinsonism)
Myasthenic dysarthria Voice is normal in the beginning but becomes
weak as sentences progress
Functions of Cerebral Hemispheres
Q. Write a short note on normal functions of different cortical lobes and
their abnormalities.
Q. Write a short note on functions of parietal lobe.
Cerebral dominance aligns limb dominance with language function. Right-
handed individuals almost always (>95%) have the dominant left hemisphere,
and about 7% of left handers have a dominant right hemisphere.
Functions and effects of damage to various lobes of cerebral hemispheres
are listed in Table 15.9 (Fig. 15.2).
Table 15.9: Functions and effects of damage to various lobes of cerebral
hemispheres.
Lobe Function Cognitive/behavioral effects of
damage
Frontal P lease SMILE
(MNEMONIC)Personality Disinhibition
Social behavior Lack of initiation
Micturition Antisocial behavior

Intelligence Impaired memory
Language Expressive dysphasia
Emotional response Incontinence
Parietal: Dominant side Language Dysphasia, dyslexia,
Calculation Acalculia
Others Apraxia, agnosia
Parietal: Nondominant side Spatial orientation Spatial disorientation, neglect of
contralateral side
Constructional skills Constructional apraxia, dressing
apraxia
Temporal: Dominant side Auditory perception Receptive aphasia
Language Dyslexia
Verbal memory Impaired verbal memory
Smell  
Balance  
Temporal: Nondominant
sideAuditory perception Impaired non-verbal memory
Melody/pitch perception Impaired musical skills(tonal
perception)
Non-verbal memory  
Smell  
Balance  
Occipital Visual processing Visual inattention, visual loss, visual
agnosia (Anton–Babinski syndrome)
Fig. 15.2: Functions of various lobes of cerebral hemispheres.
HEADACHE
Headache is among the most common reasons patients seek medical
attention.

Classification of Headache (Table 15.10 and Fig. 15.3)
Primary headaches: Benign, recurrent, no organic disease as their cause. It
affects the quality of life of the patient.
Secondary headaches: Underlying organic disease.
Fig. 15.3:  Headache types.
Migraine
Q. Write a short essay/note on classification, pathogenesis, clinical
features and management of migraine.
Migraine is a neurovascular disease caused by neurogenic inflammation and
characterized by severe, recurring headaches.
It is the second most common cause of headache. It usually characterized
by an episodic severe pain on one side of the head (headache) and usually
associated with certain features such as sensitivity to light, sound or
movement; nausea and vomiting often accompany the headache.

Gender: F:M ratio is 5:1.
Classification
Migraine without aura or common migraine:  Does not give any warning signs before the onset
of headache. It occurs in about 70–80% of migraine patients.
Migraine with aura or classical migraine:  Gives some warning signs called ‘aura’ before the
actual headache begins. About, 20–30% migraine patients experience aura. The most common
aura is visual and may include both positive and negative (visual field defects) features.
Table 15.10: Classification of headache.
Primary headache Secondary headache
Type % Type %
Tension-type 69 Systemic infection,
meningitis, encephalitis63
Migraine 16 Head injury–post
traumatic4
Idiopathic
stabbing2 Vascular disorders, e.g.
giant cell arteritis1
Exertional 1 Subarachnoid
hemorrhage<1
Cluster 0.1 Brain tumor 0.1
Other primary headache
Paroxysmal hemicrania
SUNCT (Short-lasting unilateral
neuralgiform headache attacks with
conjunctival injection and tearing)Other secondary causes
Associated with metabolic disordersHypoxia
Hypercapnia
Dialysis
Associated with substance use or withdrawal venous
thrombosis
Retinal migraine:  It involves attacks of monocular scotoma or even blindness of one eye for less
than an hour and associated with headache.
Childhood periodic syndromes:  It involve cyclical vomiting (occasional intense periods of
vomiting), abdominal migraine (abdominal pain, usually accompanied by nausea), and benign
paroxysmal vertigo of childhood (occasional attacks of vertigo). They may be precursors or
associated with migraine.Complicated migraine:  Describes migraine headaches and/or auras that are unusually long or
unusually frequent, or associated with a seizure or brain lesion.
Basilar migraine:  Occipital headache, preceded by vertigo, diplopia and dysarthria, ±visual and
sensory symptoms (brainstem symptoms).
Hemiplegic migraine:  Rare autosomal dominant disorder characterized by prolonged headache
lasting hours or days, followed by hemiparesis and/or coma that recovers slowly over days.
Ophthalmoplegic migraine:  Migraine associated with transient 3rd nerve palsy with/without

involvement of pupil; sometimes also affect 4th and 6th nerve.
Vestibular migraine (also called migrainous vertigo) associated vertigo.
Catamenial migraine: Migraine associated with menstruation associated migraine.
Pathogenesis
Cause of migraine is not known.
Genetic factors: Play a role in causing the neuronal hyperexcitability.
Migraine is usually polygenic. Rarely, familial migraine is associated with
mutations in the α1 subunit of the P/Q type voltage gated calcium channel
or neuronal sodium channel (SCN1A), and a dominant  loss of function
mutation in a potassium channel gene (TRESK). Migraine is frequently
associated with positive family history, and similar phenomena occur in
disorders such as CADASIL. Mutations involving the Cav2.1 (P/Q)–type
voltage-gated calcium channel (CACNA1A gene) are now known to cause
familial hemiplegic migraine.Hormonal influences: Female preponderance and the frequency of
migraine attacks at certain points in the menstrual cycle due to hormonal
fluctuations. Estrogen-containing oral contraception can exacerbate
migraine in few patients.Right-to-left cardiac shunt: Migraine with aura has been associated with
patent foramen ovale (PFO), atrial septal defect (ASD) and pulmonary
arteriovenous malformations in hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia
(Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome).
Several theories have been proposed for the pathogenesis of migraine.Vascular theory: Constriction of intracerebral blood vessel produces aura.
Vasodilatation of intracranial/extracranial blood vessel produces headache
phase.Serotonin theory: Decreased serotonin levels linked with migraine and
specific serotonin receptors found in blood vessels of brain.
Neurogenic theory: The aura (see clinical features below) is thought to be
due to spreading cortical depression wave of neuronal depolarization
followed by depressed activity spreading slowly anteriorly across the
cerebral cortex from the occipital region. This spreading process occurs at
a rate of about 3 mm/minute. Dysfunction of activation of cells in the
trigeminal nucleus releases vasoactive neuropeptides [e.g. calcitonin gene-
related peptide (CGRP), substance P and other vasoactive peptides

including 5HT] by activated trigeminovascular neurons. They produce
painful meningeal inflammation and vasodilation.
Dopamine plays a role and most migraine symptoms can be induced by
dopaminergic stimulation. There is dopamine receptor hypersensitivity in
patients with migraine.
Precipitating factors:  Anything can initiate or precipitate or amplify an attack. Common triggers are:
excess stress, glare, exposure to bright light, loud noises/sounds, smoke or strong scents,
menstruation, lack or excess of sleep, cheese, caffeine, alcohol, chocolate, citrus fruit, food additives
such as monosodium glutamate, vasodilators, hunger, physical exertion, stormy weather or barometric
pressure changes and contraceptive pills, etc.
Clinical Features
Headache is usually hemicranial, throbbing, and associated with nausea and
vomiting.Migraine without aura (previously called ‘common’ migraine).
–   About 70–80% of patients with migraine have characteristic headache
but without aura.
–   Typically attacks are episodic and start at puberty and prevalence
increases in 4th decade. May show variable degree of spontaneous
remissions.
–   The scalp may be tender to touch during episodes (allodynia is
production of pain from normally non-painful stimuli) and the patient
prefer to be still in a dark and quiet environment.
–   Other symptoms associated with migraine headache are listed in Table
15.11.Migraine with aura (previously known as classical migraine)
–   Migraine aura: About 20–30% of patient with migraine experience
malaise, irritability, behavioral change or focal neurological symptoms
for some hours or days immediately preceding the headache phase.
Table 15.11: Symptom associated with migraine headache.
Nausea Vomiting
Photophobia, prostration Visual disturbances
Lightheadedness Paresthesias
Scalp tenderness/cutaneous allodynia Vertigo

–   Type of aura: (1) visual aura (2) sensory aura or (3) language aura.
♦   Visual aura: It is most common type characterized by positive visual symptoms such as
shimmering, teichopsia (silvery zigzag lines also called fortification spectra) flashing lights
or fragmentation of the image (like looking through a pane of broken glass) or scintillating
spots across the visual fields for up to 40 minutes. Sometimes there may be temporary patchy
visual field loss which may move across the visual field (scotomas) and even evolve into
hemianopia or tunnel vision.
♦   Sensory aura: It consists of positive sensory symptoms such as tingling followed by
numbness, spreading over 20–30 minutes, from one part of the body to another.
♦   Language aura:  Dominant hemisphere involvement may cause transient speech disturbance.
♦   Motor aura-transient weakness.
Duration of aura: Usually evolves over 5–20 minutes with symptoms
changing as the wave of spreading neuronal depression moves across the
surface of the cortex. It rarely lasts for more than 60 minutes and is
followed immediately by the headache phase.
Diagnostic Criteria (Table 15.12)
Table 15.12: Simplified diagnostic criteria for migraine.
Repeated attacks of headache lasting 4–72 hours (untreated) with
At least 2 of the following features: Plus at least 1 of the following features:
Unilateral pain Nausea/vomiting
Throbbing pain Photophobia and phonophobia
Motion sensitivity (headache aggravated with
head movement or physical activity)Normal physical examination, no other
reasonable cause for the headache
Moderate or severe intensity
Complications of Migraine
Status migrainosus is a debilitating migraine attack lasting for more than 72
hours.
Persistent aura without infarction  is defined by aura symptoms persisting
for one week or more with no evidence of infarction on neuroimaging.
Migrainosus infarction: Migraine attack, occurring in a patient with
migraine with aura, in which one or more aura symptoms persist for more
than one hour and neuroimaging shows an infarction in a relevant brain
area.Migraine aura-triggered seizure is a seizure triggered by an attack of

migraine with aura.
RED flags of headache (Box 15.2)
Q. Write a short essay/note on management of migraine in young
adults. Mention three drugs used and write short note on
prophylactic therapy.
Box 15.2: RED flags of headache.
“Worst” headache ever
First severe headache
Subacute worsening over days or weeks
Altered level of sensorium/consciousness
Abnormal neurologic examination
Fever or unexplained systemic signs
Significant weight loss
Vomiting that precedes headache
Pain induced by bending, lifting, cough, Worsens with Valsalva maneuvers
Pain which disturbs sleep or presents immediately upon awakening
Known systemic illness, history of trauma, cancer or HIV
New onset headache in a patient >50 years of age
Focal neurologic deficits, jaw claudication
Morning headache associated with nausea and vomiting
Pain associated with local tenderness (e.g. region of temporal artery)
Management (Flowchart 15.1)
Nonpharmacological treatment (General measures)
Explanation that migraine has no grave prognosis.
Identification of triggers and avoidance of identified triggers or exacerbating factors to prevent
attacks. Women with aura should avoid estrogen treatment (oral contraception or hormone
replacement). Lifestyle modification wherever possible.
Other measures: Meditation, relax techniques, psychotherapy.
Flowchart 15.1:  Treatment of migraine.

Pharmacological treatment
Abortive treatment-treatment of acute attack.
Preventive treatment: Drug prophylaxis.
Treatment of an acute attack
Analgesic: Simple analgesia such as aspirin, paracetamol or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
agents.
Nausea may be treated by an antiemetic (metoclopramide or domperidone).
Severe attacks: If there is previously no relief with an NSAID, use 'triptans'.
Triptans: (e.g. sumatriptan, almotriptan, eletriptan, frovatriptan, naratriptan, rizatriptan and
zolmitriptan).
–   Mode of action:  Potent 5HT1B/1D agonists, inhibit release of CGRP and substance P, inhibit
activation of the trigeminal nerve and inhibit vasodilation in the meninges.
–   Administration triptans are available as oral preparations, nasal spray and subcutaneous
injections.
–   Contraindications:  Ischemic heart disease or stroke, high-risk for coronary artery disease,
pregnancy, hemiplegic or basilar migraine and use with ergots.
CGRP (calcitonin gene-related peptide) antagonists (e.g. telcagepant ) are very effective for acute
treatment of migraine.
Lasmiditan, a selective serotonin 1F receptor agonist has been tried.
Single-pulse transcranial magnetic stimulation  (TMS) has shown good benefits.
Drug prophylaxis
Indications for drug prophylaxis in migraine are listed in Box 15.3. Various drugs can be used and
the most frequently used are:
–   Anticonvulsants (antiepileptic drugs): Valproate (800 mg) or topiramate (100–200 mg daily)
are the most effective options.
–   β-adrenoceptor antagonists (β-blockers), e.g. propranolol slow release 80– 160 mg daily.
–   Tricyclic antidepressants, e.g. amitriptyline 10 mg increasing weekly in 10 mg steps to 50–60
mg or Dosulepin (10–200 mg at night).
–   Methysergide 1-2 mg TID in resistant cases (prolonged use may produce retroperitoneal and
mediastinal fibrosis).
–   Botulinum toxin has been tried as a treatment for chronic migraine.
–   Vasoactive drugs and calcium channel blockers: These include flunarizine (5–10 mg OD at bed
time), verapamil (80 to 160 mg 3 times a day) and methysergide and are used in refractory
cases. Pizotifen is rarely used.

–   Butterbur, coenzyme Q10, fever few, magnesium, melatonin, riboflavin have been tried.
Box 15.3:  Indications for drug prophylaxis in migraine.
Patients who have very frequent headaches (more than 2–3 week)
Attack duration > 48 hours
Headache extremely severe
Migraine accompanied by severe aura
Contraindication to acute treatment
Unacceptable adverse effects with acute migraine treatment
Patients preference
Cluster Headache
Q. Write a short note on cluster headache.
Cluster headache (migrainous neuralgia) is distinct from migraine and is
much less common than migraine.
Age and gender: Usually occurs in young adult in the third decade (20 and
40 years) with male predominance (M: F = 5:1).
Pathophysiology
Cause and precise mechanism is unknown.
It differs from migraine in its character, absence of genetic predisposition,
lack of triggering dietary factors, male predominance and different drug
effect.Abnormal hypothalamic activity is observed on functional imaging studies
during an attack. Patients are often smokers and consume more than
average alcohol.
Clinical FeaturesCluster headache is periodic with recurrent bouts of identical headaches
beginning at the same hour for weeks at a time (the eponymous
‘cluster’). Patients may develop either one or several attacks within a 24-
hour period.
Cluster headache causes severe (excruciating) and worst,
stabbing/boring, unilateral periorbital/retro-orbital pain with
parasympathetic autonomic features in the same eye (e.g. unilateral
lacrimation, nasal congestion and conjunctival redness/injection or even a

transient Horner’s syndrome). The pain is so severe that they may commit
suicide.
Circadian periodicity: Usually cluster period lasts for few weeks and
followed by remission for months to years. They typically recur a year or
more later often at the same time of year
Table 15.13: Diagnostic criteria for cluster headache.
At least five attacks fulfilling following:
Severe or very severe unilateral orbital, supraorbital and/or temporal pain lasting 15 to 180
minutes if untreated.
Headache is accompanied by at least one of the following.
–   Autonomic features: Unilateral
♦   Conjunctival redness/ injection and/or lacrimation or
♦   Nasal congestion and/or rhinorrhea or
♦   Edema of eyelid
♦   Sweating on the forehead and face or
♦   Miosis and/or ptosis or
–   Restlessness or agitationFrequency of attacks: From one every other day to eight/day
Diagnostic Criteria for Cluster Headache (Table 15.13)
Management of cluster headache
Acute attacks:  Analgesics are not useful and acute attacks are usually halted by:
–   Subcutaneous injection of sumatriptan  (6 mg) is the drug of choice for acute treatment. It
works quickly and usually shortens an attack to 10–15 minutes. There is no evidence of
tachyphylaxis. Oral sumatriptan is not effective. Sumatriptan (20 mg) and zolmitriptan (5 mg)
nasal sprays are also effective or
–   Inhalation of 100% oxygen  at 10–12 L/min for 15–20 min. Many respond very well.
–   The brevity of the attack probably prevents other migraine therapies from being effective.
Octreotide  is effective in the treatment of acute cluster headaches.
Most prophylactic migraine drugs are often ineffective. Attacks can be prevented in some
patients by sodium valproate, lithium, verapamil, methysergide and/or a short course of oral
corticosteroids.
Tension-Type Headache
Q. Write short note on tension headache.
Most common type of headache.
Pathophysiology is incompletely understood, and few consider this as a

milder version of migraine.
Clinical features: Characteristic features of headache (Fig. 15.3) are:
Pain is ‘dull’, ‘tight’ or like a ‘pressure’, and it may be accompanied by a
sensation of a band round the head or pressure at the vertex.
It is of constant character and generalized, but often radiates forwards
from the occipital region. It may be episodic or persistent.
Severity may vary, and is not associated vomiting or photophobia. The
pain often progresses throughout the day.
Tenderness may be present over the skull vault or in the occiput.
Management
Carefully assess, followed by discussion of likely precipitants and reassurance that the prognosis is
good.
Physiotherapy (with muscle relaxation and stress management) may be helpful.
Low-dose amitriptyline may be beneficial. Investigation is rarely required.
Differences between most common primary headache is presented in Table
15.14.
Table 15.14: Comparison of most common primary headaches.
Characteristic Migraine Tension Cluster
Age of onset 25–55 years 30–50 years 20–40 years
Location Unilateral (but may be
bilateral)Bilateral Unilateral, orbital,
supraorbital,
temporal
Duration of
episode4–72 hours 30 min–7 days 15–180 minutes
Severity Moderate to severe Mild to moderate Extremely severe
Type Pulsating, throbbing Pressing, tightening but not
pulsatingBoring, searing
Pattern 1 to 2 attacks per month <180 attacks per year (or
<15 attacks per month)1 to 8 attacks per
day separated by
pain- free periods
Associated
symptomsNausea, vomiting,
photophobia, phonophobia
(2 of these)Either photophobia or
phonophobia, but not both,
no nausea or vomitingConjunctival
injection,
Lacrimation
Forehead/ facial
swelling, nasal
congestion,
rhinorrhea, ptosis,

Miosis, eyelid
edema
STROKE AND CEREBROVASCULAR DISEASE
Q. Describe the predisposing factors, clinical features, investigations,
and management of a patient with right middle cerebral artery
occlusion.
Q. Describe clinical features, diagnosis of the cerebral stroke in young
and its management.
Q. Describe the etiology, clinical features and treatment of cerebral
thrombosis.
Q. Write a short essay/note on cerebrovascular accidents/stroke.
Stroke
A stroke (cerebrovascular accident is a vague term which should be
avoided) is defined as a syndrome of rapid (abrupt) onset of a neurologic
deficit that is attributable to a focal vascular cause.World Health Organization (WHO) definition: Stroke is a 'rapidly
developing clinical signs of focal (or global) disturbance of cerebral
function, with symptoms lasting for 24 hours or longer or leading to
death, with no apparent cause other than of vascular origin'.
Progressing stroke (or stroke in evolution): It is a stroke in which the
focal neurological deficit worsens after the patient first presents. It may be
due to increasing volume of infarction, secondary hemorrhage in the
infarcted area or increasing cerebral edema.Complete stroke: Rapid onset with persistent focal neurological deficit
which does not progress beyond 96 hours.
Evolving stroke: Gradual stepwise development of neurological deficits.
Focal cerebral deficits that develop slowly (over weeks to months) are
unlikely to be due to stroke and are more suggestive of tumor or
inflammatory or degenerative disease.
Terminologies

Several terms are used to classify strokes, mainly based on the duration and
evolution of symptoms.
Transient ischemic attack (TIA): Described later (refer page 960)
Reversible ischemic neurological deficit (RIND): In some cases, deficits
last for longer than 24 hours but resolve completely or almost completely
within a few days.Stuttering hemiplegia: Internal carotid lesions are characterized by
repeated episodes of TIA followed by fully evolved stroke.
Types of Stroke (Flowchart 15.2)
About 80% of patients develop cerebral infarction  due to inadequate blood
flow to part of the brain, and most of the remainder develops an
intracerebral hemorrhage.
Ischemic stroke: Cerebral infarction is most commonly caused by
thromboembolic disease secondary to atherosclerosis in the major
extracranial arteries (carotid artery and aortic arch). About 20% of
infarctions are caused by emboli from the heart, and about 20% are caused
by thrombosis in situ caused by intrinsic disease of small perforating
vessels (lenticulostriate arteries), producing lacunar infarctions.Hemorrhagic stroke: Intracranial hemorrhage is caused by bleeding
directly into or around the brain. Neurological symptoms are produced by
compression, toxic effects or raised intracranial pressure.Cerebrovascular anomalies such as intracranial aneurysm and
arteriovenous malformations (AVMs).
Flowchart 15.2:  Classification of stroke.

Risk (Predisposing) Factors for Stroke (Table 15.15)
Q. Write a short essay/note on risk factors for stroke.
Table 15.15: Risk factors for stroke.
Risk factors in patients of all age groups High-
risk
Hypertension (including isolated systolic)
Smoking
Diabetes mellitus
Atrial fibrillation
Drugs: Cocaine, amphetamine
Dilated cardiomyopathy
EndocarditisHigh cholesterol
Obesity
Vasculitis: Systemic vasculities (e.g.
polyarteritis nodosa-PAN), granulomatosis
with polyangiitis (Wegener's) etc.),
primary CNS vasculitis, meningitis
(syphilis, tuberculosis, fungal, bacterial,
zoster)
Low-riskMigraine
Oral contraceptives or alcohol
Patent foramen ovaleRecent myocardial infarction
Prosthetic valve
Sleep apnea
Additional risk factors that are more common in young patients
Hypercoagulable disorders
Protein C and S deficiencies
Antithrombin III deficiency
Antiphospholipid syndrome
Factor V Leiden mutation
Prothrombin G20210A heterozygous
mutationSickle-cell anemia
Hyperhomocysteinemia
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
Arterial dissection
Infections (e.g. syphilis, HIV)
Systemic malignancy

Ischemic Stroke
Pathophysiology (Flowchart 15.3)
Complete stop of cerebral blood flow causes death of brain tissue within
4–10 minutes. The cerebral blood flow (CBF) to the ischemic core is <10
mL/100 g/min.
Ischemic penumbra (Fig. 15.4) is the region surrounding the central core.
The tissue of the penumbra is functionally impaired and is at risk of
infarction. CBF is 10–18 mL/100 g/min. It has the potential to be salvaged
by revascularization. The damage of the penumbra is coupled by
inflammation and excitotoxicity mediated by glutamine and sodium. Also
hyperglycemia and fever worsen the penumbra, so need to be controlled.
Flowchart 15.3:  Pathophysiology of ischemic stroke.


Fig. 15.4: Ischemic penumbra and ischemic core (black center).
(DWI: diffusion weighted image; PWI: perfusion weighted image; CBF: cerebral blood flow)
Etiology of Ischemic Stroke (Table 15.16)
Embolic occlusion
Q. Write a short essay/note on embolic stroke, its causes and management.
Artery-to-artery embolic stroke
Any vessel  may be the source of emboli, including the aortic arch, common and internal carotid,
vertebral and basilar arteries.
Atherosclerosis within the carotid artery:  Carotid bifurcation atherosclerosis is the most
common source of artery-to-artery embolus.
In young (age <60 years) patients:  Intracranial atherosclerosis, dissection of the internal carotid
or vertebral arteries or even vessels beyond the circle of Willis is a common source of embolic
stroke.
Cardioembolic stroke
Heart is a common source of emboli. Emboli from the heart most often lodge in the middle
cerebral artery (MCA), the posterior cerebral artery (PCA), or one of their branches.
Infrequently, the anterior cerebral artery (ACA) territory is involved.
Non-rheumatic atrial fibrillation  (and other arrhythmias) causing thrombosis in a dilated left
atrium is the most common cause of cerebral embolism . Other causes include cardiac valvular
disease such as congenital valve disorders, infective vegetations; rheumatic and degenerative
calcific changes may cause embolization.
Simultaneous infarcts in different vascular territories are suggestive that heart or aorta is the source
of emboli.
Paradoxical embolus
Atrial septal defect or patent foramen ovale (PFO) may occasionally allow passage of fragments of
thromboemboli (e.g. from a lower limb DVT) from the right atrium to the left. This is believed to be
the most common cause of cryptogenic strokes.
Other embolism like fat embolism, air embolism, amniotic fluid embolism, tumor embolism are rarely
associated with neurological deficits.

Table 15.16: Etiology of ischemic stroke.
Thrombotic occlusion
Small vessel (lacunar) stroke
Large vessel thrombosis
Embolic occlusion
Artery-to-artery: Carotid bifurcation, aortic arch, arterial dissection
Cardioembolic: Atrial fibrillation, mural thrombus, myocardial
infarction, dilated cardiomyopathy, valvular lesions, mitral stenosis,
mechanical valve, bacterial endocarditis
Paradoxical embolus: Atrial septal defect, patent foramen ovale
Venous sinus thrombosis
Subarachnoid hemorrhage due to vasospasm
Thrombosis occlusion
Large vessel thrombosis
Thrombosis developing at the site of ruptured mural atheromatous plaque
may produce occlusion of involved vessel or may be a source of artery to
artery embolism.
Small Vessel (Lacunar) Stroke
Q. Write a short essay/note on lacunar infarct.
Small penetrating arterial branches of 200–800 μm in diameter, supply the
deep brain parenchyma. Each of these small branches can be occluded
either by atherothrombotic disease at its origin or by the development of
occlusive vasculopathy—lipohyalinotic thickening (consequence of
hypertension).Thrombosis of these vessels causes small infarcts that are referred to as
lacunes. These infarcts range in size from 0.2 to 15 mm  in diameter.
Risk factors: Include hypertension and age.
Small-vessel strokes account for 20% of all strokes.
Symptoms (Table 15.17): Lacunar strokes present with fluctuating
symptoms ‘capsular warning syndrome’.

Table 15.17: Signs and symptoms of lacunar stroke depending on location
of lesion.
Syndrome Signs/Symptoms Localization Vascular supply
Pure motor Contralateral hemiparesis or
hemiplegia. Affects face,
arm and leg equallyPosterior limb
of internal
capsuleCorona radiata-
Basis pontisLenticulostriate
branches of the
middle cerebral
artery (MCA) or
perforating arteries
from basilar artery
Pure sensory Contralateral hemisensory
loss. Persistent or transient
numbness and/or tingling on
one side of the bodyVPL (ventral
posterolateral)
nucleus of
thalamusLenticulostriate
branches of MCA.
Small
thalamoperforators
of PCA (posterior
cerebral artery)
Mixed sensorimotor Contralateral weakness and
numbness. Hemiparesis or
hemiplegia with ipsilateral
sensory impairmentThalamus and
adjacent posterior
limb of internal
capsuleLenticulostriate
branches of MCA
Dysarthria- clumsy hand Slurred speech and
weakness of contralateral
hand (fine motor)Basis pontis Basilar artery
perforators
Ataxia- hemiparesis Combination of cerebellar
and motor symptoms.
Contralateral hemiparesis
and ataxia out of proportion
to weaknessInternal
capsule-
posterior limbBasis pontis
Corona radiataLenticulostritae
branches of
MCAPerforating
arteries of
basilar artery
Hemiballismus/ hemichorea Contralesional limb
flailing/dyskinesisSubthalamic
nucleusPerforating
arteries of anterior
choroidal or
PCOM (posterior
communicating
artery)
Clinicoanatomic Correlation (Table 15.18 and Flowchart 15.2)
Table 15.18: Features of cerebral ischemia depending on the neuroanatomic
basis.
Vascular territory Signs and symptoms
Internal carotid arteryCombined ACA (anterior cerebral artery) +
MCA (middle cerebral artery)
Ipsilateral monocular visual loss (amaurosis)

secondary to CRAO
Left anterior cerebral artery (ACA) Right leg numbness and weakness
Transcortical motor aphasia
Ideomotor apraxia
Right anterior cerebral artery (ACA) Left leg numbness and weakness
Motor neglect
Possibly ideomotor apraxia
Left middle cerebral artery (MCA) Right face/arm > leg numbness and weakness
Aphasia
Left gaze preference
Right middle cerebral artery (MCA) Left face/arm > leg numbness and weakness
Left hemispatial neglect
Right gaze preference
Agraphesthesia/astereoagnosia
Stroke Localization—Clinical Features (Table 15.19 and Fig.
15.5)
Fig. 15.5:  Localization of lesion in hemiplegia. (I/L: ipsilateral; C/L: contralateral)
Table 15.19: Clinical features of stroke depending on localization.
Syndrome Clinical features Localization
Middle cerebral artery (M1) Produces pure motor or sensory Internal capsule,

syndrome motor stroke contralateral to the side
of lesion. If ischemia of putamen,
pallidus- predominantly
parkinsonian featurescaudate nucleus,
putamen and outer
pallidus
Middle cerebral artery (M2)
syndromeBrachial syndrome: Weakness of
hand and arm
Frontal opercular syndrome:
Broca’s aphasia with facial
weakness with or without arm
weaknessSuperior division of
MCA-M2 involved
If dominant hemisphere: Wernicke’s
aphasia without weakness with
contralateral homonymous superior
quadrantanopia
If non-dominant hemisphere:
Hemispatial neglect, spatial agnosia
without weaknessInferior division of
MCA-M2 involved
Complete MCA syndrome Contralateral hemiplegia,
contralateral hemianesthesia,
contralateral homonymous
hemianopia, gaze preference to the
ipsilateral side. If dominant
hemisphere involved-global aphasia.
If non-dominant hemisphere
involved-hemispatial neglect,
anosognosia and constructional
apraxia
Unpaired ACA syndrome Profound abulia and bilateral
pyramidal signs with paraparesis or
quadriparesis and urinary
incontinenceFrontal lobe, entire
medial part of cerebral
hemispheres
Anterior choroidal artery occlusion
syndromeContralateral (c/l) hemiplegia, c/l
hemianesthesia, c/l homonymous
hemianopiaPosterior limb of
internal capsule,
retrolentiform and
sublentiform parts
Claude’s syndrome 3rd nerve palsy + contralateral
ataxiaRed nucleus/cerebral
peduncle
Weber’s syndrome 3rd nerve palsy + contralateral
hemiplegiaMedial
midbrain/cerebral
peduncle
Benedict’s syndrome Weber’s + tremors + ataxia Red nucleus/medial
midbrain
Dejerine-Roussy syndrome Contralateral hemisensory loss and
agonizing painThalamus
Parinaud’s syndrome Loss of up gaze, convergence-
retraction nystagmus on attemptedDorsal midbrain

up gaze, downward ocular deviation
(‘setting sun’ sign), lid retraction
nystagmus (Collier’s sign),
mydriasis
Marie-Foix syndrome Ipsilateral ataxia—arm and leg
Contralateral hemiparesis and
hemisensory lossLateral pontine (middle
cerebellar peduncle,
corticospinal tract and
spinothalamic tract
Raymond-Cestan syndrome Ipsilateral lateral gaze palsy (VI
nerve), contralateral hemiparesisVentral pons
Millard-Gubler syndrome Ipsilateral lateral gaze palsy (VI
nerve) and LMN facial palsy,
contralateral hemiparesisVentral pons
Medial medullary syndrome
(Dejerine syndrome)Ipsilateral XII nerve palsy,
contralateral hemiparesis,
Internuclear ophthalmoplegia
(involvement of medial longitudinal
fascicle), loss of posterior column
sensationMedial medulla
Hemimedullary syndrome
(Babinski–Negolette)Lateral medullary syndrome +
contralateral hemiparesisInvolve both lateral and
medial medulla
Top of basilar syndrome Parinauds syndrome features+
oculomotor palsy, behavioral
features, abuliaBasilar artery occlusion
Involves thalamus,
midbrain, occipital
lobes, cerebellum
(superior cerebellar
artery)
Lateral medullary syndromeQ. Write short note on lateral medullary syndrome.
Also called as Wallenberg’s syndrome and is due to occlusion of the
posterior inferior cerebellar artery. Localization/structures involved and
associated symptoms are presented in Table 15.20.
Table 15.20: Localization/structures involved and associated symptoms of
LMS.
Localization/structures involved Symptoms
Vestibular nuclei and connections
Inferior cerebellar peduncle (Restiform body)Dizziness and imbalance
Hypotonia ipsilateral side
Diplopia/ osscilospia
Nystagmus, limb ataxia

Spinal nucleus of CNV
Spinothalamic tractLoss of pain and temperature sensation in
ipsilateral face
Loss of pain and temperature contralateral
trunk (crossed sensory loss)
Nucleus ambiguous (CN 9 and 10) Ipsilateral paralysis palate, pharynx, and
larynx
Absent gag reflex
Descending sympathetic fibers
Dorsomotor nucleus of VagusIpsilateral Horner's syndrome
Autonomic signs—labile
BP/tachycardia/sweating/arrhythmias
Ventrolateral medullary tegmentum and the
medullary reticular zone (Respiratory centers)Failure of automatic respirations
Hiccoughs
Corticospinal tracts, Medial lemniscus NOT
involvedNo pyramidal tract signs. Posterior column
sensations preserved
TOAST (The Trial of ORG 10172 in Acute Stroke Treatment) classification
of subtypes of acute ischemic stroke is presented in Box 15.4.
Hypoperfusion and its consequences
A generalized reduction in cerebral blood flow due to systemic
hypotension (e.g. cardiac arrhythmia, cardiac arrest, myocardial
infarction, or hemorrhagic shock) usually produces syncope.
If low cerebral blood flow persists for a longer duration, then infarction
in the border zones (watershed areas) between the major and posterior
cerebral artery distributions may develop (particularly if there is severe
stenosis of proximal carotid vessels).In more severe instances, global hypoxia-ischemia causes widespread
brain injury, the constellation of cognitive sequelae that ensues is called
hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy.
Focal ischemia or infarction, conversely, is usually by thrombosis of the
cerebral vessels themselves or by emboli from a proximal arterial source
of the heart.
Carotid and vertebral artery dissectionAbout 20% of cases of young (below the age 40 years) stroke is due to
dissection of carotid or vertebral artery.
It may develop sometimes as a sequel of trivial neck trauma or
hyperextension  (e.g. after whiplash, hair washing in a salon, or exercise).
Predisposing factor include subtle collagen disorders (e.g. partial forms of

Marfan’s syndrome).
Most dissections occur in large extracranial neck vessels and are
characterized by penetration of blood into the subintimal region o f
vessel wall  and forms false lumen. However, it is the thrombosis within
the true lumen due to tissue thromboplastin release which results in
embolization from the site of dissection. This type of stroke sometimes
develops days after the initial event.Symptoms: Pain in the neck or face is the clue for diagnosis.
Box 15.4: TOAST classification of subtypes of acute ischemic stroke.
Large-artery atherosclerosis
Cardioembolism
Small-vessel occlusion
Stroke of other determined etiology
Stroke of undetermined etiology
Venous stroke
Only 1% of strokes are due to venous thrombosis (within intracranial
venous sinuses).
Predisposing factors: It may occur in pregnancy, hypercoagulable
states and thrombotic disorders or with dehydration or malignancy.
Consequences: Cortical infarction, seizures and raised intracranial
pressure.
Investigations/Diagnosis
Q. Write a short essay/note on computerized tomography (CT) in
stroke.
Neuroimaging (Figs. 15.6A to C)
CT scans: To identify or exclude hemorrhage as the cause of stroke.
–   They identify extraparenchymal hemorrhage, neoplasms, abscesses,
and other conditions mimicking as stroke.
–   Brain CT scans in the first several hours after an infarction generally
does not show any abnormality, and the infarct may not be detected
reliably for 24–48 hours.

Figs. 15.6A to C:  Neuroimaging in stroke: (A) Acute right anterior cerebral artery (ACA) infarct;
(B) Acute bilateral posterior cerebral artery (PCA) infarct—Anton syndrome: (C) Right lateral
medullary syndrome.
–   CT may fail to show small ischemic strokes in the posterior fossa
because of bone artifact; small infarcts on the cortical surface may also
be missed.
MRI: reliably documents the extent and location of infarction in all areas
of the brain, including the posterior fossa and cortical surface. MRI is less
sensitive than CT in detecting acute bleeding.Diffusion-weighted imaging and FLAIR (fluid-attenuated inversion
recovery) imaging is more sensitive for early brain infarction than
standard MR sequences or CT. It can identify ischemic penumbra and
patients showing large regions of mismatch may be better candidates for
acute revascularization.
Vascular imagingMany ischemic strokes are due to atherosclerotic thromboembolic disease
of the major extracranial vessels. Detection of extracranial vascular
disease can establish the diagnosis of ischemic stroke and, it may also help
for specific treatments (e.g. carotid endarterectomy to reduce the risk of
further stroke).Extracranial arterial disease can be non-invasively detected by duplex
ultrasound, MRA or CT angiography, or occasionally intra-arterial
contrast radiography.
Cardiac investigationsCardioembolism is responsible for 20% of ischemic strokes. The source of
emboli includes atrial fibrillation, prosthetic heart valves, other valvular
abnormalities and recent myocardial infarction.

Clinical examination and ECG helps in identifying the source of cardiac
emboli. However, it may be necessary to perform a transthoracic or
transesophageal echocardiogram to confirm the cardiac source or for
detecting an unsuspected source (e.g. endocarditis, atrial myxoma,
intracardiac thrombus or patent foramen ovale). Such findings will help in
providing specific cardiac treatment.
Paramedical personnel and general public are taught how to make the
diagnosis of stroke on a simple history and examination—FAST (Box 15.5).
Complications of acute stroke (Box 15.6).Box 15.5: Diagnosis of stroke on a simple history and examination—FAST.
Face: Sudden weakness of the face
Arm: Sudden weakness of one or both arms
Speech: Difficulty in speaking, slurred speech
Time: Sooner the starting of treatment, better the outcome
Box 15.6: Complications of acute stroke.
Cerebral edema
Cardiac arrhythmias, myocardial infarction, and neurogenic cardiac injury
Chest infection
Seizures
Deep venous thrombosis/ pulmonary embolism
Pressure sores
Urinary infection
GI bleed:  Stress ulcers, drug induced
Constipation
Painful shoulder/contractures
Depression and anxiety
Q. Write a short essay/note on complications of stroke.
Differential Diagnosis of Stroke (Table 15.21)
Treatment of Ischemic Stroke—'Time is brain'
Treatments designed to reverse or lessen the amount of tissue infarction and improve clinical
outcome fall into six categories: (1) IV thrombolysis, (2) endovascular techniques, (3) antithrombotic
treatment, (4) medical support, (5) neuroprotection, and (6) stroke centers and rehabilitation.
Table 15.21: Differential diagnosis of stroke.

Structural stroke mimickers
Tumors: Primary and metastatic cerebral
tumorsDemyelinating disorders: Multiple sclerosis
Subdural hematoma Peripheral nerve lesions (vascular or
compressive) Cerebral abscess
Functional stroke mimickers
Seizure and postictal state Ménière’s disease/other vestibular disorders
Focal seizures Encephalitis
Syncope Wernicke encephalopathy
Hypoglycemia Transient global amnesia
Migrainous aura Metabolic encephalopathy
Conversion disorders and other psychiatric
disorders
1. Intravenous thrombolysis
Intravenous administration for recombinant t-PA within three hours of the onset of symptoms
reduces disability and mortality from ischemic stroke.
Indications and contraindications for r-tPA (Table 15.22)
Administration
–   Administer at the rate of 0.9 mg/kg intravenously (maximum 90 mg) as 10% of total dose
as an intravenous bolus and remainder of dose as a continuous intravenous infusion over 60
minutes.
–   No other antithrombotic treatment for 24 hours.
–   Avoid urethral catheterization for 2 hours.
For decline in neurologic status or uncontrolled blood pressure, stop infusion, give
cryoprecipitate, and reimage brain emergently.
2. Endovascular mechanical thrombectomy:  It an alternative or adjunctive treatment of acute
stroke in patients who are ineligible for, or have contraindications to, thrombolytics or in those
who have failed to have vascular recanalization with IV thrombolytics.
3. Antiplatelet therapy
Platelet inhibition: Aspirin 150 mg PLUS clopidogrel 75 mg daily.
Note:  Glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor inhibitor abciximab causes excess intracranial hemorrhage
and should be avoided in acute stroke.
Randomized studies of unfractionated heparin, low-molecular-weight heparins, or heparinoids
have shown no proven benefits in the reduction of stroke-related mortality, stroke-related
morbidity, early stroke recurrence, or stroke prognosis except in the case of cerebral venous
thrombosis.
4. Anticoagulation for acute ischemic stroke Routine use of anticoagulation for acute ischemic
stroke is not recommended. Only indications for anticoagulants are:Conditions with potential high risk of early cardiogenic re-embolization (e.g. atrial fibrillation)
Symptomatic arteriosclerotic stenosis with crescendo TIAs

Known hypercoagulable states
Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis
5. Medical support
Prevention of the common complications  of bedridden patients:
♦   Infections (pneumonia, urinary and skin): Prophylactic antibiotic.
♦   Deep venous thrombosis (DVT) with pulmonary embolism: Subcutaneous heparin and
pneumatic compression stockings to prevent DVT.
♦   Others: Catheterization, Ryle's tube (RT) feeding, maintenance of hygiene etc.
Maintenance of blood pressure:  Collateral blood flow within the ischemic brain is dependent
on the blood pressure; hence it is to be maintained. Blood pressure should be lowered if there is
malignant hypertension or concomitant myocardial ischemia or if blood pressure is >185/110
mm Hg and thrombolytic therapy is anticipated.
Fever:  It is detrimental and should be treated with antipyretics and surface cooling.
Serum glucose should be monitored and kept at <6.1 mmol/L (110 mg/dL) using an insulin
infusion if necessary.
Decreasing intracranial tension (ICT):  By water restriction and IV mannitol, oral glycerol,
head end elevation.
Hemicraniectomy (craniotomy and temporary removal of part of the skull) markedly reduces
mortality.
Control of intracranial pressure (ICP):  In cerebellar strokes, even small amounts of
cerebellar edema can acutely increase ICP or directly compress the brainstem. Prophylactic
suboccipital decompression of large cerebellar infarcts before brainstem compression is very
useful.
6. Statins: Atorvastatin, rosuvastatin—10–20 mg
7. Neuroprotection:  Drugs that block the excitatory amino acid pathways (nimodipine, magnesium
lubeluzole, basic fibroblast growth factor, and citicoline) protect neurons and glia in animals, but
they have not yet been proven to be beneficial in humans.
8. Rehabilitation:Proper rehabilitation of the stroke patient includes early physical, occupational and speech
therapy. It is directed toward educating the patient and family about the patients' neurologic
deficit, preventing the complications of immobility (e.g. pneumonia, DVT and pulmonary
embolism, pressure sores of the skin, and muscle contractures), and providing encouragement
and instructions in overcoming the deficit.Goal of rehabilitation:  It is to return the patient to home and to maximize recovery. The
use of restrain therapy (immobilizing the unaffected side) has been shown to improve
hemiparesis following stroke, even years following the stroke.
Table 15.22: Indications and contraindications for r-tPA.
Indications for r-tPA
Clinical diagnosis of stroke
Onset of symptom to time of drug
administration less than or equal to 3 hours
(time window: 3–4.5 hours)Age more than or equal to 18 yearsCT scan showing no hemorrhage or infarct
size more than one-third of the MCA territory
Consent by patient or surrogate

Contraindications for r-tPA
Sustained BP > 185/110 mm of Hg despite
treatment
Platelets < 100,000/µL
Hematocrit < 25%
Glucose < 50 or > 400 mg%
Use of heparin/warfarin within 48 hours and
prolonged APTT or INR
Prior intracranial hemorrhagePrior stroke or head injury within 3 months
Major surgery in preceding 14 days
Minor stroke symptoms
GI bleed in preceding 21 days
Recent MI (myocardial infarction within 3
months)
Coma or stupor
Pregnancy
Age > 80 years
Secondary Prevention of Stroke and TIA
ABCD2 score can help in identifying the stroke risk. A score of <4 is
associated with a minimal risk whereas >6 is high-risk for a stroke (Table
15.23).
Treatment of Atherosclerosis
Risk factors:  Treatment of hypertension, diabetes, dyslipidemia and cessation of smoking.
Patients with higher risk scores need to be on anticoagulation while those with lower scores
antiplatelet agents would suffice.
Atorvastatin:  In the dose of 80 mg/day useful both in secondary and primary prevention even
with normal lipid levels.
Antiplatelet agents:  Aspirin, clopidogrel or dipyridamole are used.
Anticoagulation therapy for embolic stroke: Anticoagulation (INR range, 2–3) in patients with
chronic nonvalvular (nonrheumatic) atrial fibrillation prevents cerebral embolism and is safe.
Warfarin, apixaban, dabigatran, rivaroxaban, edoxaban are equally effective.
Calculation of ChADS2 score:  One point for age > 75 years, one point for hypertension, one
point for congestive heart failure, one point for diabetes, and two points for stroke or TIA; sum of
points is the total CHADS2 score.
Treatment of Carotid Atherosclerosis
High-grade stenosis of carotid artery:  Patient with recent symptom- atic (within 2 weeks of
symptoms) hemisphere ischemia, high grade, stenosis (>70%) in the appropriate internal carotid
artery, and an in- stitutional perioperative morbidity and mortality rate of 6% generally should
undergo carotid endarterectomy.Low-grade stenosis of carotid artery: For asymptomatic stenosis and symptomatic low-grade
stenosis (50–70%), medical therapy for reduction of atherosclerosis risk factors, including
cholesterol-lowering agents and antiplatelet medications, is generally recommended.Endovascular therapy:  Balloon angioplasty coupled with stenting to open stenotic carotid
arteries and maintain their patency.
Treatment of Intracranial Atherosclerosis
Symptomatic lesions with intracranial angioplasty and stenting.
Dural sinus thrombosis: By short-term anticoagulants, regardless of the presence of intracranial
hemorrhage, for venous infarction following sinus thrombosis.

Table 15.23: Features and ABCD2 score useful in assessing the stroke
risk.
Clinical feature Score
A: Age > 60 years 1
B: BP systolic > 140 mm Hg or
diastolic BP > 90 mm Hg1
C: Clinical symptoms
Unilateral weakness
Speech disturbance without
weakness2
1
D: Duration of symptoms
> 60 minutes
10–59 minutes2
1
D: Diabetes (oral medications or
insulin)1
ABCD2 total scoreSum each category
Young Stroke (Table 15.24)
Q. Write a short essay/note on etiology of stroke in a young.
The term ‘young stroke’ is used to denote stroke in individuals less than 45
years of age.
Table 15.24: Causes for young stroke.
Cardiac
–   Congenital heart disease, patent foramen
ovale
–   Atrial myxoma
–   Atrial fibrillation and other arrhythmia
–   Cardiomyopathy, myocarditis, myocardial
infarction
–   Cardiac surgery, cardiac catheterization
–   Endocarditis, rheumatic heart diseaseVascular
–   Noninflammatory
♦   Arterial dissection
♦   Secondary to connective tissue disease
(Ehlers-Danlos, Marfan)
♦   Moyamoya disease
♦   Hypertension
♦   Radiation vasculopathy

–   Prosthetic valve
Hematologic
–   Sickle cell disease, iron deficiency
anemias, polycythemia vera
Hypercoagulable states
–   Inherited prothrombotic states, protein C
and S deficiency, antithrombin III
deficiency, factor V Leiden gene mutation,
prothrombin gene mutation
–   Antiphospholipid syndrome
–   Hyperhomocysteinemia
–   Myeloproliferative disorders (e.g.
leukemia, lymphoma)
–   Pregnancy exposure to hormonal
treatments such as anabolic steroids and
erythropoietin, nephrotic syndrome♦   Vasculitis and postinfectious
vasculopathy
♦   Migraine
♦   Cerebral autosomal dominant
arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts
and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL)
Fibromuscular dysplasia, Susac's
syndrome, Sneddon's syndrome,
Fabry's disease
–   Inflammatory
♦   Takayasu arteritis
♦   Giant cell arteritis
♦   Kawasaki disease
♦   Polyarteritis nodosa
♦   Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
♦   Bacterial meningitis
Intracranial Hemorrhage (ICH)Q. Describe the risk factors, etiopathogenesis, clinical features,
investigations, diagnosis and management of cerebral/intracerebral
hemorrhage.
Q. Describe the etiology, clinical features, investigations and
management of hemorrhagic stroke.
This includes: (1) intracerebral (Fig. 15.7) and cerebellar hemorrhage, (2)
subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH), and (3) subdural and extradural
hemorrhage/hematoma.It causes about 10% of acute stroke events. It usually due to rupture of a
blood vessel within the brain parenchyma but may also occur in
association with an SAH if the artery ruptures into the brain substance as
well as into the subarachnoid space.Hypertensive intraparenchymal hemorrhage (hypertensive hemorrhage
or hypertensive intracerebral hemorrhage) usually results from
spontaneous rupture of a small penetrating artery deep in the brain. The
most common sites are the basal ganglia (especially the putamen),
thalamus, cerebellum, and pons. Cortical bleeds are rare.Pontine hemorrhages: 3 Ps namely pinpoint pupil, hyperpyrexia,
paralysis (quadriplegia). There is prominent decerebrate rigidity and

‘pinpoint’ (1 mm) pupils that react to light. There is impairment of reflex
horizontal eye movements evoked by head turning (doll’s head or
oculocephalic maneuver) or by irrigation of the ears with ice water.
Primary versus secondary hemorrhage (Hemorrhage that frequently
occurs also into an area of brain infarction)—may be difficult to
distinguish from primary intracerebral hemorrhage both clinically and
radiologically.
Fig. 15.7: CT showing hemorrhage in internal
Consequences of Hemorrhage
Immediate cessation of function: The sudden entry of blood into the
brain parenchyma causes immediate cessation of function in that area as
neurons are structurally disrupted with splitting of white-matter fiber
tracts.Mass effect: The hemorrhage may expand  over the first minutes or
hours, or it may produce a rim of cerebral edema.  Progression of
neurological deficit occurs due to the mass effect. If large, they can cause
shift of the intracranial contents, producing transtentorial coning and
sometimes rapid death.Resorption of hematoma: If the patient survives, the hematoma is

gradually absorbed, and produces a hemosiderin-lined slit in the brain
parenchyma.
Causes of Intracranial Hemorrhage (Table 15.25)
Table 15.25: Causes of intracranial hemorrhage and its location.
Cause Location Comments
Head trauma Intraparenchymal: Frontal
lobes, anterior temporal
lobes, subarachnoidCoup and countercoup injury during
brain deceleration
Hypertensive hemorrhage Putamen (most common),
globus pallidus, thalamus,
cerebellar hemisphere, ponsChronic hypertension produces
hemorrhage from small (100 μm)
vessels in these regions
Metastatic brain tumor Lobar Primary tumors in lung,
choriocarcinoma, melanoma
Coagulopathy Any Uncommon cause: Often associated
with prior stroke or underlying
vascular anomaly
Drug Lobar, subarachnoid Cocaine, amphetamine,
phenylpropanolamine
Arteriovenous malformation Lobar, intraventricular,
subarachnoidRisk is 2–4% per year for bleeding
Aneurysm Subarachnoid,
intraparenchymal, rarely
subduralMycotic and nonmycotic forms of
aneurysms
Cerebral amyloid angiopathy Lobar Most common cause for recurrent
lobar hemorrhage in elderly
Clinical FeaturesClinical presentation depends upon  which arterial territory is involved
and the size of the lesion.
Rapid-onset: Occurs over minutes.
Most common presentation: Weakness of the face or arm, or disturbance
of speech.
Focal deficit of brain function: Affects an identifiable area of the brain
and is ‘negative’ in character (i.e. abrupt loss of function without positive
features such as abnormal movement). Features which suggest the location
of lesion are:
–   Lesion in the cerebral hemisphere: Usually characterized by

unilateral motor deficit, a higher cerebral function deficit such as
aphasia or neglect, or a visual field defects.
–   Lesion in the brainstem or cerebellum: Ataxia, diplopia, vertigo
and/or bilateral weakness.
–   Intracerebral hemorrhage: Combination of severe headache and
vomiting at the onset of the focal deficit.
Management/Treatment
Any identified coagulopathy should be reversed as soon as possible.
For patients taking VKAs (vitamin K antagonists), rapid reversal of coagulopathy can be achieved
by infusing prothrombin complex concentrates which can be administered quickly, followed by
fresh-frozen plasma and vitamin K.
When ICH is associated with thrombocytopenia (platelet count <50,000/µL), transfusion of fresh
platelets is indicated.
Control of BP
BP >185/110 increases the size of hematoma by more bleeding. Hence, maintain a mean arterial
pressure (MAP) <130 mm Hg, unless an increase in ICP (intracranial pressure) is suspected.
In patients who have ICP monitors in place, keep the cerebral perfusion pressure (MAP-ICP)
above 60 mm Hg (i.e. one should lower MAP to this target if blood pressure is elevated).
Blood pressure should be lowered with nonvasodilating IV drugs such as nicardipine, labetalol, or
esmolol.
Hyperosmolar therapy
Mannitol: Bolus of 0.25 g/kg to 1 g/kg body weight.
Hypertonic saline, concentrations ranging from 3% to 23.4%.
Hyperventilation decreases PaCO 2, which can induce constriction of cerebral arteries by
alkalinizing the CSF.
Barbiturate coma
Pentobarbital is given in a loading dose of 10 mg/kg body weight followed by 5 mg/kg body
weight each hour for 3 doses.
Hypothermia
Steroids are used for primary and metastatic brain tumors, to decrease vasogenic cerebral edema.
Treatment of raised intracranial tension
If the hematoma causes marked midline shift of structures with consequent obtundation, coma or
hydrocephalus, osmotic agents coupled with induced hyperventilation can be instituted to lower
ICP.
Once ICP is recorded, further hyperventilation and osmotic therapy can be tailored to the
individual patient to keep cerebral perfusion pressure (MAP-ICP) above 60 mm Hg.
If ICP is still found to be high, CSF can be drained from the ventricular space and osmotic therapy
continued.
Persistent or progressive elevation in ICP may prompt surgical evacuation of the clot.
Glucocorticoids are not helpful for the edema from intracerebral hematoma.
Most cerebellar hematomas > 3 cm in diameter will require surgical evacuation.

Transient Ischemic Attacks
Q. Write a short essay/note on transient ischemic attack (TIA) including
its definition.
Transient ischemic attack (TIA) is characterized by a brief episode of
neurological dysfunction (sudden loss of function) in which symptoms and
signs resolve completely after a brief period within 24 hours (usually within
30 minutes).Transient ischemic attack is defined as a transient episode of neurologic
dysfunction caused by focal brain, spinal cord, or retinal ischemia,
without acute infarction. However, TIAs may herald a stroke.Newly proposed definition classifies those with new brain infarction as
ischemic strokes regardless of whether symptoms persist.
Clinical features: Hemiparesis and aphasia are most common. Other features
include amaurosis fugax (sudden transient loss of vision in one eye),
hemisensory loss, hemianopic visual loss, diplopia, vertigo, vomiting,
choking and dysarthria, ataxia, etc.
Types of TIA (transient ischemic attack) (Box 15.7).
Diagnosis of TIA often depends on its description. There may be clinical
evidence of a source of embolus (e.g. carotid arterial bruit/stenosis, atrial
fibrillation or other dysrhythmia, valvular heart disease/endocarditis, recent
myocardial infarction.An underlying risk factor/condition may be present. These include
atheroma, hypertension, postural hypotension, bradycardia or low cardiac
output, diabetes mellitus, etc.
Box 15.7: Types of TIA (transient ischemic attack).
Large artery low-flow TIA—recurrent, short lasting episodes of stereotyped symptoms (shotgun
TIA/ thrombotic TIA)
Embolic TIA—longer lasting less frequent episodes with varied symptoms, changing territories
Lacunar TIA
Treatment
Medical therapy and surgical treatment if appropriate. If patients have ABCD2 (refer Table 15.23)
score >4, or have had two recent TIAs (especially within the same vascular territory), they should be
investigated and advised for secondary prevention of stroke.

Subarachnoid Hemorrhage
Q. Discuss the clinical manifestations and treatment of primary
subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH).
Q. Write a short essay/note on subarachnoid hemorrhage.
Subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) is a pathologic condition in which the
blood enters the subarachnoid space.
SAH is less common than ischemic stroke or intracerebral hemorrhage. It
accounts for about 5% of strokes.
Etiology (Table 15.26)
Most common cause of SAH is trauma.
Most common cause of spontaneous SAH  is an aneurysmal (saccular or
‘berry’ aneurysms) bleed (65–80%).
SAH causes intense reductions in CBF (cerebral blood flow), reduced
cerebral autoregulation and acute cerebral ischemia.
The overall case fatality varied from 32–67%.
Risk factors for subarachnoid hemorrhage (Table 15.27).
Table 15.26: Causes of subarachnoid hemorrhage.
Category Causes
Trauma Closed, penetrating, electric, etc.
Vascular Aneurysms (berry aneurysm), atherosclerosis,
arteriovenous malformations (AVM),
vasculitides
Idiopathic Benign perimesencephalic subarachnoid
hemorrhage
Blood dyscrasias Leukemia, hemophilia, thrombocytopenia
Infections Dengue, leptospirosis, bacterial meningitis
Toxins Amphetamines, cocaine, nicotine, anticoagulants
Neoplasms Gliomas, meningiomas, hemangioblastoma, etc.
Table 15.27: Risk factors for subarachnoid hemorrhage.
Hypertension
Cigarette smokingSlight increased risk with advancing age
Alcohol consumption (debatable)

Oral contraceptives
Diurnal variations in blood pressure
Pregnancy and parturition
Slight increased risk during lumbar puncture
and/or cerebral angiography in patient with
cerebral aneurysmFollowing cocaine abuse
Increased incidence of polycystic kidneys,
fibromuscular dysplasia of extracranial
arteries, Ehler-Danlos syndrome, moyamoya,
AV malformations and coarctation of aorta
Circle of Willis
Q. Write a short note on circle of Willis.
Circle of Willis is a circulatory anastomosis that supplies blood to the brain and surrounding
structures. This anastomotic pathway is important for the preservation of brain function when
major blood flow is disrupted in one of the major feeding vessels.Constituents arteries of circle of Willis (Fig. 15.8 and Box 15.8):
The middle cerebral arteries, supplying the brain, do not form the part of the circle of Willis.
Saccular (‘berry’) aneurysm
Saccular aneurysms develop within the circle of Willis and adjacent arteries. Three most common
locations are—(1) the terminal internal carotid artery, (2) middle cerebral artery (MCA)
bifurcation, and (3) top of the basilar artery.It can undergo spontaneous rupture and cause subarachnoid hemorrhage. If the patient survives,
but the aneurysm is not obliterated, the rate of rebleeding is about 20% in the first 2 weeks, 30% in
the first month, and about 3% per year afterwards.The annual risk of rupture for aneurysms <10 mm in size is 0.1%, and for aneurysms >10 mm in
size is 0.5–1%.

Fig. 15.8: Blood supply to the brain and circle of Willis with common sites of saccular (berry)
aneurysms.
Box 15.8: Constituents arteries of circle of Willis.
Two internal carotid arteries (left and right)
Anterior cerebral artery (left and right)
Anterior communicating artery
Posterior cerebral artery (left and right)
Posterior communicating artery (left and right)
Basilar artery formed by joining of two vertebral arteries
Clinical Features of Subarachnoid Hemorrhage (SAH)
Headache: Most common symptom (97%). Usually severe (the worst
headache of my life) and sudden (thunderclap) in onset. Few patients
may have milder warning headaches (sentinel headaches) in 2–8 weeks
preceding the major hemorrhage. Headache may pulsate towards the
occiput and sometimes may be felt as neck pain. Occipital and posterior
cervical pain may signal a posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) or

anterior inferior cerebellar artery aneurysm. If there is expanding middle
cerebral artery aneurysm, pain may be observed in or behind the eye and
in the low temple. Headache commonly occurs on physical exertion,
straining and sexual excitement.
Vomiting may be present.
Other symptoms: Decreased consciousness and alertness, seizure (10%)
and stiff neck, etc.
Rerupture/rebleed: The rerupture of an untreated aneurysm in the first
month following SAH is ~30%, with the peak in the first 7 days.
Physical examination
Patient is usually distressed and irritable, with photophobia.
Neck stiffness (and a positive Kernig’s sign) due to subarachnoid blood
may be present but this may take few hours to develop. Focal hemisphere
signs, e.g. intracerebral hematoma may cause hemiparesis or aphasia.Rarely, third nerve palsy may be developing due to local pressure from an
aneurysm of the posterior communicating artery.
Fundoscopy: May show subhyaloid hemorrhage (canoe shaped)
produced due to tracking of blood along the subarachnoid space around
the optic nerve.
Investigations
CT scan: It shows blood in the subarachnoid space (if performed in the first
few days), intracerebral hematoma, hydrocephalus, associated brain ischemia
and occasionally aneurysmal location.
Q. Write a short essay/note on CSF findings in subarachnoid
hemorrhage.
Lumbar puncture: It should be performed when clinical suspicion of
SAH is high, CT scan does not reveal subarachnoid blood, and there is no
mass effect. In the initial few hours CSF will be uniformly blood stained.
Xanthochromia appears within 6 hours of SAH and persists for nearly 2
weeks. Naked inspection of supernatant CSF is usually sufficiently
reliable for diagnosis of SAH. Spectrophotometry to estimate bilirubin in
the CSF released from lysed cells confirm the diagnosis.Angiography: It is required to locate the site of bled aneurysm and details

that are needed to ligate the aneurysm by the neurosurgeon. It should be
done in all patients fit for surgery (i.e. age <65 years and who are not in
coma).
MR angiography (MRA): It will accurately identify aneurysms >5 mm in
size.
CT angiography: It is a rapid readily available, less invasive alternative
to catheter angiography. It is equivalent to conventional angiography for
detecting large aneurysms.ECG changes: Prolonged QRS complex, increased QT interval, and
prominent ‘peaked’ or deeply inverted symmetric T waves are usually
secondary to the intracranial hemorrhage (cerebral T waves) .
Differential Diagnosis of Subarachnoid Hemorrhage (Box 15.9)
Complications
Obstructive hydrocephalus: Due to blood in the subarachnoid space. It
may be asymptomatic but may cause deteriorating consciousness
following SAH. Shunting may be required.Arterial spasm (cause of coma or hemiparesis): It is a serious complication
and is a poor prognostic feature.
Hyponatremia.
Box 15.9: Differential diagnosis of subarachnoid hemorrhage.
Migraine
Acute bacterial meningitis
Cervical arterial dissection
Q. Write a short essay/note on treatment of subarachnoid hemorrhage.
Management
Immediate treatment is absolute bed rest  (for 4 weeks) and supportive measures.  These include
protecting the airway, managing blood pressure and raised ICP, pain management, and sedation. It
should be discussed urgently with a neurosurgical team. Patient is advised to gradually resumption
of physical activities after recovery.
Control of hypertension:  In conscious patients without raised ICP, active treatment of
hypertension is necessary. A target mean arterial pressure of 130 mm Hg is recommended. Drugs
include labetalol, esmolol or nicardipine. Sodium nitroprusside should be avoided because may
cause increase of ICP.Avoid strictly:  Hypovolemia, hypotension, hyperthermia, hyperglycemia and hyponatremia  are
important to prevent delayed cerebral ischemia.

Calcium channel blocker: Nimodipine (30–60 mg IV for 5–14 days, followed by 360 mg orally
for a further 7 days) provides a modest but significant improvement in outcome by reducing
cerebral arterial vasospasm. It is given for 3 weeks to prevent delayed ischemia in the acute phase
and decreases mortality.Prophylactic anticonvulsants
Interventional management:  Early aneurysm repair prevents rerupture/rebleeding and improve
blood flow. An aneurysm can be 'clipped' by a neurosurgeon or 'coiled' by an endovascular
surgeon.
– Insertion of platinum coils into an aneurysm:  If angiography shows an aneurysm (most
common cause of SAH), endovascular treatment by inserting a platinum coils via a catheter in
the aneurysm sac to promote thrombosis and ablation of the aneurysm, is the first line
treatment. Surgical clipping of the aneurysm neck also helps in reducing the risk of recurrence
(both early and late). Endovascular coiling has fewer perioperative complications and better
outcomes than surgery. For unruptured aneurysms larger than 8 mm in diameter the risk of
treatment is less than the risk of hemorrhage if not treated.Treatment of complications:  Managing delayed cerebral ischemia due to vasospasm (may be
treated with vasodilators), treating obstructive hydrocephalus (may require drainage via a shunt),
treating hyponatremia (managed by fluid restriction) and systemic complications associated with
immobility, such as chest infection venous thrombosis and preventing pulmonary embolus.
Differences between hemorrhagic, thrombotic and embolic strokes
(Table 15.28).
Q. Mention the differences between hemorrhagic, thrombotic and
embolic strokes.
Table 15.28: Differences between hemorrhagic, thrombotic and embolic
strokes.
Feature Hemorrhagic stroke
(Intracerebral or
subarachnoid
hemorrhage)Ischemic stroke
Thrombotic Embolic
Time of onset of stroke During activity Suddenly and often
during sleep or in the
early morning (4 AM)Any time
Rapidity of onset and
progressionOver minutes and
hoursOn waking up or over
hoursRapid within seconds
deficit maximum at
onset
Transient ischemic
attacks (TIAs)Absent Precedes stroke Precedes stroke
Vomiting Recurrent Absent or occasional Absent or occasional
Headache Severe and prominent Mild or absent Mild or absent
Early resolution (within Unusual Variable Possible

minutes or days)
Meningeal irritation May be present Absent Absent
Carotid bruit and
absence of pulseNot observed Highly supports the
diagnosisPossible
Valvular heart disease
and atrial fibrillationNot found Unusual Highly supports the
diagnosis
CT scan findings Hemorrhage Early stage: Normal
Later: Pale infarctEarly stage: Normal
Later: Pale infarctNote: It may not be possible always to differentiate stroke of different type
with absolute certainly.
Cerebral Venous Thrombosis
Q. Write a short note of cerebral venous thrombosis (CVT).
It is the thrombosis of the draining venous sinuses of the cerebral cortex and
the least common of all other types of cerebrovascular accidents (1–2% of
strokes in young adults).
Thrombosis most commonly involves superior sagittal sinus and it may
extend into transverse and sigmoid sinuses.
Thrombosis of deep venous system (e.g. internal cerebral veins, vein of
Galen or straight sinus) is less common.
Age and gender: It frequently affects young adults and children. More
common in women than men with an F: M ratio of 3:1. It may be due to the
presence of gender specific risk factors such as pregnancy, puerperium and
oral contraceptive pills and hormone replacement therapy (HRT). One of the
leading causes of maternal mortality and morbidity with cases of puerperal
CVT occurring 10–12 times more frequently in India than the west.
Causes of Cerebral Venous Thrombosis (Table 15.29)
Table 15.29: Causes of cerebral venous thrombosis.
Local causes Systemic causes Trauma to the dural sinuses
Infection of structures adjacent to the dural
sinuses: Otitis media, mastoiditis, sinusitis,
tonsillitis
Invasion or compression of venous sinuses byHypercoagulable states, e.g. inherited
prothrombotic states, protein C /S deficiency,
antithrombin III deficiency, factor V Leiden
gene mutation, prothrombin gene mutation,
presence of lupus anticoagulant, oral

neoplasms contraceptive use, pregnancy, malignancy
Dehydration
Pathophysiology
Two basic mechanisms are responsible for the development of the clinical
features in CVT.
1. Thrombosis of cerebral veins or sinuses leading to cerebral parenchymal
lesions or dysfunctions.
2. Occlusion of dural venous sinus causes reduced absorption of CSF and
raised intracranial pressure.
Obstruction of venous structures → increased venous pressure → decreased
capillary perfusion → increased cerebral blood volume → disruption of
blood brain barrier → plasma leakage into interstitial space → cerebral
edema, parenchymal changes and venous hemorrhage.
Clinical Features
The clinical presentation of CVT is highly variable and it may present as
acute/subacute/chronic.
Symptoms and signs: Depends on the sinuses involved, the place of
occlusion, and involvement of cortical veins and presence of collaterals,
parenchymal changes and the patient’s age. Symptoms are grouped under
three major clinical syndromes:1. Isolated intracranial hypertension syndrome  (headache with or without
vomiting, papilledema, and visual problems)
2. Focal syndrome (focal deficits or seizures or both)
3. Encephalopathy (multifocal signs, mental status changes, stupor or
coma)
Diagnosis
CT or MR venography: Direct signs of CVT in CT include:
–   Dense triangle sign  seen as hyperdensity with triangular shape at the
posterior end of superior sagittal sinus caused by venous thrombus.
–   Empty delta sign seen in head CT with contrast as a triangular pattern
of contrast enhancement surrounding a central region lacking contrast
enhancement.
–   Cord sign  as linear or curvilinear hyperdensity over the cerebral cortex

caused by thrombosed cerebral veins.
CT or MRI to detect secondary parenchymal lesions.
CSF examination: To rule out meningitis or SAH.
Workup for prothrombotic state.
Treatment
Treatment should be started as soon as the diagnosis is confirmed and consists of:
Treatment of the underlying cause when known.
Control of seizures and intracranial hypertension.
Antithrombotic therapy
The main treatment option to achieve these goals is anticoagulation using heparin or LMWH
(IV/SC). It is recommended that anticoagulant therapy with warfarin should be given for a
minimum of 3 months after acute CVT aiming at an INR target of 2.5(2–3).
DEMYELINATING DISEASES
DEMYELINATING DISEASES
Q. What are the common demyelinating diseases? (refer Table 15.30)
Table 15.30: Example of demyelinating diseases.
Central nervous system Peripheral nervous system
Autoimmune, e.g. multiple sclerosis (MS),
neuromyelitis optica
Nutritional, e.g. Wernicke encephalopathy,
subacute combined degeneration
Infectious, e.g. acute disseminated
encephalomyelitis (ADEM), HIV encephalitis,
Creutzfeldt-Jakob encephalitisToxic, e.g. radiation, chemotherapeutic agents,
methanol
Hypoxic/ischemic, e.g. vasculitisDeficiencies of vitamin B1: Dry beriberi
Guillain-Barré syndrome
Vitamin B 12 deficiency
Organophosphate poisoning
Chronic inflammatory demyelinating
polyneuropathy
Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease
Copper deficiency
Multiple Sclerosis (MS)
Q. Write short essay on multiple sclerosis and its clinical features.
Chronic autoimmune T-cell mediated inflammatory disorder with
selective destruction of myelin of the central nervous system (CNS). It has

a relapsing-remitting or progressive course. The neurological deficits are
disseminated in time and space.
It is termed multiple sclerosis because of the multiple scarred areas (well
demarcated gray areas termed plaques) of demyelination throughout the
brain and spinal cord observed on macroscopic examination. The plaques
are crucial for diagnosis. The peripheral nervous system (PNS) is
generally spared.
Epidemiology
Gender: Female preponderance and female to male ratio is 2:1.
Age: Usually present between 20 and 40 years of age and is rare after 60
years of age.
Pathophysiology
Both genetic and environmental factors play a causative role.
Genetic factors:  Risk of familial recurrence in MS is 15%, with highest
risk in first-degree relatives. Multiple genes interact and it has a complex
polygenic inheritance pattern. HLA DR2 association. Other autoimmune
disorders occur in patients with MS and their relatives, indicating a genetic
predisposition to autoimmunity.Environmental factors: Epidemiologic evidence supports the role of an
environment exposure in MS but these factors are still largely unknown.
For example, sunlight exposure, vitamin D and exposure to Epstein–Barr
virus (EBV). Viral infections can precipitate MS relapses in genetically
susceptible individuals.Etiology and Pathogenesis
Etiology is not known.
It is probably a T-cell mediated autoimmune disease causing an
inflammatory process within the white matter of the brain and spinal cord.
MS risk correlates with high socioeconomic status, which may reflect
improved sanitation and delayed initial exposures to infectious agents.
Clinical ManifestationsNo single group of signs or symptoms is diagnostic of MS (Table 15.31).
Onset: May be abrupt/insidious, vary from trivial to severe form.

Presentation varies and depends on the anatomical site of lesions and
severity. It has been called as the modern ‘great imitator’. MS commonly
involve pyramidal tract, optic nerve, posterior cord, cerebellum and
MLF (medial longitudinal fascicle ).
Common symptoms in MS (Box 15.10): Disability and neurological
impairments gradually accumulate over the years.
Box 15.10:  Common presentations of multiple sclerosis.
Optic neuropathy (neuritis)
Relapsing/remitting sensory symptoms, e. g. Lhermitte sign  (barber chair phenomenon, is an
electrical sensation that runs down the back and into the limb on neck flexion)
Subacute painless spinal cord lesion
Acute brainstem syndrome: Sudden diplopia, and vertigo with nystagmus
Subacute loss of function of upper limb (dorsal column deficit): Clumsy/useless hand or limb
Fatigue, cognitive impairment
Sixth cranial nerve palsy, wall-eyed bilateral internuclear ophthalmoplegia (WEBINO)
Unsteadiness or ataxia. Charcot triad of dysarthria, ataxia, and tremor
Urinary symptoms—bladder hyperreflexia
Neuropathic pain, fatigue, spasticity, depression, sexual dysfunction
Uhthoff’s phenomenon:  Worsening of neurologic symptoms (especially vision) when the body
gets overheated
Clinical course: Main clinical patterns are:
Relapsing remitting MS  (RRMS) (85–90%): Discrete attack and
complete recovery.
Secondary progressive MS (SPMS): Begin as RRMS, clinical steady
deterioration at some stage.
Primary progressive MS  (PPMS) (10–15%): Steady function decline
from onset.
Progressive relapsing MS  (PRMS)
Malignant MS/Aggressive MS  refers to disease with a rapid progressive
course, leading to significant disability in multiple neurologic systems in a
relatively short time after disease onset.
Tumefactive MS  is an acute tumor-like MS variant in which some
patients with demyelinating disease present with large (>2 cm) acute
lesions, often associated with edema or ring enhancement.
Diagnosis

The diagnosis of MS is usually easily made in a young adult with relapsing
and remitting symptoms referable to different areas of CNS white matter. No
single diagnostic test for definitive diagnosis of MS.
MRI (Fig. 15.9)
Characteristic abnormalities are found in >95% of patients.
Lesion appears as focal area of hyperintensity on T2-weighted.
Typical lesions are oval up to 2 cm in diameter, and frequently orientated
perpendicular to the lateral ventricular surface, corresponding to the
pathologic pattern of perivenous demyelination (Dawson’s fingers).
Lesions are multifocal (periventricular, juxtacortical, infratentorial, or
spinal cord).
Evoked potential (EP) or evoked responses: Assesses function in afferent
(visual, auditory and somatosensory) or efferent (motor) CNS pathways,
Abnormalities on one or more EP modalities occur in 80–90% of MS
patients. However, they are less important than MRI.
CSF examinationCSF cell count may be raised (5–60 mononuclear cells/mm)—
mononuclear cell pleocytosis.
Increased IgG, total CSF protein, CSF IgG index.
Protein electrophoresis: Oligoclonal IgG bands detected by agarose gel,
but these are not specific.
Mc Donald criteria for multiple sclerosis is presented in Table 15.31.

Fig. 15.9: MRI of multiple sclerosis.
Table 15.31: Mc Donald criteria for MS.
Attack Lesions Additional criteria for diagnosis MS
2 or more 2 or more Non-clinical evidence alone will
suffice
2 or more 1 lesion Dissemination in space of MR (or
await further clinical attack
implicating a different CNS site)
1 attack 2 lesion Dissemination in time on MR (or
await further clinical attack
implicating a different CNS site)
1 attack 1 lesion Dissemination in space and time  (or
await further clinical attack
implicating a different CNS site)
0 attack
progression from onsetOne year of disease progression
(Retrospective or prospective) and at
least 2 out of 3 criteriaDissemination in space in the brain
Dissemination in space in the spinal
cord based on 2 or more T2 lesions
Positive CSF

Treatment multiple sclerosis
Treatment of acute attack
–   Intravenous methyl prednisolone 500–1,000 mg/day for 3–5 days, followed by a course of
oral prednisone beginning at a dose 60–80 mg/day and gradually tapered over 2 weeks. High-
dose cyclophosphamide has been used for induction therapy to stabilize aggressive MS.
–   Plasma exchange:  5–7 changes are done with 40–60 mL/kg per exchange alternate days for 14
days for cases that are unresponsive to glucocorticoids.
Disease modifying drugs: For prophylaxis of RRMS and SPMS after acute stage has passed. No
effective treatment for PPMS. These include IFN ß (1a-1b), glatiramer acetate, natalizumab,
mitoxantrone hydrochloride, rituximab, siponimod, fingolimod, and cladribine.Ocrelizumab, a recombinant human anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody designed to optimize B cell
depletion, is the first drug to significantly reduce the risk of disability progression among patients
with primary progressive MS (PPMS).Symptomatic therapy
–   Weakness (heat induced) : K+ channel blockers-4 aminopyridine, 3-4 diaminopyridine
–   Spasticity/spasm: Physiotherapy, avoid trigger factors. Drugs like baclofen, diazepam,
tizanidine, dantrolene can be used
–   Pain :
♦   Anticonvulsant: Carbamazepine, phenytoin, gabapentin, pregabalin
♦   Antidepressant: Amitriptyline/nortriptyline, desipramine, venlafaxine
♦   Antiarrhythmic: Mexiletine
–   Bladder care
Differences between multiple sclerosis (MS) and neuromyelitis optica
(NMO) are listed in Table 15.32. It is important to differentiate as IFN is
contraindicated in NMO.
Table 15.32: Differences between multiple sclerosis (MS) and neuromyelitis
optica (NMO).
Features Devic's disease (NMO) Multiple sclerosis
Age Adults Young adults
F:M >3:1 <3:1
Distribution of signs and
symptomsRestricted to optic nerves
and spinal cordAny white matter
Attack severity Usually severe Usually mild
Brain MRI Usually normal (rarely
lesion around area postrema
+)Multiple periventricular white matter
lesions
Cord MRI Longitudinally extensive
transverse myelitis (LETM)
central necrotic lesions, 3 or
more spinal cord segmentsMultiple small peripheral lesions

involved
CSF cells Pleocytosis during attack Rarely >25 cells
Oligoclonal bands Usually absent Usually present
Antibodies Anti NMO antibody (46%),
antiQP4 (aquaporin) (85%)
presentNo antibodies
Coexisting autoimmunity Frequent (30–40%)
(Sjogren's syndrome)Less common
Recurrence rate Higher (90%) Lower
Recurrence interval Shorter Longer

SEIZURES AND EPILEPSY
Q. Classify seizure/epilepsy. Discuss the evaluation of adult seizures and
management of seizures.
Q. Describe the types, etiology, clinical features, investigations
(evaluation) and management of epilepsy. Enumerate antiepileptic
agents.
Q. Classify epilepsy. Describe the clinical features and treatment of
grand mal (generalized tonic clonic) epilepsy.
Q. Write a short essay/note on:
Enumerate the causes and investigation of a seizure. Mention
drugs used to treat grand mal epilepsy.
Temporal lobe epilepsy.
Management of complex partial seizures.
Complications of status epilepticus.
Causes of convulsion.
Primary epileptic disorders.
Complications of seizures.
Define complex partial seizure.
Seizure: It is a paroxysmal event due to abnormal, excessive,
hypersynchronous discharges from an aggregate of central nervous
system (CNS) neurons.
Epilepsy: It is a condition in which an individual has recurrent seizures
due to a chronic, underlying process.
An individual with a single seizure or recurrent seizures due to correctable
or avoidable circumstances does not necessarily have epilepsy.
Classification of Seizures (Tables 15.33 and 15.34)
Q. Classify seizure/epilepsy.
Seizures are classified as ‘simple’ if there is no impairment of
consciousness or as ‘complex’ if an alteration in consciousness occurs.

Seizures may be either focal or generalized.
–   Focal seizures: They originate within networks limited to one cerebral
hemisphere across both cerebral hemispheres. They are usually
associated with structural abnormalities of the brain.
–   Generalized seizures: In contrast to focal, they may result from
cellular, biochemical, or structural abnormalities that have a more
widespread distribution. However, there are clear exceptions in both
cases.Most seizures last seconds to minutes.
Status epilepticus (refer pages 972-5).
Table 15.33: New classification of seizures.
Focal seizures: It can be further described as having motor, sensory, autonomic, cognitive, or other
features
Generalized seizures
Absence (typical/atypical)
Tonic clonic (in any combination)
Clonic
TonicAtonic
Myoclonic
May be focal, generalized, or unclear
Unknown:  Epileptic spasms
Focal Seizures
Focal Seizures without Dyscognitive Features
In this type, consciousness is fully preserved during the seizure and the
clinical manifestation is relatively simple.
Focal seizures can cause motor, sensory, autonomic, or psychic symptoms
without an obvious alteration in consciousness.
A focal motor seizure arising from the right primary motor cortex near the
area controlling hand movement will note the onset of involuntary
movements of the contralateral, left hand.Three additional features of this seizures are:
Table 15.34: International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) classification of
seizure types 2017.
Generalized onset seizures

Tonic-clonic
Clonic
Tonic
Myoclonic
Myoclonic-tonic-clonic
Myoclonic-atonic
Atonic
Epileptic spasmsTypical
Atypical
Myoclonic
Eyelid myoclonia
Focal onset seizures
Motor onset Nonmotor onset
Aware
Impaired awareness
Unknown awarenessAware
Impaired awareness
Unknown awareness
Automatisms
Atonic
Clonic
Epileptic spasms
Hyperkinetic
Myoclonic
TonicAutonomic
Behavior arrest
Cognitive
Emotional
Sensory
Focal to bilateral tonic-clonic Focal to bilateral tonic-clonic
Unknown onset seizures
Motor Nonmotor
Tonic-clonic
Epileptic spasmsBehavior arrest
Unclassified seizures
Q. Write a short note on Jacksonian epilepsy.
1.  Jacksonian march : Representing the spread of seizure activity over
a progressively larger region of motor cortex . In Jacksonian
seizures, march of symptoms occur where if it is motor, clonic jerking
starts at a point. For example it may start at face, and spreads to upper
limb, then to lower limb and then on to opposite side to become a
generalized fit. This denotes the path of spread of the epileptic activity
and is called Jacksonian spread/march.Q. Write a short note on Todd’s paralysis.
2.   Todd’s paralysis or the localized paresis: It is a condition
characterized by brief, temporary paralysis that follows a seizure. It
may occur for minutes to hours in the involved region following the

seizure.
3.   Epilepsia partialis continua: Analogous to partial status epilepticus.
It is often quite refractory to medical therapy.
Other manifestations
Changes in somatic sensation (e.g. paresthesia), vision (flashing lights or
formed hallucinations), equilibrium (sensation of ailing or vertigo), and
autonomic function (flushing, sweating, piloerection).
Focal Seizures with Dyscognitive Features
Focal seizure activity may be accompanied by a transient impairment of
the patient’s ability to maintain normal contact with the environment.
Patient is unable to respond to visual or verbal commands during the
seizure and has impaired recollection or awareness of the ictal phase.
The seizures frequently begin with an aura (i.e. focal seizures without
dyscognitive features) that is stereotypic for the patient.
The start of the ictal phase is often a sudden behavioral arrest or
motionless stare, and this marks the onset of the event for which the
patient will be amnesic.
The behavioral arrest is usually accompanied by oromandibular or hand
automatisms, which are involuntary, automatic behaviors that have a wide
range of manifestations.Automatisms may consists of very basic behaviors such as chewing, lip
smacking, swallowing or picking movements of the hands or more
claborate behaviors such as a display of emotion or running.
Complex partial seizures (temporal lobe seizures)
Focal seizures arising from the temporal or frontal cortex may also cause alterations in hearing,
olfaction or higher cortical function (psychic symptoms-like to sensation of unusual intense odors
(e.g. burning rubber or kerosene) or sounds (crude or highly complex sounds) or illusions that objects
are growing (metamorphopsia) smaller (micropsia) or larger (macropsia). When such symptoms
precede focal seizures with dyscognitive features or secondarily generalized seizure, these seizures
serve as a warning, or aura.
Generalized SeizuresGeneralized seizures arise from both cerebral hemispheres
simultaneously.
It may be practically defined as bilateral clinical and electrographic

events without any detectable focal onset.
Though they arise at some point of the brain they rapidly engage neuronal
networks in both cerebral hemispheres.
Absence Seizures (Petit Mal)
Sudden, brief lapses of consciousness without loss of postural control.
It lasts for only a few seconds and consciousness returns rapidly and
there is no postictal confusion.
Usually accompanied by subtle, bilateral motor signs such as rapid
blinking of the eyelids, chewing movements, or small-amplitude, clonic
movements of the hands. Absence seizures can be typical or atypical.Onset usually in childhood (ages 4–8 years) or early adolescence and are
the main seizure type in 15–20% of children with epilepsy.
May occur hundreds of times in a day without the knowledge of parents or
the child.
First clue may be often unexplained ‘daydreaming’ and a decline in school
performance recognized by a teacher.
EEG: Generalized, symmetric, 3-Hz spike-and-wave discharge that
begins and ends suddenly, superimposed on a normal EEG background
which can be provoked by hyperventilation.
Generalized, Tonic-Clonic Seizures (GTCS) (Grand Mal)
Q. Write short essay/note on clinical features and treatment  of grand
mal (generalized tonic clonic) epilepsy.
Main type of seizure in 10% of all individuals with epilepsy.
Usually begins abruptly without warning. Some may develop vague
premonitory symptoms which are distinct from the stereotypic auras
associated with focal seizures that generalize.
Initially, there is tonic contraction of muscles throughout the body
leading to loud moan or ictal cry, cyanosis, biting of the tongue, etc.
Marked enhancement of sympathetic tone leads to increases in heart rate,
blood pressure, and pupillary size.
After 10–20 seconds, clonic phase starts with superimposed relaxation
which progressively increases until the end of ictal period.
Postictal phase is characterized by unresponsiveness, muscular

flaccidity, and excessive salivation, bladder or bowel incontinence.
Patients gradually regain consciousness over minutes to hours with
accompanying postictal confusion, headache and muscle ache.
EEG: Generalized high-amplitude, polyspike discharges in tonic phases
which in the clonic phase typically interrupted by slow waves to create a
spike-and-wave pattern.
Other variants include pure tonic and pure clonic type.
Atonic Seizures
Characterized by sudden loss of postural muscle tone lasting 1–2
seconds.
Consciousness is briefly impaired, but there is usually no postictal
confusion.
May cause only a quick head drop or nodding movement, while a longer
seizure will cause the patient to collapse.
They are rarely seen in isolation  and are usually seen in association with
known epileptic syndromes.
EEG: Brief, generalized spike-and-wave discharges followed immediately
by diffuse slow waves that correlate with the loss of muscle tone.
Myoclonic Seizures
Sudden, brief jerky muscle contraction  that may involve one part of
the body or the entire body.
Normal, common physiologic forms of myoclonus are the sudden jerking
movement observed while falling asleep and hiccups.
Most pathologic myoclonus commonly seen in association with metabolic
disorders, degenerative CNS diseases, or anoxic brain injury.
Myoclonic seizures are the predominant feature of juvenile myoclonic
epilepsy.
EEG: May show bilaterally synchronous spike-and-wave discharges
synchronized with the myoclonus.
Epilepsy Syndromes
Epilepsy syndromes are disorders in which epilepsy is a predominant
feature, and there is sufficient evidence to suggest a common underlying

mechanism.
Juvenile Myoclonic Epilepsy
Juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (JME) is a generalized seizure disorder of
unknown cause that appears in early adolescence and is usually
characterized by bilateral myoclonic jerks that may be single or
repetitive.
The myoclonic seizures are most frequent in the morning after
awakening and can be provoked by sleep deprivation.
Unless severe consciousness is preserved.
Many patients also experience generalized tonic-clonic seizures, and up to
one-third have absence seizures.
The condition is otherwise benign, and although complete remission is
uncommon, the seizures respond well to appropriate anticonvulsant
medication.Lifelong treatment is necessary and sodium valproate is the drug of
choice.
Lennox-Gastaut Syndrome
Lennox-Gastaut syndrome is seen in children between the age of 1 to 8 and is
characterized by the following triad.
1. Multiple seizure types (usually including generalized tonic-clonic, atonic
and atypical absence seizures).
2. EEG: Shows slow (<3 Hz) spike and wave discharges and a variety of
other abnormalities.
3. Impaired cognitive function  in most but not all patients.
Lennox-Gastaut syndrome is an epileptic encephalopathy associated with
CNS disease or dysfunction  from a variety of causes, including
developmental abnormalities, perinatal hypoxia/ischemia, trauma, infection
and other acquired lesions.
The multifactorial nature of this syndrome suggests that it is a nonspecific
response of the brain to diffuse neural injury.
A similar syndrome in infancy that often evolves into Lennox-Gastaut
syndrome is West syndrome, characterized by infantile spasms, Salaam
attacks, other findings of cerebral dysfunction, and abnormal EEG pattern

(Hypsarrhythmia).
Mesial Temporal Lobe Epilepsy Syndrome
Mesial temporal lobe epilepsy (MTLE) is the most common syndrome
associated with complex partial seizures and is an example of
symptomatic, partial epilepsy.
Characteristic hippocampal sclerosis on MRI is an essential element in
the pathophysiology of MTLE for many patients.
Recognition of this syndrome is especially important because it tends to be
refractory to treatment with anticonvulsants but responds extremely
well to surgical intervention.
Febrile SeizureUsually occur between 3 months and 5 years of age and have a peak
incidence between 18 and 24 months.
It is generalized, tonic-clonic seizure in child during a febrile illness in
the setting of a common childhood infections.
The seizure is likely to occur during the rising phase of the temperature
curve (i.e. during the first day)
A simple febrile seizure is a single, isolated  event, brief and symmetric
in appearance. Complex febrile seizures are characterized by repeated
seizure activity, duration >15 minutes, or by focal features.
Simple febrile seizures are not associated with an increase in the risk of
developing epilepsy; while complex febrile seizures have a risk of 2–5%.
Other risk factors include the presence of pre-existing neurologic deficits
and a family history of nonfebrile seizures.
Causes of Seizures According to Age (Box 15.11)
Evaluation of the Patient with a SeizureWhen a patient is seen shortly after a seizure, the first priorities are
attention to vital signs, respiratory and cardiovascular support, and
treatment of seizures if they resume.
When the patient is not acutely ill, the evaluation will initially focus on
whether or not there is a history of earlier seizures.
Box 15.11: Causes of seizures according to age.

Neonates (<1 month)
Perinatal hypoxia and ischemia
Intracranial hemorrhage and trauma
CNS infections
Metabolic
Infants and children(>1 month and <12 years)
Febrile seizures
Genetic disorders (metabolic, degenerative, primary epilepsy syndromes)
CNS infections
Adolescents (12–18 years)
Trauma
Genetic disorders
Infection
Young adults (18–35 years)
Trauma
Alcohol withdrawal
Older adults (>35 years)
Cerebrovascular disease
Trauma (including subdural hematoma)
Brain tumor
Alcohol withdrawal
Degenerative diseases
First Seizure
If this is the patient’s first seizure, then the emphasis will be to establish
whether the reported episode was a seizure rather than another paroxysmal
event.
In case of generalized, tonic-clonic seizures (GTCS), features supporting
organicity are postictal confusion, tongue bite, history of fall or having
sustained injury, etc.
Determine the cause of the seizure by identifying risk factors and
precipitating events. Precipitating factors such as sleep deprivation,
systemic diseases, electrolyte or metabolic derangements (like
hypoglycemia, hyper and hypocalcemia, hyponatremia hypomagnesemia)
acute infection, drugs that lower the seizure (like penicillins, quinolones,
antipsychotics, lithium, amphetamine, barbiturates, cocaine) threshold or
alcohol or illicit drug use should be identified.General physical examination: Look for signs of system illnesses or
infection. Careful examination of the skin may reveal signs of

neurocutaneous disorders such as tuberous sclerosis or neurofibromatosis,
or chronic liver or renal disease. Organomegaly may indicate a metabolic
storage disease, and limb asymmetry may provide a clue to brain injury
early in development.
Finally decide whether anticonvulsant therapy is required  in addition
to treatment for any underlying illness. It is usually not required in case of
metabolic or electrolyte derangements and seizures due to alcohol
withdrawal.If no metabolic or infectious causes found, then look for
Focal features of seizure
Any focal neurological deficits
Any other neurological dysfunction/mental retardation
Unusual features such as, prolonged duration of seizures (>6 hours), more
than six seizures, status epilepticus, or a prolonged postictal state.
– If present, usually antiepileptic therapy is required. Then MRI and EEG
are done to find any mass lesion/stroke/degenerative lesion. Treatment
of underlying cause besides antiepileptic therapy.
–   If absent, it is idiopathic epilepsy and antiepileptic therapy continued.
Recurrence of a Seizure
In the patient with prior seizures or a known history of epilepsy, the
evaluation is directed toward:Identification of the underlying cause and precipitating factors.
Common precipitating factors are: sleep deprivation, fever, hypoglycemia,
and alcohol.Determination of the adequacy of the patient’s current therapy.
–   If no precipitating factors found, measure the plasma concentration of
antiepileptic drug.
–   If subtherapeutic concentration: Appropriate increase in drug dosage is
done.
–   If therapeutic concentration is normal: Either drug increased to
maximum tolerated dose or alternate therapy is started with gradually
tapering the first drug.
Laboratory Studies

Routine investigations: These include serum glucose, calcium,
electrolytes, renal and hepatic functions.
Lumbar puncture: If indicated.
EEG: May help establish the diagnosis of epilepsy, classify the seizure
type, and provide evidence for the existence of a particular epilepsy
syndrome.
–   The presence of electrographic seizure activity, i.e. of abnormal,
repetitive, rhythmic activity having an abrupt onset and termination,
clearly establishes the diagnosis.
–   The EEG findings may also be helpful in the inter-ictal period by
showing certain abnormalities that are strongly supportive of an
epilepsy. Such epileptiform activity consists of bursts of abnormal
discharges containing spikes or sharp waves.
–   EEG is normal in 40% of epileptic patients.Neuroimaging studies (MRI preferred over CT).
Differences between seizures and syncope are listed in Table 15.35.
Table 15.35: Differences between seizures and syncope.
Features Seizures Syncope
Immediate precipitating factor Usually none Emotional stress, Valsalva, orthostatic
hypotension, cardiac etiologies
Premonitory symptoms None or aura (e.g.
odd odor)Tiredness, nausea, diaphoresis, tunneling of
vision
Posture at onset Variable Usually erect
Transition to unconsciousness Often immediate Gradual over seconds
Duration of unconsciousness Minutes Seconds
Duration of tonic or clonic
movements30–60 seconds Never more than 15 seconds
Facial appearance during event Cyanosis, frothing
at mouthPallor
Disorientation and sleepiness
after eventMany minutes to
hours<5 minutes
Headache, muscle pain, tongue
bite incontinenceOften, tongue bite—
lateralRarely, tongue bite—tip
Treatment
Indications to initiate antiepileptic drug therapy

Antiepileptic drug therapy should be started in any patient with recurrent seizures of unknown
etiology or a known cause that cannot be reversed with in short time. Risk factors associated with
recurrent seizures are listed in Box 15.12.
Selection of antiepileptic drugs (Table 15.36). Certain AEDs like phenytoin and carbamazepine can
worsen myoclonic seizure. Hence proper AED for proper seizure must be given.
Treatment modification
If a treatment is modified recently, one should wait for at least four half-lives of the drug before
further modifying dosage.
If one drug is unable to control seizures then another drug should be considered when either
maximum dose of the first drug is reached or the patient starts showing intolerable side effects.
Whenever a new drug is added, the first drug is continued till the second drug controls seizures.
Only after achieving adequate seizure control the first drug should be gradually withdrawn.
Box 15.12:  Risk factors associated with recurrent seizures.
An abnormal neurologic examination
Seizures presenting as status epilepticus
Post-ictal Todd’s paralysis
Strong family history of seizures
An abnormal EEG
Abnormal CT or MRI
Table 15.36: Selection of antileptic drugs in seizures.
Seizure types 1st choice 2nd choice
Monotherapy for
generalized-onset
tonic-clonic seizuresValproate,
topiramateZonisamide, levetiracetam,
lamotrigine phenytoin,
carbamazepine
Absence seizure Ethosuximide
valproateZonisamide, levetiracetam,
topiramate, felbamate,
clonazepam
Monotherapy for
partial seizuresCarbamazepine,
oxcarbazepine,
phenytoin,
topiramateLamotrigine, gabapentin,
levetiracetam
Myoclonic Valproate
levetiracetam,
clonazepamZonisamide Topiramate
Status epilepticus Diazepam
LorazepamPhenytoin IV
Phosphenytoin IV

Febrile convulsions Diazepam rectal 0.5
mg/kg
Infantile spasms Corticotropin
Corticosteroids
ZonisamideClonazepam, nitrazepam,
vigabatrin, phenobarbital
Indications for discontinue therapy
Complete medical control of seizures for 1–5 years.
Single seizure type, either focal or generalized.
Normal neurologic examination (including intelligence)
Normal EEG
In most cases, it is preferable to reduce the dose of the drug gradually over 2–3 months.
Most recurrences occur in the first 3 months after discontinuing therapy, and patients should be
advised to avoid potentially dangerous situations such as driving or swimming during this period.
Treatment of refractory epilepsy
Therapy combines first line drugs, i.e. carbamazepine, phenytoin, valproic acid and lamotrigine.
If these drugs are unsuccessful, then the addition of a newer drug such as levetiracetam and
topiramate is indicated.
Patients with myoclonic seizures resistant to valproic acid may respond to a combination of
valproic acid and ethosuximide.
Surgical treatment of refractory epilepsy
About 20–30% of patients with epilepsy are resistant to medical therapy. ketogenic diet—has
been advised to decrease seizure recurrence. Low carbohydrate, adequate protein, high fat has
been advised.
Anteromedial temporal lobe (temporal lobectomy) or a more limited removal of the
underlying hippocampus  and amygdala (amygdalohippocampectomy).
Focal seizures arising from extratemporal regions may be abolished by a focal neocortical
resection with precise removal of an identified lesion (lesionectomy).
Others:  Hemispherectomy, corpus callosotomy, etc.
Vagus nerve stimulation  (VNS) may be used–some of these cases, although the benefit for most
patients seem to very limited.
Antiepileptic drugs for chronic use (Tables 15.37 and 15.38).
Q. Write a short essay/note on drugs used in
epilepsy/antiepileptic/anticonvulsant drugs.
Q. Write short note on (1) phenytoin (2) sodium valproate.
Newer antiepileptic drugs (Third Generation AEDs):  Carisbamate, esclicarbazepine, brivaracetam,
carabersat, ganaxalone, huperzine, lacosamide, losigamone, remacemide, retigabine, rufinamide,
safinamide, perampanel.

Status Epilepticus
Q. Write short essay/note on definition, complications of status
epilepticus and its emergency management.
Status epilepticus (SE) refers to continuous seizures or repetitive, discrete
seizures with impaired consciousness in the interictal period.
Status epilepticus is an epileptic seizure of greater than five minutes or more
than one seizure within a five-minute period without the patient returning to
normal between them. Previous definitions used a 30-minute time limit.
Subtypes
Generalized convulsive status epilepticus (GCSE), e.g. persistent,
generalized electrographic seizures, coma and tonic- clonic movements.
Nonconvulsive status epilepticus, e.g. persistent absence seizures or
focal seizures, confusion or partially impaired consciousness, and minimal
motor abnormalities.
Table 15.37: Antiepileptic drugs for chronic use.
Type of drug Examples
Na+ channel blockersPhenytoin, carbamazepine,
oxcarbazepine, primidone, valproic
acid, lamotrigine, topiramate,
zonisamide, phenobarbital, gabapentin,
felbamate
Ca2+ channel blockersEthosuximide, phenobarbital,
zonisamide
Drugs that potentiate
GABAIncrease opening time of
channelPhenobarbital
Increase frequency of
openings of channelDiazepam, lorazepam, clonazepam
Increase GABA in synapse Valproic acid
Increase GABA metabolism Gabapentin
Increase GABA release Gabapentin
Block GABA transaminase Vigabatrin
Block GABA transporter
(GAT-1)Valproic acid
Tiagabine
Facilitate GAD
(Glutamic acid
decarboxylase)Valproic acid

Increase GABA synthesis
Synaptic vesicle protein 2A
bindingLevetiracetam (inhibits presynaptic
calcium channels)
AMPA agonist Perampanel
Table 15.38: Antiepileptic drugs and their mechanism of action, adverse
reactions and uses.
Drug and mechanism of
actionAdverse reactions Uses
Phenytoin :
Oldest nonsedative
antiepileptic drug.
It alters Na+, Ca2+ and K+
conductancesAtaxia and nystagmus,
cognitive impairment,
hirsutism, gingival
hyperplasia, coarsening of
facial features, dose-
dependent zero order
kinetics, exacerbates
absence seizures, ‘Fetal
hydantoin syndrome’Partial seizure, generalized (including
tonic-clonic) seizures, contraindicated
in absence seizures. Nonseizure
indications include trigeminal
neuralgia, manic-depressive disorders
Carbamazepine: Tricyclic,
antidepressant (bipolar)
Mechanism of action, similar
to phenytoin. Inhibits high
frequency repetitive firing
(Na++)Auto induction of
metabolism, nausea and
visual disturbances,
granulocyte suppression,
aplastic anemia, exacerbates
absence seizuresPartial seizure (including tonic-clonic)
seizures.
Contraindicated in absence seizures.
Nonseizure indications include
trigeminal neuralgia, manic-depressive
disorders
Oxcarbazepine: Related to
carbamazepine.
With improved toxicity
profile. Less potent than
carbamazepine.
Active metaboliteHyponatremia, less
hypersensitivity and
induction of hepatic
enzymes than with
carbamazepine
Phenobarbital : It is the
oldest antiepileptic drug.
Although considered one of
the safest drugs, it has
sedative effects.
Prolongs opening of Cl-
channels. Blocks excitatory
GLU (AMPA) responses.
Blocks Ca2+ currents (L, N)Sedation, cognitive
impairment, behavioral
changes, induction of liver
enzymes, may worsen
absence and atonic seizuresUseful for partial, generalized tonic-
clonic seizures, and febrile seizures
Primidone: Metabolized to
phenobarbital
and phenylethylmalonamide
(PEMA), both
active metabolites.Same as phenobarbital
Sedation occurs early.
Gastrointestinal disturbancesEffective against partial and
generalized tonic-clonic seizures

Valproate: Mechanism of
action, similar
to phenytoin. Increases
levels of GABA
in brain. May facilitate
glutamic acid
decarboxylase (GAD).
Inhibits GAT-1Elevated liver enzymes,
nausea and vomiting,
abdominal pain, heartburn,
tremor, hair loss,
syncratic, hepatotoxicity,
teratogen (spina bifida)A broad spectrum anti-seizure drug t
most partial and generalized seizures,
including myoclonic and absence
seizures).
Nonseizure indications include:
Migraine (prophylaxis), bipolar
disorder
Ethosuximide: Reducing
low-threshold
Ca2+ channel current (T-
type channel) in
thalamusGastric distress, including,
pain, nausea and
vomiting, lethargy and
fatigue, headache,
hiccups, euphoria, skin
rashesDrug of choice for absence seizures
Clonazepam : One of the
most potent antiepileptic
agents knownSedation is prominent.
Ataxia, behavior
disordersLong-acting drug with efficacy for
absence
seizures. Also effective in some cases
of
myoclonic seizures.
Has been tried in infantile spasms
Lamotrigine: Suppresses
sustained rapid
firing of neurons and
produces a voltage
and use-dependent
inactivation of sodium
channels, thus its efficacy in
partial seizuresDizziness, headache,
diplopia, nausea,
somnolence, rashPresently use as add-on therapy with
valproic
acid. Also effective in generalized and
myoclonic
seizures in childhood and absence
seizures
preferred in elderly
Topiramate: Potentiates
inhibitory effects
of GABA (acting at a site
different from
BDZs and BARBs)Somnolence, fatigue,
dizziness, cognitive
slowing, paresthesia,
nervousness, confusion,
urolithiasisMyoclonic seizures, migraine
Zonisamide: Sulfonamide
derivativeDrowsiness, cognitive
impairment, high
incidence of renal stonesEffective against partial and
generalized tonic-clonic seizures
Felbamate Aplastic anemia, severe
hepatitisThird-line drug used only for
refractory partial
seizure cases
Vigabatrin (g-vinyl-
GABA) : Irreversible
inhibitor of GABA-
aminotransferaseDrowsiness, dizziness,
weight gain, agitation,
confusion, psychosisUse for infantile spasms, partial
seizures and
contraindicated if pre-existing mental
illness is
present
Tiagabine: GABA uptake
inhibitor GAT-1Dizziness, nervousness,
tremor, difficultyEffective against partial and
generalized tonic-clonic seizures

concentrating, depression,
asthenia, emotional
liability, psychosis, skin rash
Gabapentin: Analog of
GABA that does not act on
GABA receptors.
Low potencySomnolence, dizziness,
ataxia, headache,
tremorUsed as an adjunct in partial and
generalized
tonic-clonic seizures.
Neuropathy
Levetiracetam Somnolence, incoordination,
irritability, mood
swings, psychosisEffective for GTCS, JME. Preferred in
elderly.
Etiology of Status Epilepticus (Box 15.13)
Box 15.13: Etiology of status epilepticus.
Stroke, including hemorrhagic
Low AED levels
Alcohol withdrawal
Anoxic brain injury
Metabolic disturbances
Remote brain injury/congenital malformations
Infections
Brain neoplasms
Idiopathic
Clinical Features
Self-perpetuating, generalized tonic-clonic seizure or
Series of generalized tonic-clonic seizures
Without return to consciousness in between seizures.
Phases
Initial compensatory phase: Sympathetic overdrive, increased CO,
increased BP.
Decompensation → homeostatic failure
–   Reduced → CO/sugar/lactate/O2 levels leading to
♦   Cardiorespiratory collapse
♦   Electrolyte imbalance
♦   Rhabdomyolysis and delayed tubular necrosis
♦   Hyperthermia

♦   MOF (multiorgan failure)
♦   Raised ICP and cerebral edema.
Complications
These include aspiration, hypotension, cardiac arrhythmias and renal or
hepatic failure.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of nonconvulsive status epilepticus in critically ill patients.
Correlate with poorer outcome.
EEG patterns are difficult to interpret (equivocal patterns)—criteria are
not validated.
A trial of rapidly acting IV AED is used to observe improvement in both
clinical → EEG by several hours.
Management of Status Epilepticus (Table 15.39): Convulsive/nonconvulsive.
Table 15.39: Management of status epilepticus.
First 5 minutes
Check emergency ABC's
Give O 2
Obtain IV access
Begin ECG monitoring
Check finger stick glucose
Draw blood for serum electrolytes. RFT, magnesium, calcium, phosphate, CBC, LFTs, AED
levels, ABG, troponin
Toxicology screen (urine and blood)
6–10 minutes
Thiamine 100 mg IV; 50 mL of D50 IV unless adequate glucose known
Lorazepam 4 mg IV over 2 minutes; if still seizing, repeat × 1 in 5 minutes
If no rapid IV access give diazepam 20 mg PR or midazolam 10 mg intranasally, buccally or IM
10–20 minutes
If seizures persist, begin fosphenytoin 20 mg/kg IV at 150 mg/min, with blood pressure and ECG
monitoring. OR
Phenytoin 15–20 mg/kg at 30–50 mg/min
Reasonable to bypass this step, or perform subsequent step simultaneous with fosphenytoin loading
10–60 minutes:  One (or more) of the following 4 options (intubation usually necessary except for
valproate):
1. Continuous IV midazolam: Load: 0.2 mg/kg; repeat 0.2–0.4 mg/kg boluses every 5 minutes until
seizures stop, up to a maximum total loading dose of 2 mg/kg. Initial rate: 0.1 mg/kg/hr.

Continuous IV dose range: 0.05 – 2.9 mg/kg/hr.
OR
2. Continuous IV propofol: Load: 1 mg/kg; repeat 1–2 mg/kg boluses every 3–5 minutes until
seizures stop, up to maximum total loading dose of 10 mg/kg. Initial continuous IV rate: 2
mg/kg/h. Continuous IV dose range: 1–15 mg/kg/hr. Avoid >48 hrs of >5 mg/kg/h (increased risk
of propofol infusion syndrome).
OR
3. IV valproate: 40 mg/kg over ∽10 minutes. If still seizing, additional 20 mg/kg over ∽5 minutes.
OR
4. IV phenobarbital: 20 mg/kg IV at 50–100 mg/min.
60 minutes
Continuous IV pentobarbital. Load: 5 mg/kg at up to 50 mg/min; repeat 5 mg/kg boluses until
seizures stop. Initial continuous IV rate: 1 mg/kg/ hr. Continuous IV-dose range: 0.5–10 mg/kg/hr;
traditionally titrated to suppression-burst on EEG.
Perform neuroimaging when convulsive activity is controlled.Begin continuous EEG, if patient does not awaken rapidly or if continuous IV Rx is used.
Treat metabolic abnormalities and hypothermia.
Lumbar puncture and antibiotics can be considered if infection is suspected.
SE not controlled even with anesthetic agents is called super refra ctory SE, for which IV Ig/pulse
steroid can be tried as last resort.
Other available modalities
–   Brain imaging (perfusion/metabolic imaging)
–   Intracranial monitoring with intracortical EEG.
–   Brain tissue O2 monitoring.
–   Cerebral microdialysis.
Pregnancy and Epilepsy
In approximately 50% epileptic women, the frequency of epilepsy remain
the same. In about 30% it increases and in about 20% it decreases in
frequency.
Uncontrolled seizures in mother causes harm to both mother and fetus
greater than the teratogenic effects of antiepileptic drugs. Hence, pregnant
women should be maintained on effective drug therapy.Due to the numerous side effects phenytoin is not used in pregnancy.
Neural tube defects are associated with valproic acid and carbamazepine.
Carbamazepine is considered relatively safe in pregnancy, because of its
low teratogenic potential. Levetiracetam is safest drug.
If mother is on phenobarbital, she should be given oral vitamin K (20 mg

daily) in the last 2 weeks of pregnancy, and the infant should be given an
intramuscular injection of vitamin K (1 mg) at birth. This is because
phenobarbital may cause a transient and reversible deficiency of vitamin
K- dependent clotting factors in up to 50% of newborn infants.
NEUROINFECTIONS
Q. Write a short essay/note on classify meningitis and enumerate its
causes.
Classifications of Meningitis (Table 15.40)
Table 15.40: Classifications of meningitis.
Infective
1.  Bacterial meningitis
–   Common organisms: Streptococcus
pneumonia, Neisseria meningitidis,
Haemophilus influenzae
–   Uncommon organisms: Staphylococcus
aureus, Staphylococcus epidermidis ,
Group B streptococci, E.coli , Klebsiella,
Proteus spp, Listeria monocytogenes.
–   Rare organisms: Salmonella, Shigella,
Clostridium perfringens, Neisseria
gonorrhoeae3.  Viral meningitis (aseptic meningitis)
–   Enteroviruses (Coxsackie, poliovirus)
–   Mumps virus
–   Arboviruses
–   HIV
–   Herpes simplex-2
2.  Tuberculous meningitis (TBM) :
Mycobacterium tuberculosis4.  Spirochetal:  Leptospirosis, Lyme disease,
syphilis
5.  Rickettsial:  Typhus fever
6.  Protozoal:  Cysticerci, amoeba, Naegleria
7.  Fungal:  Cryptococcus neoformans, Candida,
Histoplasma, Blastomyces, Coccidioides,
Sporothrix
Noninfective ('sterile')  
1.  Malignant disease
–   Breast cancer
–   Bronchial cancer
–   Leukemia (leukemic meningitis)
–   Lymphoma
2.  Subarachnoid  hemorrhage (SAH) (causes
meningismus)3.  Inflammatory disease (may be recurrent)
–   Sarcoidosis
–   Systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid
arthritis
–   Behçet's disease
–   Vasculitis

Neurosyphilis
Q. Write a short essay on the clinical features and management of
neurosyphilis.
Treponema pallidum invades nervous system within 3 to 18 months (may
take years to develop) after primary infection.
Neurosyphilis may be asymptomatic or symptomatic. Initial event is
usually in the form of asymptomatic meningitis. Later it may produce
more damage. All forms of neurosyphilis have meningitis of variable
severity. Secondary to meningitis, the blood vessels show endarteritis
obliterans.Asymptomatic Neurosyphilis
Asymptomatic invasion of CNS by treponema is common and occur
within few months of primary infection by Treponema pallidum.
Neurosyphilis may develop in 25% cases of latent syphilis. Many of them
may develop symptomatic neurosyphilis.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) shows lymphocytosis with increased protein
and low glucose. Antibodies in the CSF, is the most specific test for
neurosyphilis. Venereal disease research laboratory test is positive.Treatment: Penicillin.
Symptomatic Neurosyphilis
It takes one of several forms, although mixed features are common (Box
15.14).
Meningeal syphilis
Symptoms of meningitis may develop at any time after infection, but
usually occur within 2 years after primary infection.
Symptoms:
–   These include headache, neck stiffness, seizures, altered sensorium and
cranial nerve palsies. It may show skin rash on palms and soles.
–   Papilledema with symptoms of increased intracranial pressure (ICP)
may develop.
–   Patient is afebrile and CSF is abnormal.

Box 15.14: Major categories of symptomatic neurosyphilis.
Meningeal syphilis
Chronic meningovascular disease
Parenchymatous syphilis
–   General paresis of insane
–   Tabes dorsalis
Meningovascular syphilis
Chronic meningitis involves base of the brain, cerebral convexities and
spinal leptomeninges.
Usually presents 6–7 years after primary infection. However, it can
develop as early as 6 months and as late as 10–12 years.
It should be suspected when a young patient develops stroke (generally
subacute) which results in hemiparesis, aphasia, visual loss, etc. Other
features include headache, vertigo, insomnia and psychological
abnormalities.
CSF findings (Table 15.41)
Note: Gold standard test for diagnosis is VDRL from CSF. This is highly
specific but only 30–70% sensitive for neurosyphilis. CSF FTA-ABS is more
sensitive but not specific because false positives are common.
General paralysis of insaneIt develops about 20 years after primary infection.
Shows generalized/diffuse brain parenchymal disease with dementia;
hence called as general paresis of insane.
Clinical manifestation includes personality changes, illusions, delusions,
hallucinations, dementia (reduced memory), hyperactive reflexes and
Argyll Robertson pupils.
Tabes dorsalis
Tabes dorsalis is the parenchymal form of neurosyphilis characterized by
demyelination of posterior column, dorsal root and dorsal root
ganglia in the spinal cord.Usually develops 20–25 years after primary infection.
Symptoms: Severe lightening pains in trunk and extremities, ataxia and

urinary incontinence.
Signs: Patchy tactile sensory loss and severe impairment of proprioception
with sensory ataxia. Muscular strength is normal and tendon jerks are
absent. Complications include trophic lesions such as perforating ulcers of
feet and Charcot joints. Argyll Robertson pupils may also be observed in
tabes dorsalis.Visceral crisis: It consists of sudden epigastric pain with vomiting that
Abadie’s sign (Pinching of, or the application of firm pressure to, the
Achilles tendon does not result in pain) lasts for hours. Barium studies
show pylorospasm (gastric crisis). Other crisis includes intestinal crisis
with diarrhea, rectal crisis with tenesmus, genitourinary crisis with
strangury and pharyngeal-laryngeal crisis with gulping movements and
dyspnea.CSF findings: (refer Table 15.41).
Table 15.41: CSF findings in neurosyphilis.
Parameter Findings
Pressure Normal or raised
CSF fluid Clear
Protein Raised (100–200 mg%)
Glucose Normal
Cell count Mildly elevated and cells are lymphocytes
Gamma globulin levels Raised
Venereal disease research laboratory (VDRL) Positive
FTA-ABS (fluorescent treponemal antibody
absorption)Positive
Treatment
Penicillin: Drug of choice and given in the dose of 18–24 million units/day for 15–20 days.
If patient is sensitive to penicillin: Erythromycin and tetracycline 0.5 g 6 hourly for 20–30 days.
Follow-up
Re-examine the patient every 3 months and CSF examination at 6 months interval.
If CSF is normal and VDRL titers are reduced, no further treatment is necessary. However, if CSF
remains abnormal, patient should be treated by another full course of penicillin.
Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF)
CSF is formed within the ventricles and circulates in the subarachnoid

space (between arachnoid and pia matter) and in the ventricles. The total
volume of CSF in adults ranges from 90 to 150 mL. It is a medium for
transfer of substances from brain and spinal cord into the blood.
Importance of CSF examination: Analysis of the CSF is of diagnostic
importance in conditions like meningitis or primary/metastatic tumor of
CNS with CSF involvement.Collection of CSF: CSF is usually obtained by lumbar puncture (LP)
using an LP needle under strict aseptic conditions.
Fig. 15.10 : Procedure of lumbar puncture.
Lumbar Puncture (LP)
Q. Write a short essay on the procedure indications, contraindications
and complications of lumbar puncture.
Lumbar puncture is the technique (Fig. 15.10) done to obtain CSF sample
and also provides an indirect measure of intracranial pressure (ICP).
After local anesthetic injection, a lumbar puncture needle is inserted in the
midline between lumbar spinous processes usually between L3 and L4
(3rd lumbar space) through the dura and into the spinal canal. In children,
it is collected from the 4th lumbar space.

Intracranial pressure can be assessed (if patients are lying on their side)
and CSF obtained for analysis.
CSF pressure is important in the diagnosis and monitoring of idiopathic
intracranial hypertension.
Indications and contraindication for lumbar puncture (Box 15.15).
Complications of Lumbar Puncture
Most common complication is post spinal headache . Herniation of
cerebellum through the foramen magnum due to raised intracranial
pressure.
Hematoma, either extradural or subdural.
Introduction of infection by the LP needle through the infected skin or
subcutaneous tissue.
Normal CSF findings are presented in Table 15.42.
CSF osmolality and sodium level is same as that of serum
Constituents that are in higher concentration in CSF than in blood include
magnesium, chloride, H+ concentration and lactate.
Table 15.42: Normal CSF findings.
Constituent Normal value
CSF volume 150 mL
CSF pressure 90–180 mm of water
Cell count <5 cells, all lymphocytes, no neutrophils
CSF proteins 15–45
CSF sugar 60–80% of blood glucose
Box 15.15: Indications and contraindication for lumbar puncture.
Indications for lumbar puncture
Diagnostic indications
–   Infection :
♦   Meningeal infection : Bacterial (pyogenic, tuberculosis, syphilitic (to differentiate general
paresis of insane, tabes dorsalis and meningeal syphilis), viral, fungal
♦   Encephalitis
–   Subarachnoid hemorrhage
–   Primary or metastatic malignancy (e.g. acute leukemia, lymphoma)
–   Demyelinating diseases:  Multiple sclerosis and subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE)

–   Guillain-Barré syndrome
–   Spinal canal blockage leading to elevated intracranial tension (spinal cord tumors)
–   Injecting the radio-opaque dye for myelography
Therapeutic indications
–   Spinal anesthesia, epidural analgesia
–   Intrathecal injection of chemotherapeutic drugs  for CNS prophylaxis/relapse of ALL,
lymphomas
–   Therapeutic CSF drainage in cases of normal pressure hydrocephalus
Contraindications for lumbar puncture
Raised intracranial pressure, coagulopathy
Local infective lesion
Bony deformities at site of puncture
Box 15.16: Causes of elevated CSF proteins.
Meningitis
Brain abscess
Brain or spinal cord tumors
Multiple sclerosis
Guillain-Barré syndrome
Syphilis
Hemorrhage
Froin’s syndrome
Causes of low sugar in CSF: Pyogenic, tuberculous, fungal and
carcinomatous meningitis.
Causes of elevated protein in CSF (Box 15.16).
Q. Write a short note on causes of elevated CSF proteins.
Xanthochromia
Q. Write a short note on xanthochromia in CSF analysis.
Xanthochromia is the yellowish appearance of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).
Causes: Xanthochromia is always pathological and conditions associated
with it are:
Old subarachnoid hemorrhage: The yellow appearance is due to RBCs
which may leak into the cerebrospinal fluid during the hemorrhage. RBCs
are breakdown and liberate hemoglobin which is converted into yellow
bilirubin.

Other causes are high protein in the CSF, jaundice and Froin’s syndrome
(refer page 984).
Meningitis and Encephalitis
Q. What are the causes of meningitis? Discuss the clinical features,
investigations, diagnosis, complications and management of acute
pyogenic (bacterial/meningococcal) meningitis.
Acute Bacterial (Pyogenic/ Purulent) Meningitis
Q. Write a short essay/note on the common organisms causing pyogenic meningitis.
Relative frequency of various bacterial species causing meningitis varies with age.
Neonatal period:  Major causative agents include gram-negative bacilli (principally Escherichia
coli), Listeria monocytogenes, and group B streptococci.
Infants and children:  Major causes in children beyond 1 month of age are Haemophilus
influenzae and Neisseria meningitidis.
Adolescents and in young adults: Meningococcus ( Neisseria meningitides ) is the most common
pathogen.
Extremes of life: Streptococcus pneumoniae and Listeria monocytogenes.
Causes of community acquired bacterial meningitis:  Important causes are:
Streptococcus pneumonia (50%):  Most common
Neisseria meningitides  (25%): Is the only major cause of epidemics of bacterial meningitis.
Group B streptococci  (15%) and
Listeria monocytogenes (10%)
Haemophilus influenzae (10%)
Predisposing conditions
For Pneumococci: Other Pneumococcal infections (pneumonia, sinusitis,
otitis media), splenectomy, hypogammaglo-bulinemia, complement
deficiency.For Neisseria meningitides: Complement deficiency (including
properdin), B-serotype (not protected by vaccine is responsible for one-
third of cases). Usually associated with petechial or purpuric skin lesions.Listeria monocytogenes: Important cause in neonates (<1 month),
pregnant women, >60 years and immunocompromised persons.
Clinical manifestations
Q. Write a short essay/note on physical signs of meningitis.
Classic triad: (1) Fever, (2) headache, and (3) nuchal rigidity.

Consciousness: Vary from lethargy to coma (>75%).
Nausea, vomiting and photophobia are common
Seizure/convulsions (especially in children) may be initial presentation or
present during course (20–40%).
–   Focal: Due to arterial ischemia, infarction, cortical venous thrombosis
or focal edema.
–   Generalized or status: Due to hyponatremia, cerebral anoxia or toxic
effects of antimicrobial drugs.
Classic signs of meningitis (Box 15.17).
Occasionally cranial nerve palsies, with focal neurologic deficits such as
visual field defects, dysphasia, and hemiparesis may occur.
In meningococcus: Rash begin as diffuse erythematous maculopapular
that become petechial, found on trunk, lower limbs, mucous membrane,
conjunctiva and rarely on palm and sole.Raised ICP: One of the complications of bacterial meningitis and CSF
pressure may be raised to 180–400 mm H2O. Disastrous complication of
ICP is cerebral herniation.
–   Other signs: Reduced level of consciousness, papilledema, dilated
poorly reactive pupil, VIth cranial palsy, decerebrate posture, Cushing
reflex (bradycardia, hypertension, and irregular respiration).
Box 15.17: Classical sign of meningitis.
Cervical rigidity/neck stiffness
Kernig sign: Knee pain with hip flexion
Brudzinski sign: Knee/hip flexion when the neck is flexed
Box 15.18: Complications of bacterial meningitis.
Obstructive hydrocephalus
Thrombophlebitis of leptomeningeal veins may lead to venous thrombosis, cerebral infarction,
focal infection of the underlying brain parenchyma
Chronic adhesive arachnoiditis
Cerebral abscess
Subdural empyema
Focal neurologic deficits (e.g. cranial nerve palsy, hemiparesis)
Sensorineural hearing loss
Vasculitis of cranial vessel
Epilepsy

Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome: It results from meningitis-associated septicemia with
hemorrhagic infarction of the adrenal glands and cutaneous petechiae. It occurs most often with
meningococcal and pneumococcal meningitis
Complications of bacterial meningitis (Box 15.18)
Diagnosis
By examination of the CSF: It is usually obtained by lumbar puncture.
Lumbar puncture should be postponed if there is papilledema and or focal
neurologic findings suggestive of an intracranial mass lesion. It can be
done only after ruling out the same by computed tomography (CT) or
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).Blood culture: If meningitis seems likely, blood should be sent for culture
and sensitivity and empirical antimicrobial therapy should be started while
the neuroimaging study is being carried out.
CSF findings in bacterial meningitis (refer Table 15.46)
Q. Write a short essay/note on CSF findings pyogenic/bacterial
meningitis.
Q. Write a short essay/note on treatment of pyogenic meningitis.
Treatment
Antibiotics used in empirical therapy of bacterial meningitis and focal CNS infections.
A. Empirical therapy (Table 15.43)
S. pneumoniae and Neisseria meningitides are common organisms. Due to emergence of penicillin
and cephalosporin resistant of
S. pneumoniae a combination therapy of 3rd or 4th generation cephalosporin (ceftriaxone,
cefotaxime, cefepime) and vancomycin, plus acyclovir (HSV is a differential diagnosis) and
doxycycline (tick infection) is given as empirical therapy.
B. Specific antimicrobial therapyNeisseria meningitides
–   Penicillin sensitive:  Penicillin G-250,000–300,000 U /kg/day in divided doses, Ampicillin
(3 g intravenous TID/QID)
–   Penicillin resistant:  Ceftriaxone 2 g intravenous BID/Cefotaxime 2 g intravenous BID
–   7 days IV dose are adequate.
–   All close contacts should be given chemoprophylaxis with rifampicin for 2 days or
azithromycin (500 mg once) or one IM ceftriaxone (250 mg).
Streptococcus pneumonia
–   Should be tested for penicillin and cephalosporin sensitivity
–   Penicillin sensitive:  Penicillin G

–   Penicillin-intermediate:  Ceftriaxone/cefotaxime/cefepime
–   Penicillin-resistant: Ceftriaxone/cefotaxime/cefepime+vancomycin
–   2 weeks IV is adequate.
–   Lumbar puncture is to be repeated 24-36 hours after initiation to see the response
–   Intraventricular vancomycin may be more effective than IV or intrathecal.Gram-ve bacilli (except Pseudomonas ): Ceftriaxone/cefotaxime for 3 weeks
Pseudomonas aeruginosa:  Ceftazidime/cefepime/meropenem
Staphylococci spp:
–   Methicillin sensitive:  Nafcillin
–   Methicillin resistant: Vancomycin (1 g intravenous TID) (IV or intraventricular)
Listeria monocytogenes:  Ampicillin for 3 weeks. Gentamicin may be added in critical ill cases.
Trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole is alternative
H. influenzae-intermediate: Ceftriaxone/cefotaxime/ cefepime
Streptococcus Agalactiae: Penicillin G/ampicillin
Bateroides fragilis : Metronidazole
Fusobacterium spp: Metronidazole
C. Adjunctive therapy
Dexamethasone inhibits synthesis of IL-1ßand TNF-a, decrease CSF out flow resistance and
stabilize blood brain barrier (BBB).
It is to be given 20 minutes before antimicrobial therapy. It is less effective if given 6 hours
after antibiotic therapy.
D. Treatment of raised ICP
Elevation of head end of the bed to 30 to 45°, hyperventilation, and administration of mannitol.
Duration of therapy: 7 days for N. meningitides , 7–10 days for H. influenzae, 10–14 days for S.
pneumoniae and 3 weeks for gram-negative bacilli.
Table 15.43: Empirical therapy for bacterial meningitis depending on the
age group/predisposing factors.
Age group/predisposing factors Drug used
Infants <1 month Ampicillin + cefotaxime
Infants 1–3 months Ampicillin + cefotaxime/ceftriaxone
Infants >3 months and adults <55 years Cefotaxime/ceftriaxone/cefepime + vancomycin
Adults >55 years or adult with alcohol or
debilitating conditionsAmpicillin + cefotaxime/ceftriaxone/cefepime +
vancomycin
Hospital acquired, posttraumatic, post
neurosurgery, neutropenic patients or impaired
cell mediated immunityAmpicillin + ceftazidime/meropenem +
vancomycin
Tubercular MeningitisQ. Describe the pathology, clinical features, investigation, complications

and treatment/management of tuberculous meningitis.
In India tubercular meningitis (TBM) remains the most common form of
meningitis.
Risk factors
–   Previous history of exposure to tuberculosis or illness.
–   Immunocompromised state of AIDS
–   Young children.
Pathology
Main neuropathologic finding is basal meningeal exudates containing
mainly mononuclear cells.
Tubercles may be seen on the meninges and on the surfaces of the brain.
The ventricles may be dilated  as a result of hydrocephalus, and the
ependymal surface may be covered by exudates.
Hydrocephalus is common in children and most develop symptoms in 2–
3 weeks.
–   Communicating type: Common, due to blockage of basal cistern by
exudates in acute phase or adhesive leptomeningitis in chronic phase.
–   Obstructive type: Less common, due to narrowing or occlusion of
aqueduct by ependymal inflammation, tuberculomas, or obstruction of
outlet of IVth ventricle.
Arteritis can cause cerebral infarction, and basal inflammation; and
fibrosis can compress cranial nerves.
Clinical features
Onset: Usually subacute/chronic. Acute: children—50%, adult—14%.
Past history of TB: Children—50%, adult—10%.
Prodromal symptoms: Two to three weeks, vague ill health, apathy,
irritability, anorexia, changes in behavior.
Features of meningitis: Headache, vomiting, fever and focal neurological
deficit.
Features of raised intracranial pressure (ICP)
–   Convulsions (focal/generalized—20–30%).
–   Cranial nerve palsy: 20–30% (6th cranial nerve).
–   Loss of vision: Partial/complete. Due to opticochiasmatic exudate, and

arteritis.
Other presentation: Hemiplegia, facial nerve palsy, optic atrophy,
abnormal movement, occulomotor palsy, choroid tubercle, etc.
In untreated cases: Consciousness deteriorates, pupillary abnormality,
pyramidal signs due to hydrocephalus and tentorial herniation.
Complications of tubercular meningitis (Table 15.44)
Investigations
Q. Write a short essay/note on laboratory diagnosis and CSF findings in
tuberculous meningitis.
1. CSF study
–   Cytological study
♦   Leukocyte count: 100–500 cells/μL, rarely >1000/cells/μL.
♦   Cell type: Lymphocytes predominant, polymorphonuclear cells
in acute stag. Hemorrhagic due to fibrinoid necrosis of vessels.
No malignant cells seen.
–   Biochemical study
♦   Protein: Usually 100–200 mg/100 mL. In spinal block >1 g/100
mL and xanthochromic.
♦   On standing a pellicle/cobweb formed indicating fibrinogen—
high suggestion of TBM.
♦   Glucose: Reduced to 20–50 mg/100 mL. In most cases <40% of
corresponding blood sugar, but unlike pyogenic never undetectable.
♦   Chloride: Low value 450–600 mg/100 mL and is nonspecific
indicating hypochloremia. It may be seen in bacterial, viral
meningitis also.
♦   Adenosine deaminase (ADA) produced by T-lymphocytes
elevated in CSF (60–100%).
–   Microbiological study
♦   Negative with Gram stain, Indian ink stain and culture is sterile.
♦   Acid-fast bacilli (AFB): AFB in smear and culture-confirmatory
but number of bacteria should be >104/ML. Stained by Ziehl-
Neelsen and auramine (4–40% positive).

–   Centrifuged CSF: The thick smear from pellicle and repeated culture
enhance detection.
–   CSF culture: In Lowenstein-Jensen media in 4–8 weeks. It may be
enhanced by liquid media like septi-check AFB system or Middle
brook 7H9. Isolation is better from cisternal/ventricular CSF.
2. Radiological investigations
Chest X-ray: It may reveal miliary mottling in the lung.
CT scan:
–   Thickening of meninges in basal cistern (60%)
–   Hydrocephalus in 50–80% depending on duration
–   Cerebral infarct (28%) in MCA, edema (periventricular),
tuberculoma (10%).
3. Immunological methods
Antibody detection: CSF shows antibodies against various antigens
that are sensitive and are detected by ELISA and RIA.
Antigen detection: More specific. Antigen is detected by Latex
agglutination, ELISA, etc.
Molecular methods: Amplification of specific DNA sequence by
PCR used for rapid diagnosis. PCR is confirmatory and not affected by
other organisms.
Table 15.44: Complications of tubercular meningitis.
Raised intracranial pressure (ICP), cerebral edema
Basal meningitis with cranial nerve palsy—II, III, IV, VI and VII
Focal neurologic deficit and seizure
Hydrocephalus
Tuberculoma
Opticochiasmatic pachymeningits: Visual loss
Endocrine abnormality: Growth hormone and gonadotropin
Hypothalamic disorder: Loss of control of blood pressure (BP) and temperature, delayed or
precocious sexual development
Diabetes insipidus, syndrome of inappropriate ADH secretion (SIADH)
Management
Antituberculous treatment (ATT) for one and a half year in uncomplicated cases is usually
sufficient.
Steroids: It is recommended to give steroids during initial 6 weeks to decrease the possibility of

adhesion formation. Steroids prevent complications. There is no definite duration for which
treatment might be continued, but should be judged on the basis of neuroimaging findings.
Surgical intervention: If hydrocephalus, tuberculoma, or abscess develops. Tubercular abscess
needs drainage.
Viral Meningitis/Aseptic Meningitis
Viral infections of the meninges (meningitis) or brain parenchyma
(encephalitis) often present as acute confusional states.
Children and young adults are frequently affected.
Etiology
Common viruses include:
Enteroviruses (most common, i.e. coxsackie viruses, echoviruses, and
human enteroviruses): At least two–thirds of the cases of CSF culture-
negative aseptic meningitis are due to enteroviruses.
Herpes simplex virus-2 (HSV-2) meningitis: It may occur during the
initial episode of genital herpes. Most cases of benign recurrent
lymphocytic meningitis (previously called as Mollaret’s meningitis)
appear to be due to HSV.Arthropod-borne viruses: These are transmitted through infected insect
vectors.
HIV: Aseptic meningitis is a common manifestation of primary exposure
to HIV. Cranial nerve palsies, most commonly involving cranial nerves
V, VII and VIII are more common in HIV meningitis than in other viral
infections.Mumps can also cause meningitis.
Clinical Manifestations
Fever, headache, and meningeal irritation. Other features include malaise,
myalgia, anorexia, nausea and vomiting, abdominal pain, and/or diarrhea.
Laboratory Diagnosis
Q. Write short answer on CSF changes in viral meningitis.
CSF examination:
–   Reveals lymphocytosis, mildly elevated protein and normal glucose.

–   As a rule, a lymphocytic pleocytosis with a low glucose level  (<25
mg/dL) should suggest the presence of fungal, listerial or
tuberculous meningitis or of noninfectious disorders (e.g. neoplastic
meningitis)
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR): Amplification of viral-specific DNA
or RNA from CSF by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) important method
for the diagnosis of CNS viral infection.
Management
Symptomatic and hospitalization is not required.
Oral or intravenous acyclovir may be of benefit in patients with meningitis caused by HSV-1 or
2 and in cases of severe EBV or VZV infection.
Patients with HIV should receive highly active retroviral therapy.
Mollaret’s Meningitis
Q. Write short note on Mollaret’s meningitis.
Definition: It is a syndrome characterized by recurrent aseptic, self-limiting
meningitis and presence of large typical monocytes (Mollaret cells) in the
CSF.Cause: Not known, but may be due to some virus infections. Herpes
simplex-2 infection must be excluded in these patients.
Clinical features: Repeated self-limiting episodes of fever, meningismus
and severe headache (of 2–5 days duration) separated by symptom-free
intervals.
Noninfective causes of meningitis are listed in Table 15.45.
Table 15.45: Noninfective (‘sterile’) causes of meningitis.
Type of noninfectious meningitis Causes
Carcinomatous Leukemia, lymphoma, myeloma, melanoma,
breast and lung cancer
Connective tissue disorders Bechets, SLE, sarcoid, rheumatoid, Sjogrens
Drugs Azathioprine, cyclosporine, sulfasalazine
Substances injected into the subarachnoid space Anesthetics, antibiotics, chemotherapy drugs,
radiopaque contrast agents
CSF Findings in Meningitis (Table 15.46)

Q. Write a short note on compare the CSF findings of pyogenic, aseptic,
and tuberculous meningitis.
Table 15.46: CSF findings in meningitis.
Normal Acute pyogenic Acute viral
(aseptic)Tuberculous
Physical
examinationClear and
colorlessTurbid and forms
coagulumClear Clear and
colorless, forms
cobweb on
standing due to
coagulation of
fibrinogen
CSF pressure 60–150 mm of
H2ORaised above 180
mm of H 2ORaised above 250
mm of H 2ORaised above 300
mm of H 2O
Total protein 20–40 mg/100 mL
(<0.45 g/L)<50–200 mg/100
mL<40 mg/100 mL 50–150 mg/100
mL
Glucose 45–80 mg/100 mL
(>50–60% of
blood level)0–20 mg/l00 mL
(Usually ≤40
mg/dL)Normal Decreased: May
be <45 mg/100
mL
Chlorides 720–750 mg/100
mL600–700 mg/100
mLNormal 450–600 mg/100
mL
Cells
Polymorphs Usually absent 1000–5000/μL Absent 0–5 cells/μL
Lymphocytes 0–5 cells/μL 5–50 cells/μL 10–2000 cells/μL 50–5000 cells/μL
Gram stain/ZN
stain- Bacteria + - AFB + (Ziehl–
Neelsen/auramine
stain) or
tuberculosis
culture positive
Causes of Neck Stiffness (Box 15.19)Box 15.19: Causes of neck stiffness.
Meningitis (including leukemic meningitis) and meningism
Subarachnoid hemorrhage, posterior fossa tumors
Cervical spondylosis
Trauma to the neck: Fracture, dislocation of cervical spine, sprain, rupture of ligament
Rupture of cerebral abscess into subarachnoid space
Tetanus
Elderly individuals

Q. List the causes of neck stiffness.
ENCEPHALITIS
Viral Encephalitis
In meningitis, the infectious process and associated inflammatory response
is limited largely to the meninges, whereas in encephalitis, the brain
parenchyma is also involved.
Encephalitis is characterized by nonsuppurative inflammation of brain by
an inflammatory process.
Etiology (Box 15.20)
Box 15.20: Viruses causing encephalitis.
Epidemics of encephalitis are caused by arboviruses
Acute encephalitis
Herpesvirus
–   Herpes simplex virus I (MC)
–   Varicella zoster virus
–   Epstein–Barr virus
Arthropod-borne viruses
West Nile virus
Japanese encephalitis Colorado tick fever
Others: Rabies, enterovirsuses, mumps, cytomegalovirus
Clinical manifestations
Acute febrile illness with evidence of meningitis and encephalitis.
Altered level of consciousness (ranging from mild lethargy to coma), an
abnormal mental state, and evidence of either focal or diffuse neurologic
signs or symptoms.
It may have hallucinations, agitation, personality change, behavioral
disorders and at times a frankly psychotic state.
Focal or generalized seizures occur in many patients with encephalitis.
Most common focal neurological findings: Aphasia, ataxia, upper or lower
motor neuron patterns of weakness, involuntary movements (e.g.
myoclonic jerks, tremor), and cranial nerve deficits (e.g. ocular palsies,
facial weakness).

Involvement of the hypothalamic pituitary axis may result in temperature
dysregulation, diabetes insipidus, or the development of the syndrome of
inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone (SIADH).
Laboratory diagnosis
1. CSF
CSF examination: Indistinguishable from that of viral meningitis and
typically consists of lymphocytic pleocytosis, a mildly elevated protein
concentration, and a normal glucose concentration.CSF PCR: Primary diagnostic test for CNS infections caused by
CMV, EBV, HHV-6 and enteroviruses.
CSF culture: Limited utility.
2. Serologic studies and antigen defection: Demonstration of antibodies or
antigens.
3. Brain biopsy: Reserved for patients in whom CSF PCR studies fail to
lead to a specific diagnosis, who have focal abnormalities on MRI, and
who continue to show progressive clinical deterioration despite treatment
with acyclovir and supportive therapy.4. MRI, CT and EEG
Management
General measures:  Care of the unconscious patient. Anticonvulsants may be needed. Brain
edema is managed with dexamethasone 4 mg 6 hourly.
Herpes simplex encephalitis:  Acyclovir (10 mg/kg IV 8 hourly for 14–21 days), if instituted
early.
Froin’s Syndrome
Q. Write a short note on Froin’s syndrome.
Froin’s syndrome describes the CSF findings in cases of complete spinal
(subarachnoid) block (below the block).
CSF below the block  shows following features:
–   CSF pressure: Reduced
–   Queckenstedt’s test: It is an outdated clinical test, formerly used for
diagnosing spinal block.
–   Physical examination: Yellowish discoloration (xanthochromia)

coagulum may form due to high protein content.
–   Chemical examination: Very much elevation of protein levels, sugar
levels are normal or occasionally reduced if the obstruction is due to
tuberculous meningitis.
–   Cytology: Normal cell count. Increased cells if the obstruction is due to
tuberculous meningitis.
Causes of total block:
–   Intraspinal tumors.
–   Vertebral diseases with compression.
–   Chronic spinal arachnoiditis.
DISEASES OF THE SPINAL CORD
Features Suggestive of Involvement of Spinal Cord (Box 15.21)
Patterns of Spinal Cord Disease (Box 15.22)
Box 15.21: Features suggestive of spinal cord involvement.
Presence of sensory deficit and/or motor weakness in both lower limbs and/or upper limbs
Bladder and bowel involvement
Brown-Sequard type of clinical picture
Presence of definite sensory level
Box 15.22: Patterns of spinal cord disease.
Complete cord transection syndrome
Brown-Sequard syndrome (bullet injury, multiple sclerosis)
Central cord syndrome (syringomyelia), Fredriachs ataxia, HIV myelopathy
Posterior column syndrome (tabes dorsalis), Fredriachs ataxia, HIV myelopathy
Posterolateral cord syndrome subacute combined degeneration of the cord (SACDC)
Combined AHC—pyramidal tract syndrome amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)
Anterior horn cell (AHC) syndrome (polio)
Anterior cord syndrome (anterior spinal artery occlusion)
Conus medularis and cauda equina syndrome
Causes and Clinical Features of Complete Cord Transection
(Table 15.47)

Table 15.47: Causes and clinical features of complete cord transection.
Causes Clinical features
Sensory Motor Autonomic
Trauma
Metastatic
carcinoma
Multiple sclerosis
Spinal epidural
hematoma
Autoimmune
disorders
Postvaccinal
syndromesAll sensations are
affected
Sensory level is
usually 2 segments
below the level of
lesionSegmental
paresthesia occurs at
the level of lesionParaplegia due to
corticospinal tract
involvementFirst spinal shock
followed by
hypertonic
hyperreflexic
paraplegiaLoss of abdominal
and cremasteric
reflexesAt the level of lesion
lower motor neuron
(LMN signs) occurUrinary retention
and constipation
Anhidrosis, trophic
skin changes,
vasomotor
instability below the
level of lesionSexual dysfunction
can occur
Differentiation between compressive and noncompressive myelopathy
(Table 15.48).
Table 15.48: Differences between compressive and noncompressive
myelopathy.
Features Compressive Noncompressive
Bony deformity + –
Bony tenderness + –
Girdle like sensation + –
Upper level of sensory loss + –
Zone of hyperesthesia + –
Root pain + –
Onset and progress Gradual May be acute
Symmetry Symmetrical Majority are
asymmetrical
Flexor spasm Common Usually absent
Pattern of neurodeficit U-shaped (Elsberg phenomenon) Bilaterally symmetrical
Bladder and bowel movement Late Early (acute transverse
myelitis)
Classical example Caries spine Acute transverse
myelitis, motor neuron

disease (chronic)
Differences between extramedullary and intramedullary lesions of the
spinal cord (Table 15.49).
Q. Write a short essay on differences between extramedullary and
intramedullary lesions of the spinal cord.
Table 15.49: Differences between extramedullary and intramedullary
lesions of the spinal cord.
Features Extramedullary Intramedullary
Root pain Early and common Rare, pain is burning in
type and poorly
localized
Secondary deficit No dissociation of sensation,
contralateral loos of pain and
temperature, with ipsilateral loss or
proprioceptionDissociation of
sensation common,
suspended sensory loss
Sacral sensation Lost (early) Sacral sparing
Lower motor neuron (LMN)
involvementSegmental Marked with wide
spread atrophy,
fasciculation seenUpper motor neuron (UMN)
involvementEarly and prominent. Ascending
pattern of weakness (sacral?lumbar?
thoracic ?cervical)Less pronounced, late
feature, descending
pattern Reflexes Brisk early feature Less brisk, later feature
Autonomic involvement (bladder
and bowel)Late Early
Trophic changes Usually not marked Common
Vertebral tenderness May be sensitive to local pressure No bony tenderness in
vertebrae
Changes in CSF Frequent Rare
Differences between presentation of intradural and extradural lesion is
presented in Table 15.50.
Q. Write short note on differentiation between extradural, intradural
extramedullary and intradural intramedullary myelopathies.
Table 15.50: Differences between presentation of intradural and extradural

lesion.
Features Extradural Intradural
Mode of onset Usually symmetrical Asymmetrical
Root pain Less common More common
Spinal tenderness Common Uncommon
Spinal deformity Present Absent
Causes of Compressive Myelopathies (Table 15.51)
Q. Write short note on common causes of compressive myelopathies.
Table 15.51: Causes of compressive myelopathies.
Extradural Intradural Intramedullary
Spondylosis
Disk prolapse
Trauma
Tumor: Metastasis, multiple
myelomaTumor: Neurofibroma,
meningioma, lipoma, sarcoma
metastasis
ArachnoiditisSyrinx
Tumor: Ependymoma,
astrocytoma,
hemangioblastoma,
hematomyelia
CVJ anomalies
Fluorosis
TB spine
Epidural abscess
Epidural hematomaSarcoidosis
Cervical meningitis
Arteriovenous malformation
Leukemic infiltration
Arachnoid cyst
Localization of the level of lesion in a compressive myelopathy
Distribution root pain: Ask for specific dermatomes involved.
Upper border of sensory loss: Examine the patient from below upwards
for demonstration of upper border of sensory loss (spinothalamic tract).
Girdle like sensation or sense or constriction  at the level of lesion
(involvement of posterior column).
Zone of hyperesthesia or hyperalgesia (zone of hyperesthesia is present
just above the level of girdle like sensation, and is due to compression of
posterior nerve roots.Analysis of abdominal reflex: If upper abdominal reflex is intact with
loss of middle and lower one, the site of lesion is probably at T10 spinal
segment.Atrophy of the muscles in a segmental distribution (due to anterior

horn cells).
Loss of deep reflexes: If the particular segment is involved. The reflexes
will be brisk below the involved segment.
Deformity or any swelling in the vertebra
Tenderness in the vertebra
The area of sweating may help (lack of sweating below the level) in
localizing the level of lesion.
The level can also be localized by X-ray of the spine, myelography, CT
scan or MRI.
Analysis of Beevor’s sign:  It is medical sign seen in the selective weakness of the lower
abdominal muscles. Rectus abdominis is innervated by the terminal branches lower six or seven
thoracic spinal nerves via the lower intercostal and subcostal nerves. If a lesion lies above T6,
entire rectus abdominis is weak so there is no contraction of muscle. If it is at or below T10, the
upper abdominal muscular function is preserved, whereas the lower abdominal muscles are weak.
Therefore, when the head is flexed against resistance (patient supine), the intact upper abdominal
muscles pull the umbilicus upward and shift of umbilicus 3 cm when head flexed is considered
significant.Causes of Beevor's sign:
–  Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
–  Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD)
–  Adult form of acid maltase deficiency disease
–  Spinal cord injury
–  Myopathy
Difference between paraplegia in flexion and paraplegia in extension
(Table 15.52).
Q. Write a short note on paraplegia in flexion, paraplegia in extension.
Table 15.52: Difference between paraplegia in flexion and paraplegia in
extension.
Feature Paraplegia in extension Paraplegia in flexion
Definition Lower limb take an extension
attitude and extensor muscles are
spasticLower limb muscles
take an attitude of
flexion
Pathology Only pyramidal tract involved Both pyramidal and
extrapyramidal tract
involved. Occurs in
late stage of paraplegia
or progressive lesion
and spinal arc is

dominant
Evolution Early Late
Position of lower limbs Extended Flexed
Deep tendon reflexes Exaggerated Less exaggerated
Clonus Present Absent
Mass reflex Absent Present
Bladder Precipitancy Automatic bladder
Note:Pierre Marie Foix test is done by firm passive plantar flexing of the toes and foot. This will result
in spontaneous “withdrawal reflex” i.e. spontaneous flexion of the hip, knee and dorsiflexion of the
ankle if the paraplegia is passing from extension to flexion.
Flexor Spasms
After recovery from spinal shock, many types of innocuous or noxious
cutaneous or muscle stimuli to the lower limb can elicit a prolonged,
coordinated pattern of hip flexion and ankle dorsiflexion, similar to
flexion withdrawal. It is attributed to increased hyperexcitability of spinal
cord circuitry and lead to flexor spasms.Spinal cord lesions are associated with flexor spasms except for
incomplete and high spinal cord lesion that usually have dominant
extensor tone.
Acute and Subacute Spinal Cord Diseases
Spinal Cord Compression
Q. Write a short note on causes of extramedullary spinal cord
compression.
Spinal cord compression is one of the common neurological emergencies
in clinical practice.
Mechanism of damage: A space-occupying lesion within the spinal cord
may damage nerve tissue either by direct pressure or indirectly by
interfering with blood supply. Edema due to venous obstruction impairs
neuronal function, and ischemia due to arterial obstruction may causes
necrosis of the spinal cord.Consequences: During early stages, the damage is reversible but severely
damaged neurons cannot recover. Hence, it is important to diagnose and
treat early.

Various causes of spinal cord compression are listed in Box 15.23.
Box 15.23: Causes of spinal cord compression.
Vertebral (80%)
Vertebral body destruction by bone metastases, e.g. breast, prostate, bronchus, myeloma
Disk and vertebral lesions: Trauma (extradural), chronic degenerative and acute central
(intervertebral) disk prolapse
Inflammatory: Tuberculosis, Staph. aureus, Melioidosis
Meninges (intradural, extramedullary) (15%)
Tumors (e.g. meningioma, neurofibroma, ependymoma, metastasis, lymphoma, leukemia)
Inflammatory: Epidural abscess, epidural hemorrhage/hematoma
Spinal cord (intradural, intramedullary) tumors (5%)
Extramedullary, e.g. meningioma or neurofibroma, metastasis
Intramedullary, e.g. glioma or ependymoma
Symptoms and signs of spinal cord compression (Table 15.53).
Investigations
Patients with acute or subacute spinal cord syndrome should be investigated
urgently.
MRI of spine: MRI is the investigation of choice. MRI can define the
extent of compression and associated abnormality in the soft-tissue.
Plain X-rays of spine: It may show destruction of bone and soft-tissue
abnormalities.
Chest X-ray: It may show evidence of systemic disease
Myelography
CSF: If there is complete spinal block, CSF shows a normal cell count
with a raised protein causing yellow discoloration of the fluid (Froin’s
syndrome).Serum vitamin B12
Biopsy: If a secondary tumor is causing the cord compression, needle
biopsy may be establish diagnosis.
Table 15.53: Symptoms and signs of spinal cord compression.
Symptoms of spinal cord compression
Pain:  Occurs early. Localized over the spine or in a root distribution. Maybe aggravated by coughing,
sneezing or straining.

Sensory:  Occurs early. Paresthesia, numbness or cold sensations (especially in the lower limbs),
spread proximally to a level on the trunk
Motor:  Occurs late. Weakness, heaviness or stiffness of the limbs (commonly legs)
Sphincters:  Occurs late. Urgency or hesitancy of micturition, and retention of urine
Signs of spinal cord compression:  Vary according to the level of the cord compression and the
structures involved.
Cervical, above C5: Frequently life threatening
Upper motor neuron signs and sensory loss in all four limbs (quadriplegia)
Weakness of diaphragm (phrenic nerve)
Cervical C4-C5
Quadriplegia with preserved respiratory function
Cervical, C5–T1
Lower motor neuron (LMN) signs and segmental sensory loss in the arms; upper motor neuron
(UMN) signs in the legs
Weakness of respiratory (intercostal) muscle
Thoracic cord
Spastic paraplegia with a sensory level on the trunk
Weakness of legs, sacral loss of sensation and extensor plantar responses
Midline back pain is a useful localizing sign
Lumbar cord and Cauda equina
Spinal cord ends at the T12/L1 spinal level. Spinal lesions below this level can cause only lower
motor neuron signs by affecting the cauda equina
L1-L2 - cremasteric reflex is a cutaneous reflex useful in localization of lumbar cord disease
L2-L4 paralyzes flexion and abduction of the thigh, weakens leg extension at the knee, and
abolishes the patellar reflex
L5-S1 paralyze movements of the foot and ankle, flexion at the knee, and extension of the thigh,
and abolish the ankle jerk (S1).
Management
Treatment depends on the underlying lesion.
Benign tumors should be surgically excised.
Extradural compression due to malignancy has a poor prognosis. Useful function can be regained
if treatment (e.g. radiotherapy), is started within 24 hours of the onset of severe weakness or
sphincter dysfunction.Spinal cord compression due to tuberculosis may require surgical treatment and antituberculous
chemotherapy.
Traumatic lesions of the vertebral column needed treatment by neurosurgeon
Brown-Séquard Syndrome
Q. Write a short note on the causes and clinical manifestations of
Brown-Séquard syndrome.
It refers to findings seen when the damage is confined to one side (lateral

half) of the spinal cord. With compressive lesions, there is a band of pain at
the level of the lesion in the distribution of the nerve roots involved by
compression.
Causes: Due to extramedullary lesions, usually caused by penetrating (Gun
shot) or tumor.
Clinical Features
Sensory
–  Ipsilateral loss of proprioception due to posterior column involvement
–  Contralateral loss of pain and temperature due to involvement of lateral
spinothalamic tract
Motor
–  Ipsilateral spastic weakness due to descending corticospinal tract
involvement
–  LMN signs at the level of lesion.
Chronic Myelopathies
Syringomyelia
Q. Write a short essay on the pathogenesis of syringomyelia.
A syrinx is a fluid-filled cavity within the spinal cord. Syringomyelia is a
cavitary expansion of the spinal cord. Syrinxes commonly develop in
the lower cervical and high thoracic regions or in the high cervical region.
They may extend proximally to the medulla or pons (syringobulbia).Pathogenesis: More than 50% are associated with Arnold-Chiari type I
malformation characterized by herniation of cerebellar tonsils through the
foramen magnum. This abnormality at the foramen magnum probably
allows normal pulsatile CSF pressure waves to be transmitted to fragile
tissues of the cervical cord and brainstem. This results in secondary cavity
formation. There is gradually destruction of spinothalamic neurons,
anterior horn cells and lateral corticospinal tracts. It leads to progressive
myelopathy.Classic presentation  is a central cord syndrome with dissociated sensory
loss and areflexic weakness in the upper limbs.
Sensory loss: Most cases begin asymmetrically with unilateral sensory

loss. The sensory loss has a distribution that is ‘suspended’ over the nape
of the neck, shoulders, and upper arms (cape distribution) or in the hands.
Neurogenic arthropathies (Charcot joint): Most common in shoulder.
Thoracic kyphoscoliosis is common.
La Main succulente of syringomyelia (subcutaneous thickening and
swollen fingers)
Morvan’s syndrome: Progressive loss of pain sensation, ulceration, loss
of soft tissues and resorption of phalanges.
MRI scans (Fig. 15.11): Accurately identify syrinx cavities and
associated spinal cord enlargement.
Treatment is surgery: Posterior decompression of Arnold-Chiari
malformation and the coperitoneal shunt to drain syrinx cavity.
Fig. 15.11: MRI showing cervical syringomyelia.
Syringobulbia
It is characterized by dysphagia, nystagmus, pharyngeal and palatal
weakness, asymmetric weakness and atrophy of the tongue, and loss of pain,
temperature in the distribution of the trigeminal nerve (facial sensory loss
resembling in distribution a balaclava helmet), involving the outer parts of

the face but sparing the nose and mouth. This pattern of facial sensory
impairment also be known as onion peel or onion skin pattern.
Subacute Combined Degeneration (SACD) of Cord
Q. Write a short essay on etiology, clinical features/neurological signs
and management of subacute combined degeneration.
It is myelopathy that develops due to nutritional deficiency of vitamin B12
deficiency, including pernicious anemia.
This treatable myelopathy presents with paresthesia in the hand and feet,
early loss of vibration and position sensation, and a progressive spastic
and ataxic weakness.
Loss of reflexes due to a superimposed peripheral neuropathy in a patient
who also has Babinski signs is an important diagnostic clue.
The myelopathy of subacute combined degeneration tends to be diffuse
rather than focal; signs are generally symmetric and reflect predominant
involvement of the posterior and lateral tracts.Optic atrophy and irritability prominent in advanced cases.
Low vitamin B12 levels confirm the diagnosis.
MRI spinal cord: Inverted V sign or rabbit ear sign due to T2 hyper
intensity along posterolateral column of spinal cord.
Treatment  is by replacement therapy, beginning with 100 mg of intramuscular vitamin B 12 repeated
at regular intervals or by subsequent oral treatment.
Causes of posterior column disease (Box 15.24)
Q. Write a short essay on diseases affecting posterior column. Explain
clinical features of any one of them.
Refer respective diseases.
Paraplegia
Q. Write a short note on causes and differential diagnosis of spastic
paraplegia.
Paraplegia is weakness or paralysis of both lower limbs, sparing the upper

limbs.
Causes: It can occur in disorders of cerebrum, spinal cord, spinal roots,
peripheral nerves or muscles. It is usually due to disorders of spinal cord.
Spastic Paraplegia
Spasticity is due to an upper motor neuron lesion. It is usually produced to
subacute or chronic lesion. Acute lesions usually cause flaccid paralysis.
Box 15.24: Causes of posterolateral column disease.
Vitamin B 12 deficiency
AIDS
HTLV associated myelopathy
Cervical spondylosis, hypocupremia, vitamin E deficiency
Causes of spastic paraplegia (Table 15.54)
Table 15.54: Causes of spastic paraplegia (Upper motor neuron (UMN)
type lesion).
A. Gradual onset B. Sudden onset
Cerebral causes
Parasagittal meningioma
HydrocephalusThrombosis of unpaired anterior cerebral
artery or superior sagittal sinus
Spinal causes
Compressive or transverse lesion in the spinal
cord:  Cord compression
Non-compressive or longitudinal lesion  or
systemic disease of the spinal cord
Motor neuron disease (MND) e.g.
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
Multiple sclerosis, Friedreich’s ataxia
Subacute combined degeneration (i.e. from
vitamin B 12 deficiency)
Lathyrism, syringomyelia, Erb’s spastic
paraplegia, tropical spastic paraplegia
Radiation myelopathyCompressive causes
Injury to the spinal cord (fracture-dislocation
or collapse of the vertebra)
Intervertebral disc prolapse
Spinal epidural abscess or hematoma
Non-compressive causes
Acute transverse myelitis
Thrombosis of anterior spinal artery
Hematomyelia (from arteriovenous
malformation, angiomas, or endarteritis)
Cauda Equina Syndrome
The epiconus comprises the cord segment between L4 and S1, corresponding

to the T12 and L1 vertebrae. The most distal bulbous part of the spinal cord
(L1-L2) is called the conus medullaris. The conus medullaris consists of the
cord segment between S2 and S5 as well as coccygeal segments. Distal to
this end of the spinal cord is a collection of nerve roots (L2-3 onwards to
cocxygeal), which are horsetail-like in appearance called the cauda equina
(Table 15.55).
Q. Write a short note on differences between conus medullaris lesions
and cauda equina lesions.
Table 15.55: Differences between conus medullaris and cauda equina
syndromes.
Features Conus medullaris syndrome Cauda equina
syndrome
Presentation Sudden and bilateral Gradual and unilateral
Reflexes Knee jerks preserved but ankle jerks
affectedBoth knee and ankle
jerks affected
Radicular pain Less severe More severe
Low back pain More Less
Sensory symptoms and sings Numbness in symmetrical and
bilateral, sensory dissociation
occurs. Saddle anesthesia presentNumbness is
asymmetrical, may be
unilateral, no necessary
dissociation
Motor strength Typically symmetric, hyperreflexic
distal paresis of lower limbsAsymmetric areflexic
paraplegia
Impotence Frequent Less frequent
Sphincter dysfunction Overflow urinary incontinence and
fecal incontinence, tend to present
early in course of diseaseUrinary retention, tends
to present late in course
of disease
Complications of Paraplegia (Box 15.25)
Management of ParaplegiaSkin care:  Prevention of pressure sores. They develop due to loss of sensation and reduced blood
supply. Following measures will be helpful.
–  Turn the patient every 2-4 hour to avoid pressure over bony prominences.
–  Keep the skin dry and clean.
–  Specially designed mattress like water or air-cushioned bed will be useful.
–  The patient should be prevented from lying on the side of the pressure sores. Needs aseptic care
and may require skin grafting.Bladder

–  Aseptic intermittent catheterization. Indwelling catheter is not advisable as it predisposes to
infection, reduces bladder capacity and promotes calculus formation.
–  Prompt treatment of urinary infections and maintenance of adequate fluid intake
Bowel:  Laxative to prevent constipation. If fecal matter becomes hard, manual evacuation is done.
Paralysis
–  Spasticity can lead to contractures and flexor spasms. Hence, regular passive movements of the
limbs should be encouraged.
–  Posture should be such that flexion is prevented at joints.
–  Drug treatment of spasticity: Baclofen, diazepam and tizanidine. In severe spasticity, intrathecal
baclofen via a pump or sectioning of the anterior roots (rhizotomy).
Rehabilitation: Use a caliper or wheel chair and physiotherapy
Box 15.25:  Complications of paraplegia.
Pressure/bed sore
Urinary infection and renal stones
Fecal impaction with intestinal obstruction
Contracture of limbs
It may lead to death.
Spinal Pain
Q. Write a short note on different types of spinal pain.
Radicular pain:
–  It is unilateral, lancinating, dermatomal  pain often exacerbated by cough, sneeze, or Valsalva
maneuver.
–  Common with extradural growths  (e.g. neurilemmoma which is intradural extramedullary)
and rare with intramedullary lesions.
Vertebral pain
–  It is an aching pain localized to the point of the spine involved  in the compressive process
and often accompanied by point tenderness.
–  Common with neoplastic or inflammatory extradural lesions and infrequent with
intramedullary or intradural- extramedullary lesions.
Funicular (central) pain
–  It is deep, ill-defined painful dysesthesia , usually distant from the affected spinal cord level
(and therefore of poor localizing value), probably related to dysfunction of the spinothalamic
tract or posterior columns.
–  It is common with intramedullary lesions and very unusual with extradural lesions.
With dysfunction of the posterior columns in the cervical region, neck flexion may elicit a sudden
'electric-like' sensation down the back or into the arms (Lhermitte’s sign or Barber’s chair
syndrome).
More reliable band-like radicular pain or segmental paresthesia may occur at the level of the lesion
and may be of localizing value for the appropriate spinal level.

Causes of Flaccid Paraplegia (LMN type)
UMN lesion in shock stage: i.e. sudden onset or history of long duration as in extradural
transverse myelitis and spinal injury
Lesion involving anterior horn cells
–  Acute anterior poliomyelitis
–  Progressive muscular atrophy (a variety of motor neuron disease)
Diseases affecting nerve root:  tabes dorsalis, radicullitis, GB syndrome
Diseases affecting peripheral nerves
–  Acute infective polyneuropathy (GB syndrome)
–  High cauda equina syndrome
–  Disease of peripheral nerves involving both the lower limbs
–  Lumbar plexus injury (psoas abscess or hematoma)Diseases affecting myoneural junction
–  Myasthenia gravis, Lambert-Eaton syndrome
–  Periodic paralysis due to hypo- or hyperkalemia
Diseases affecting muscles:  Myopathy.
Table 15.56: Causes of quadriplegia.
UMN causes LMN causes
Cerebral palsy
Bilateral brainstem lesion (glioma)
Craniovertebral anomaly
High cervical cord compression
Multiple sclerosis
Motor neuron diseaseAcute anterior poliomyelitis
GB syndrome
Peripheral neuropathy
Myopathy or polymyositis
Myasthenia gravis and crisis
Periodic paralysis
Snake bite, organophosphorous poisoning, etc.
Box 15.26: Causes of pure motor paraplegia.
Hereditary spastic paraplegia
Lathyrism
GB syndrome
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (MND)
Fluorosis
Erb’s spastic paraplegia (syphilitic)
Causes of Pure Motor Paraplegia (Box 15.26)
Causes of Quadriplegia (Table 15.56)
Weakness of all the 4 limbs can occur in the lesions from cortex to C5 level

of spinal cord and various lower motor neuron (LMN) lesion affecting
anterior horn cells, roots, peripheral nerve, neuromuscular junction and
muscles.
Craniovertebral Junction (CVJ) Anomalies
Q. Discuss craniovertebral junction anomalies.
Abnormal general physical appearance: Head may be cocked to one
side, short neck and scoliosis.
Neurological: Most common posterior occipital headache that worsens
with neck flexion or extension. Others include myelopathy and brainstem
and lower cranial nerve deficits.Vascular symptoms: Intermittent attacks of altered consciousness,
confusion, transient loss of visual fields and vertigo.
Classification of craniovertebral junction anomalies (Table 15.57).
Hemiplegia
Q. Discuss hemiplegia in an elderly male. Give the differential diagnosis,
investigations and its treatment.
Hemiplegia is paralysis of one side of the body. Hemiparesis is the weakness
of one side of body.
For differential diagnosis, investigations and its treatment, refer individual
diseases.
Table 15.57: Craniovertebral junction anomalies.
Skeletal anomalies Neuraxial anomalies
Platybasia
Basilar invagination (10/20)
Klippel-Feil anomaly
Occipitalization of atlas
Atlanto-axial dislocationArnold-Chiari malformation
Dandy-Walker syndrome
Occipitocervical myelomeningocele
Posterior fossa cysts
Causes of Hemiplegia (Table 15.58)
Table 15.58: Causes of hemiplegia.
Onset Cause

Acute
Stroke Cerebral infarct (thrombotic/embolic-most
common cause in elderly), intracerebral
hemorrhage (hypertensive), subarachnoid
hemorrhage (SAH) with intracerebral
hemorrhageTrauma Hematoma (epidural or subdural), cerebral
contusion
Others
Subacute
ChronicMeningitis, encephalitis, postseizure (Todd’s
paralysis)
Cerebral metastasis, subdural hematoma,
granulomas (tuberculosis-younger age, fungal),
pyogenic abscesses (metastatic infection, post-
traumatic), rapidly growing malignant neoplasms
(e.g. glioblastoma), hypoglycemia, multiple
sclerosis
Slow growing neoplasms
Small Muscle Wasting of the Hand (Fig. 15.12)
Q. Write a short note on wasting of small muscles of hand.
Causes of Small Muscle Wasting of the Hand (Table 15.59)
Table 15.59: Causes of small muscle wasting of the hand.
Lesions of vertebra:  Craniovertebral anomalies, vertebral metastasis
Lesions of spinal cord:  Syringomyelia, cord compression by tumor
Lesion of anterior horn cell:  Motor neuron disease (MND), poliomyelitis
Lesions of spinal root:  Cervical cord tumor, pancoast tumor, cervical disk prolapse
Lesion of brachial plexus: Cervical rib
Lesions of peripheral nerve:  Hansen’s disease, carpal tunnel syndrome, lead poisoning
Diseases of muscle:  Distal muscular dystrophy, polymyositis
Disuse atrophy: Therapeutic immobilization (e.g. fracture), rheumatoid arthritis, post-paralytic
(hemiplegia)

Fig. 15.12:  Wasting of small muscles of hand.
MOTOR NEURON DISEASES
Q. Write a short essay/note on motor neuron disease.
Motor neuron disease (MND) is a devastating, progressive, heterogeneous
group  of neurodegenerative condition caused by loss of upper and lower
motor neurons in the spinal cord, cranial nerve nuclei and motor cortex.
There is no involvement of sensory or other nonmotor tracts. It causes
progressive weakness and eventually death (usually as a result of respiratory
failure or aspiration). Various types of motor neuron disease are listed in
Table 15.60.
Clinical Features
Q. Write short answer on three neurological signs of upper and lower
motor neuron disease.
There are four main clinical patterns. There is no involvement of sensory
system. Hence, sensory symptoms (e.g. numbness, tingling and pain) are not
present.
1. Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis

Q. Write a short essay/note on amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Named by Jean Martin Charcot in 19th century. Also known as Lou
Gehrig’s disease after the famous baseball player diagnosed of ALS in
1930.
Degeneration of the motor neuron (UMN and LMN) in motor cortex,
brainstem and spinal cord.
–  Amyotrophy: Atrophy of muscle fibers consequent to denervation
due to anterior horn cell degeneration
–  Lateral sclerosis: Sclerosis of the anterior and lateral corticospinal
tracts which are replaced by progressive gliosis.
Epidemiology: Incidence is 1 to 2.7/lakh, prevalence is 2.7 to 7.4/lakh
Sex predisposition: M > F (2:1 to 7:1), (F > M in bulbar onset ALS).
Age: Risk increases with age up to 74 years. Peak onset-sixth to
seventh decade (one to two decades earlier in India).
Prognosis: 20% of patients survive for 5 years and 10% survive for 10
years.
Etiopathogenesis
Undetermined etiology. Complex genetic and environmental
interaction for neuronal degeneration.
MND is usually (90–95%) sporadic.
Molecular pathway: Pathological hallmarks observed in axons of
MND is the ubiquitinated cytoplasmic inclusions containing the RNA
processing proteins TDP43 and FUS. This indicates that protein
aggregation may be involved in its pathogenesis similar to other
neurodegenerative disorders. Other mechanism involved in
pathogenesis may be oxidative neuronal damage, glutamate mediated
excitotoxicity, mitochondrial dysfunction and impaired axonal
transport.
Clinical presentationTypical/spinal form of ALS constitutes 2/3rd of cases. They present
with simultaneous involvement of upper and lower motor neurons.
Usually in one limb, spreading gradually. Often present with focal
motor weakness of distal or proximal upper or lower limbs. The focal
motor weakness spreads to contiguous muscles in the same region

before involvement of another region. Then involves other limbs and
trunk muscles.
Pseudoneurotic pattern: Resembles neuropathy, i.e. involvement of
muscles in the apparent distribution of a peripheral nerve.
Fasciculations are present on wasted muscles.Monomelic: Involvement of one limb (as wasted leg syndrome,
monomelic amyotrophy, Chopras MND)
Pseudopolyneuritic: Weakness in the both distal lower limbs.
Mill’s hemiplegic variant: Weakness restricted to one half of the body.
Madras MND: Associated sensorineural deafness, bifacial and bulbar
weakness, bilateral optic atrophy in age <15 years.
2. Bulbar/Pseudobulbar Palsy (20%)
Initially involves the lower cranial nerve nuclei and their supranuclear
connections.
Presents with weakness of respiratory group of muscles (e.g.
dysarthria, dysphagia, nasal regurgitation of fluids and choking).
About 10% present with bilateral upper limb weakness and wasting,
flail arm of flail person in barrel syndrome.
Head drop
Wasting and fasciculations of tongue seen almost in all patients (Fig.
15.13).
Cramps in the thighs, abdomen, back or even tongue.
Nonmotor symptoms: Sleep disturbance, subtle cognitive dysfunction
and mood changes.
Rarely involved: Bladder, bowels, autonomic, extraocular movements
and sensory.
3. Progressive muscular atrophy
It presents as a pure lower motor neuron disease with symptoms of
weakness, muscle wasting and fasciculation.
Usually starts in one limb and gradually spreading to involve other
adjacent spinal segments.
4. Primary lateral sclerosis (rare 1–2%)

The least common form of MND. It involves upper motor neurons and
presents with a slowly progressive tetraparesis and pseudobulbar palsy.
Table 15.60: Various types of motor neuron disease.
Subset of motor neurons involved Clinical syndromes
Upper motor neuron (UMN)+ lower motor
neuron (LMN)Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)
Upper motor neuron (UMN) Pseudobulbar palsy
Primary lateral sclerosis
Familial spastic paraplegia
Lower motor neuron (LMN) Bulbar palsy
Spinomuscular atrophy
Fig. 15.13: Tongue wasting with atrophy
Diagnosis of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis
No biological marker identified so far.
Diagnosis is largely by series of clinical and neurological examinations.
MRI: Coronal T2WI shows bilateral symmetrical hyperintensity along
corticospinal tract (thin white arrows) forming a ‘wine glass appearance‘
or ‘garland sign’.
Myelogram of cervical spine (an X-ray analysis): Detects lesions in
selected area of the spinal cord.

Muscle and/or nerve biopsy.
Electromyography (EMG) and nerve conduction velocity (NCV) to
measure muscle response to nervous stimulation.
–  Split hand phenomenon: In cases of severe changes in the thenar
eminence and the relative sparing of hypothenar eminence, observed
on the EMG study.
Differential Diagnosis of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis
As amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in untreatable, all secondary causes should
be excluded (Table 15.61).
Table 15.61: Differential diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Other motor neuron diseases:  Primary lateral
sclerosis (UMN only), progressive muscular
atrophy (LMN only), progressive bulbar palsy
Structural lesions: Cervical spondylosis,
parasagittal/foramen magnum tumor, spinal cord
AV malformation
Neuropathies:  Chronic inflammatory
demyelinating polyneuropathy ( CIDP)
Myopathies:  Polymyositis, inclusion body
myositis
Neuromuscular junction disorder: Myasthenia
gravisNeurodegenerative diseases:  Parkinson’s,
progressive supranuclear palsy, multiple sclerosis
Malignancy: Primary/metastasis to CNS, motor
neuron syndromes with multiple myeloma,
lymphoma, lung, breast
Toxic exposure:  Alcohol, heavy metals
Endocrine:  Hyperthyroidism,
hyperparathyroidism
Infectious:  HIV, CMV
Treatment
No treatment to arrest degeneration.
Drug TherapyRiluzole:  Dose 100 mg/day. It is a sodium channel blocker that reduces glutamate-induced
excitotoxicity. Adverse drug reactions include asthenia, nausea, alterations in liver function tests,
headache, abdominal pain, and tachycardia.
Trial drugs:  IGF-1, ceftriaxone, edaravone, tamoxifen.
Spasticity
–  Baclofen 5–10 mg twice daily to three times daily.
–  Tizanidine in the dose of 2–4 mg by mouth twice daily up to a total dose of 24 mg daily.
–  Memantine starting at 5 mg daily, increasing by 5 mg a week to a maximum of 20 mg twice a
day.
–  Tetrazepam 50 mg at bedtime, increasing by 25 mg a day to a maximum dose of 150 mg taken
two to three times a day.
Rehabilitation
Foot drop splint
Finger extension splint

Respiratory support: Tracheostomy, positive pressure ventilation, cough assisted device.
Bulbar involvement: Gastrostomy (for feeding), speech therapy.
Physiotherapy, speech and occupational therapy
Prognosis
Patient usually does not survive for more than three years, though rarely
patients may survive for a decade or longer.
Nerve Supply of Urinary Bladder (Fig. 15.14)
Q. Write a short note on nerve supply of urinary bladder.
Fig. 15.14:  Nerve supply of urinary bladder
.
Neurogenic Bladder

Q. Write a short note on neurogenic bladder.
Dysfunction of urinary bladder due to neurological disorders is known as
neurogenic bladder.
Various causes of neurogenic bladder are listed in Table 15.62.
Table 15.62: Various causes of neurogenic bladder.
Type Uninhibited
bladder/detrusor
hyperreflexiaAutomatic
bladder/Detrusor
sphincteric
dyssynergiaAutonomous
bladder/Detrusor
areflexiaSensory
atonic
bladderMotor atonic
bladd er
Site of lesion Suprapontine
neurologic
disorder, mostly
frontal lobeUMN disorder of
the suprasacral
spinal cordLMN lesion at
the sacral cordLMN lesion- peripheral nerve
Causes Frontal tumors,
parasagittal
meningioma,
ACA aneurysm,
NPHSpine cord
trauma,
compressive
myelopathy,
myelitisCauda equina
syndrome, conus
medullaris
lesion, spinal
shockDiabetes
mellitus,
amyloidosis
tabes
dorsalisLumbosacral
menin gomyelocele,
tether ed cord
syndr ome, lumbar
canal stenosis
Bladder sensation Preserved Interrupted Absent Absent Intact
Size of bladder Normal Small Large Large Large
Ability to initiate
voidingPresent Absent Absent Present Lost
Type of
incontinenceUrge social
disinhibitionUrge Overflow Overflow Overflow
Residual urine Nil Small Large amount Large Large
Anal sphincter tone Normal Normal Lost Normal Lost
Perianal sensation Normal Normal Absent Absent Preser ved
Bulbocavernous/anal
reflexNormal Normal Absent Absent Preserved
Treatment Anticholinergic
medicationSelf-intermittent
catheterizationContinuous catheterization
Transverse Myelitis
Q. Write a short note on transverse myelitis.
Transverse myelitis (TM) is an acute, usually monophasic, demyelinating
inflammatory disorder affecting the spinal cord. It is characterized by acute or
subacute motor, sensory and autonomic (bladder, bowel and sexual) spinal
cord dysfunction.

Myelitis refers to inflammation of the spinal cord and transverse signifies
the involvement across one spinal cord level.
Usually 1 or 2 spinal segments are affected with part or all of the cord area
at that level involved.
Varying degree of motor, sensory and autonomic disturbances are
produced.
Causes of Transverse Myelitis (Table 15.63)
Q. Write a short note on clinical features of transverse myelitis.
It is usually thought to be postinfectious in origin and up to half of idiopathic
cases will have a preceding respiratory or gastrointestinal illness. It is one of
cause of a noncompressive spinal cord syndrome in which immune-mediated
process may be responsible for neural injury of the spinal cord.
Clinical FeaturesAge: It can occur at any age.
Symptoms develop rapidly over several hours to several weeks which
may worsen maximally within 24 hours.
Symptoms
Lower limb weakness.
Sensory: Sensation is diminished or absent below the level of involved
spinal cord. Few patients experience tingling or numbness in the legs
(subacute paraparesis). Pain and temperature sensation are diminished.Bladder and bowel  dysfunction: It results in disturbed sphincter control.
Lhermitte’s sign: It is the radiation of paresthesias down the spine or limbs
with neck flexion. It may be positive. It suggests intrinsic cervical spinal
cord lesion.
Diagnosis
First exclude any mass-occupying lesion  compressing the spinal cord.
Early surgical decompression results in complete recovery. MRI and CSF
analysis may be useful in the diagnosis.
MRI: MRI is sensitive and shows spinal cord swelling and edema with
gadolinium enhancing lesions (single or multiple) at the affected level(s).

MRI is also useful for excluding other treatable causes of spinal cord
dysfunction (e.g. spinal cord compression).
CSF examination: Shows cellular pleocytosis (usually
monocytes/lymphocytes) often with polymorphs at the onset. Protein is
slightly increased and IgG index is elevated. IgG index is a measure of
intrathecal synthesis of immunoglobulin (Ig) and is calculated using the
following formula: (CSF IgG/serum IgG)/(CSF albumin/serum albumin).
Normal value is = 0.85 oligoclonal bands are usually absent.Tests for exclusion of other treatable causes: These include chest X-ray,
tuberculin test, ESR, serologic tests (e.g. for mycoplasma, Lyme disease
and HIV), vitamin B12 and folate levels, antinuclear antibodies and CSF
and blood for VDRL (Venereal Diseases Research Laboratory) tests.
TreatmentTreat the underlying cause or associated disorder. Otherwise it is mainly supportive.
High dose corticosteroids, intravenous immunoglobulin and plasmapheresis are used in the
treatment of idiopathic cases.
For severe, refractory cases:  Course of azathioprine, methotrexate, mycophenolate, or oral
cyclophosphamide
Outcome is variable and evolves over days. There may be no recovery. If
present it may be partial or complete (often partial) and follows over weeks
or months (1–3 months).
Table 15.63: Causes of transverse myelitis.
Disease Examples
Bacterial infections Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Lyme borreliosis,
syphilis (tabes dorsalis), tuberculosis
Viral infections Herpes simplex, herpes zoster, cytomegalovirus,
Epstein-Barr virus, enteroviruses (poliomyelitis,
Coxsackie virus, echovirus), human T-cell,
leukemia virus, human immunodeficiency virus,
influenza, rabies
Postvaccination Rabies, cowpox
Autoimmune diseases SLE, Sjögren’s syndrome, sarcoidosis, multiple
sclerosis, neuromyelitis optica
Paraneoplastic syndromes
Vascular Thrombosis of spinal arteries, vasculitis
secondary to heroin abuse, spinal arteriovenous

malformation (AVM)

DISEASES OF THE PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Introduction
Diseases of the peripheral nervous system are common. They may affect the
motor, sensory or autonomic components, either in isolation or combination.
Cranial nerves 3–12 share the same tissue characteristics as peripheral nerves
and are prone to the same range of diseases.Site of lesion: It may be (1) dorsal or ventral nerve root (radiculopathy),
(2) brachial/lumbosacral nerve plexus (plexopathy) or (3) cranial nerves
(except I, II) other sensory, motor, autonomic or mixed nerves
(neuropathy). Neuropathy is a pathological process affecting a peripheral
nerve or nerves. May be axonal, demyelinating or neoronopathy.
Classification
Peripheral nerve disorders can be broadly classified into three categories.1. Mononeuropathy simplex: Signifies involvement of a single peripheral
nerve (e.g. median nerve in carpal tunnel syndrome).
2. Mononeuropathy multiplex (now called multiple mononeuropathies):
Simultaneous or sequential several individual nerves involvement usually
at random and noncontiguous (e.g. vasculitis, HIV, leprosy).3. Polyneuropathy: Function of numerous peripheral nerves is affected at
the same time. This leads to a predominantly diffuse, distal and symmetric
deficit usually commencing peripherally. It may be acute, chronic, static,
progressive, relapsing or towards recovery. They are motor, sensory,
sensorimotor and autonomic. They are classified into demyelinating and
axonal types, depending on principal predominant pathological process.
Typically, there is widespread loss of tendon reflexes with distal weakness
and distal sensory loss.
Damage to peripheral nerve may affect the nerve cell body (axon) or the
myelin sheath (Schwann cell), leading to axonal or demyelinating
neuropathies.
Clinical FeaturesMotor nerve involvement: It produces features of a lower motor neuron
lesion.

Sensory nerve involvement: It features depend on the type of sensory
nerve involved; small-fiber neuropathies are usually painful, present with
paresthesias. Large fiber neuropathies cause sensory ataxia.
Autonomic involvement: may cause postural hypotension, disturbance of
sweating, cardiac rhythm, and gastrointestinal, bladder and sexual
functions. Commonly autonomic involvement complicates other
neuropathies.
Diagnosis: By clinical pattern, nerve conduction/EMG, nerve biopsy, usually
sural or radial, and detection of systemic or genetic disease.
Mononeuropathies
Focal involvement of a single nerve and implies a local process and may be
due to direct trauma, compression or entrapment, leprosy, vascular lesions,
neoplastic compression or infiltration, etc.
Peripheral Nerve Compression and EntrapmentNerves are susceptible to mechanical compression at a certain locations
(e.g. ulnar nerve at the elbow, common peroneal nerve at the head of the
fibula, radial nerve at spiral groove of humerus, lateral cutaneous nerve of
thigh at inguinal ligament, posterior tibial at tarsal tunnel). Focal
compression or entrapment is the common cause of a mononeuropathy.Entrapment occurs in relatively tight anatomical passages (e.g. the carpal
tunnel). At the site of compression, focal demyelination and mild
degeneration of distal axonal develops.Predisposing causes for entrapment neuropathies include diabetes, excess
alcohol or toxins, or genetic syndromes. These are recognized mainly by
clinical features and diagnosis is confirmed by nerve conduction studies.Usually recover once the primary cause is removed, either by avoiding the
precipitation of activity or by surgical decompression.
Carpal Tunnel Syndrome (CTS)
Q. Write a short essay/note on carpal tunnel syndrome and its causes.
Common mononeuropathy due to entrapment of median nerve at the
wrist.
CTS is usually not associated with any underlying disease. However, may
be seen in: hypothyroidism, 3rd trimester of pregnancy, rheumatoid

disease, amyloidosis in dialysis patients and acromegaly.
Clinical features: Nocturnal pain, paresthesia/tingling on palmar
aspect of hand and/or forearm and fingers. It is usually poorly localized
and not confined to the anatomical sensory territory of the nerve. At later
stages, weakness and wasting of thenar muscles develop.Tinel’s sign  (elicited by tapping the flexor aspect of the wrist: this causes
tingling and pain) and Phalen’s test positive. (In Phalen’s, the symptoms
are reproduced on passive maximal flexion of wrist).
Treatment: Wrist splint at night or a local steroid injection  in mild
cases. In pregnancy CTS is self-limiting and subsides during postpartum.
Definitive treatment is surgical decompression  of the carpal tunnel.
Mononeuropathy Multiplex
Simultaneous/sequential damage to multiple noncontiguous nerves
(peripheral or cranial nerves).
Causes: Ischemia caused by vasculitis (e.g. Churg–Strauss),
microangiopathy in diabetes mellitus. Less common causes include HIV
and hepatitis C infection, granulomatous, amyloidosis, leukemic, or
neoplastic infiltration, neurofibromatosis, Hansen’s disease (leprosy),
toxins, paraneoplastic and sarcoidosis.Clinical features: Symptoms will depend on the specific nerves involved.
Several nerves may be affected sequentially or simultaneously, e.g. ulnar,
median, radial and lateral popliteal nerves. When multifocal neuropathy is
symmetrical, it is difficulty distinguishing it from polyneuropathy.Treatment: Glucocorticoids, Cytotoxic agents.
Polyneuropathies (Peripheral Neuropathy)
Q. Write a short essay/note on peripheral neuropathy and its
causes/etiology.
Polyneuropathy is characterized by a ‘length dependent’ pattern, occurring
first in the longest peripheral nerves and affecting the distal lower limbs
before the upper limbs. Sensory symptoms and signs occur in an
ascending ‘glove and stocking’ pattern. Types of peripheral neuropathy
are presented in Figure 15.15.
Causes: Many diseases can produce polyneuropathy (Box 15.27). However,
the etiology is unknown in about 50% of cases.

Fig. 15.15:  Type of polyneuropathy.
Common causes of axonal and demyelinating chronic polyneuropathies are
mentioned in Table 15.64.
Box 15.27: Causes of polyneuropathy.
Vitamin deficiencies:  Thiamine, pyridoxine, vitamin B 12, vitamin E
Therapeutic drugs:  Amiodarone, antibiotics (dapsone, isoniazid, metronidazole, ethambutol),
antiretroviral, chemotherapy (cisplatin, vincristine, thalidomide), phenytoin
Toxins:  Alcohol, nitrous oxide (recreational use)
Infections:  HIV, leprosy
Inflammatory:  Guillain-Barré syndrome, vasculitis (e.g. polyarteritis nodosa, granulomatosis with
polyangiitis, SLE), paraneoplastic (antibody-mediated)
Systemic diseases:  Diabetes, renal failure
Malignancy:  Infiltration
Genetic conditions: Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT), familial amyloid polyneuropathy,
hereditary neuralgic amyotrophy
Others:  Paraproteinemias, amyloidosis

Table 15.64: Common causes of axonal and demyelinating chronic
polyneuropathies.
Axonal Demyelinating
Diabetes mellitus
Alcohol
Uremia
Cirrhosis
Amyloid
Myxedema, acromegaly
Paraneoplastic
Deficiency states: Thiamine,
pyridoxine, vitamin B 12,
vitamin E
Hereditary
Infection
IdiopathicDrugs and toxins: Amiodarone,
antibiotics (dapsone, isoniazid,
metronidazole, ethambutol),
antiretrovirals, chemotherapy
(cisplatin, vincristine,
thalidomide), phenytoinChronic inflammatory
demyelinating
polyradiculoneuropathyMultifocal motor
neuropathy
Paraprotein-associated
demyelinating
neuropathyCharcot-Marie-Tooth
disease type I and type
X
Q. What are causes of peripheral nerve thickening?
Causes of peripheral nerve thickening (Table 15.65).
Table 15.65: Causes of peripheral nerve thickening.
Leprosy
Chronic inflammatory
demyelinating polyneuropathy
(CIDP)AmyloidosisCharcot-Marie-Tooth
disease
Neurofibromatosis
Diabetes
AcromegalyRefsum disease
Idiopathic
Dejerine-Sottas disease
Relapsing GBS
Types and Causes of Neuropathy (Box 15.28)
Box 15.28: Types and causes of neuropathy.
Small fibersensory neuropathy (painful neuropathy and dissociated sensory loss):  Hereditary
sensory neuropathies (early), lepromatous leprosy, diabetes, amyloidosis, Tangiers disease, Fabry’s
disease, HIV and antiretroviral therapy neuropathy
Large-fiber sensory neuropathy(ataxic neuropathy):  Sjogren’s syndrome, vitamin B 12
neuropathy, cisplatin neuropathy, pyridoxine toxicity, Friedreich’s ataxia, tabes dorsalis.
Small and large fiber neuropathy (global sensory loss):  Carcinomatous sensory neuropathy,
hereditary sensory neuropathies (late), diabetic sensory neuropathy (late)
Motor predominant neuropathies:  Immune mediated-GB syndrome relapsing, heritable motor-
sensory neuropathies, acute intermittent porphyria, diphtheritic neuropathy, lead neuropathy,
diabetic lumbosacral plexus neuropathy (diabetic amyotrophy)

Autonomic neuropathies
–  Acute: GBS, botulism, porphyria
–  Chronic: Amyloid, diabetes, Sjogren’s
Approach to a Patient with Neuropathy (Box 15.29)
Investigation of Peripheral Neuropathy (Table 15.66)
Table 15.66: Investigation of peripheral neuropathy.
Routine tests Special tests
Blood
Complete blood count and peripheral smear
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
C-reactive protein
Biochemical tests
Fasting blood glucose, LDH
Serum protein electrophoresis
Vitamin B 12, folate
Renal function tests, liver function tests
Serology
ANA, ANCA, HIV testing
Others
Chest X-ray, USG abdomenNerve conduction studies
Vitamins E and A
Nerve biopsy
CSF examination
Serum ACE (Angiotensin converting enzyme)
Serum amyloid
Genetic testing
Treatment
Depends on the underlying cause.
Symptomatic treatment (more details refer diabetic neuropathy on pages 108-10).
Paresthesia:  Carbamazepine (300–1200 mg/day), amitriptyline (25–50 mg/day) or aspirin (350–
1200 mg/day) pregabalin, gabapentin, duloxetine.
Weakness:  Physiotherapy
Box 15.29: Approach to a patient with neuropathy.
Examine:  Skin, hair, nails and look for 6Ds
Distribution of the deficits
Duration
Deficits (which fibers are involved?)
Disease pathology (axonal or demyelinating or mixed)
Developmental or inherited neuropathy
Drug/toxin exposure

Guillain-Barré Syndrome and other Immune-mediated
Neuropathies
Q. Write a short essay/note on Guillain-Barré syndrome (GB syndrome)
and diagnostic criteria for GBS.
Guillain-Barré syndrome (GBS) is a heterogeneous group of immune-
mediated conditions.
GBS is the most common acute, severe fulminant
polyradiculopathy/polyneuropathy.
Usually demyelinating or rarely axonal.
Often postinfectious, postvaccinal basis
Monophasic does not recur.
Subtypes of GBS (Table 15.67)
Q. What are the variants of GB syndrome?
Etiology
Antecedent causes
Majority of patients (70%) have preceding acute, influenza-like illness or
GI infection. Infections preceding Guillain-Barré syndrome may be due to
Campylobacter jejuni , cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, herpes virus,
CMV and Mycoplasma pneumoniae, or prior recent vaccination (e.g. for
swine flu, influenza rabies (old types).Frequently develop in patients with lymphoma, HIV seropositive, and
SLE.
Immunopathogenesis
Guillain-Barré syndrome is an acute-onset immune-mediated
demyelinating neuropathy. Autoimmune basis for AIDP (GBS) and
other subtypes. Both cellular and humoral immune mechanism causes
damage. Immune response to self-antigen, infection (mentioned above
under ‘Antecedent causes’), or vaccine induce antibody responses.
Molecular mimicry, i.e. sharing of homologous epitopes between
microorganism liposaccharides and nerve gangliosides (e.g. GM1),
misdirect the antibodies against host peripheral nerves.

Antiganglioside antibodies mostly to GM1 common in GBS (20-50%) and
anti-GQ1b IgG antibodies seen in MFS (>90%).
Clinical Features
Hallmark is an acute/rapid onset of paralysis (predominantly motor
paralysis with/without sensory) evolving over days or weeks with loss o f
deep tendon reflexes/jerk (areflexia).
Motor paralysis predominant. Weakness beginning in the distal limbs
(from lower to upper limbs) that rapidly ascends to affect proximal muscle
function (‘ascending paralysis’). It is more marked in legs than arms and
proximally than distally. Pain in the low back, neck, and shoulder, in 50%
and is often occur early. The weakness progresses proximally over few
days to a maximum of 4 weeks.Sensory involvement is minimal  and may precede muscle weakness. It
presents as distal paresthesia or loss of pain sensation.
Facial and respiratory muscle develops in 20 to 30% of cases requiring
ventilatory support.
No fever or constitutional symptoms at the onset of weakness.
Bladder dysfunction in late and severe cases.
Clinical worsening in 4 weeks reaching a plateau and no further
progression.
Autonomic disturbances common like fluctuation of BP, postural
hypotension, cardiac dysrhythmias.
Pain-common symptom acute/deep aching pain in weak muscles. It is self-
limited.
Physical examination shows diffuse weakness with loss of reflexes.
Miller-Fisher syndrome: It presents with ophthalmoplegia, ataxia and
areflexia. Often preceded by diarrhea due to Campylobacter jejuni
infection. Bickerstaff’s brainstem encephalitis (BBE) is characterized by
alteration in consciousness, paradoxical hyperreflexia, ataxia, and
ophthalmoparesis.
Asbury & Cornblath criteria for Guillain-Barré syndrome is presented in
Table 15.68.
Table 15.67: Variants of GB syndrome.

Common variants Less common variants
Acute motor and sensory axonal neuropathy
(AMSAN)
Acute motor axonal neuropathy (AMAN)
Miller-Fisher syndrome (MFS)
Pure motor variants
Pure sensory variants
Pure dysautonomia variant
Pharyngeal-cervical-brachial variant
Paraparetic variant (Ropper variant).Acral paresthesias with diminished reflexes in
either arms or legs.
Facial diplegia or abducens palsies with distal
paresthesias
Isolated postinfectious ophthalmoplegia
Bilateral foot-drop with upper limb
paresthesias
Acute ataxia without ophthalmoplegia
Bickerstaff’s brainstem encephalitis (BBE)
Investigations/Diagnosis
CSF findings: Develop after 1 week of illness:
–  Raised protein (100–1000 mg/dL), normal sugar, little or no
pleocytosis. Cell count generally <10 cells/mm 3; rarely may be up to
50 cells/mm 3, but never above that. This is called as albumin-
cytological dissociation.
–  CSF pleocytosis (up to 50 cells) is common in patients who have GBS
and concurrent HIV infection.
Electrodiagnostic study: Nerve conduction studies:
–  In mild/early stage: Normal
–  In demyelination: Prolonged distal latencies, slow conduction, velocity,
conduction block, prolonged F wave latencies. Absent H-reflex.
–  In primary axonal: Reduced amplitude of compound action potential
without slow conduction.
Antibodies:
–  Antibodies against GQ1b, a ganglioside component of nerve are found
in about 25%, usually the motor axonal form.
–  Miller–Fisher syndrome: Antibodies against GQ1b (ganglioside) have
90% sensitivity.
Differential Diagnosis
Exclusion of other causes of an acute neuromuscular paralysis: For example, poliomyelitis, botulism,
diphtheria, localized spinal cord syndromes or myasthenia gravis, vasculitis, toxins
(organophosphates, lead), diphtheria, porphyria, spinal cord or cauda equina syndrome.
Q. Write a short essay/note on principles of management of Guillain-

Barré syndrome.
Treatment
Early treatment, each day counts, >2 weeks of 1st motor symptoms immunotherapy not effective.
Initiative with high dose IV immunoglobulin/plasmapheresis/combination.
Intravenous immunoglobulin  IVIg administration has fewer side effects (0.4 g/kg daily infusion)
for 5 days. GBS autoantibodies are neutralized by antibodies in IVI g. Patients should be screened
for IgA deficiency because severe allergic reactions due to IgG antibodies may develop in patient
with congenital IgA deficiency.
Plasma exchange:  50 mL/kg, on 5 separate occasions over 1–2 weeks.
Glucocorticoid no role.
Full recovery in 55–69% by 1 year.
Worsening case:  Monitoring in intensive care unit blood pressure, cardiac and nutrition.
Maintenance of airway and breathing. Ventilatory support may be needed.
Supportive measures:  Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) prophylaxis, tracheostomy, chest
physiotherapy, skincare, bed sore, joint physiotherapy daily reassurance
Table 15.68: Asbury & Cornblath Criteria for Guillain-Barré syndrome
(GBS).
Required features
Progressive weakness in both arms and legs
Areflexia (or hyporeflexia).
Features supportive of diagnosis
Progression of symptoms over days to 4 weeks
Relative symmetry
Mild sensory signs or symptoms
Cranial nerve involvement, especially bilateral facial weakness
Recovery beginning 2 to 4 weeks after progression ceases
Autonomic dysfunction
Absence of fever at onset
Typical CSF (albuminocytologic dissociation)
EMG/nerve conduction studies (characteristic signs of a demyelinating process in the peripheral
nerves)
Features casting doubt on the diagnosis
Asymmetrical weakness
Persistent bladder and bowel dysfunction
Bladder or bowel dysfunction at onset
>50 mononuclear leukocytes/mm 3 or presence of polymorphonuclear leukocytes in CSF
Distinct sensory level
Features that rule out the diagnosis
Hexacarbon abuse

Abnormal porphyrin metabolism
Recent diphtheria infection
Lead intoxication
Other similar conditions: poliomyelitis, botulism, hysterical paralysis, toxic neuropathy.
Plasma Exchange (Plasmapheresis)
Q. Write a short note on plasma exchange (PE) therapy.
Plasma exchange (also called plasmapheresis): Plasmapheresis involves the
removal of small amounts of plasma (less than 15% of the patient’s total
blood volume). It can reduce the amount of abnormal protein in the blood.
Indications for plasma exchange (PE) therapy is listed in Box 15.30.
Box 15.30: Indications for plasma exchange (PE) therapy.
Glomerulonephritis-anti-GBM disease
Guillain-Barré syndrome
Myasthenia gravis
Autoimmune encephalitis
Prerenal transplant
Systemic vasculitis not responding adequately to immunosuppressive therapy
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
NEUROMUSCULAR JUNCTION DISORDERS
Myasthenia Gravis
Q. Discuss the etiology, clinical features, investigations, diagnosis, and
management/treatment of myasthenia gravis.
Myasthenia gravis (MG) is an autoimmune neuromuscular junction
disorder.
Weakness and fatigue of skeletal (preferentially ocular, facial and bulbar)
muscles.
Pathophysiology (Fig. 15.16)
Pathogenesis of Myasthenia Gravis
Myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune disease.
Antibodies:

–  AntiAChR antibodies: It is detected in about 80 to 85% of patients.
–  Anti-MuSK antibodies: A second group of autoantibodies against
muscle specific receptor tyrosine kinase (anti-MuSK antibodies) have
been found in anti-AChR antibody negative (about 15–20%) patients.
Changes in thymus: Thymus is abnormal in ~75% of patients with MG.
In ~65% the thymus is ‘hyperplastic,’ with active germinal centers. In
10% of patients have thymic tumors (neoplastic). Muscle like cells (myoid
cell) within thymus, bearing AChRs on their surface may serve as
autoantigen and trigger immune response.
Coexisting Autoimmune Diseases (Box 15.31)
Clinical FeaturesAge and gender: MG is common in women than in men (2:1), with a
peak incidence around 30 years of age (15 to 50 years).
Cardinal feature: Fluctuating weakness (that worsens with exertion
and decrease with rest/sleep) and fatigability of muscles. Increase with
exercise.
Muscle affected: Diplopia and ptosis due to involvement of extraocular
muscles. Show more focal muscle involvement (neck, shoulder, facial,
jaw, respiratory, and bulbar muscles).Respiratory weakness: Respiratory muscles involvement may become so
severe as to require respiratory assistance. Patient is said to be in due to
diaphragmatic and intercostal muscle weakness. Aspiration may occur if
the cough is ineffectual.Ocular MG  when weakness is exclusive to the eyelids and extraocular
muscles, and generalized MG  when weakness extends beyond these
ocular muscles.
No sensory signs or signs of involvement of the CNS.
Aggravating factors: Exertion, hot climate, infection, emotion,
pregnancy, menstruation, drugs (amino glycoside phenytoin). A temporary
increase in weakness may follow vaccination, menstruation and
exposure to extremes of temperature.
Course: Variable, exacerbation and remission in early years. Remission is
incomplete and temporary. Most cases have a protracted, lifelong course.
Exacerbations are usually unpredictable and unprovoked.

Myasthenic Crisis
A rapid and severe deterioration of myasthenia is called ‘myasthenic
crisis’ can bring patient to the brink of respiratory failure and
quadriparesis in hours.
A respiratory infection or a sedative medication with NM (neuromuscular)
block may be the reason.
It can develop at any time after the diagnosis of myasthenia.
Anticipate if patient is restless, anxious with diaphoresis and develops
tremor.
Require respiratory support.
Fig. 15.16:  Pathogenesis of myasthenia gravis. Antireceptor antibodies may inhibit/disturb the normal
function of receptors. Autoantibodies to the acetylcholine (ACh) receptor on skeletal muscle cells
produce disease by blocking neuromuscular transmission and causing progressive muscle weakness.
Box 15.31: Coexisting autoimmune diseases in myasthenia gravis.
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis/thyrotoxicosis (in 5–10%)
Rheumatoid arthritis
Pernicious anemia
Scleroderma
Lupus erythematosus
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on the basis of clinical history, physical findings and

2+ve tests (demonstration of autoantibodies, and electrophysiological
studies).
Serological tests: Antibodies against AChR or MuSK.
Pharmacological tests:
–  Anticholinesterase test: Drugs inhibiting AChE allow ACh to interact
repeatedly with limited number of AChRs producing strength
improvement in myasthenic muscles.
–  Edrophonium test (Tensilon test): Edrophonium is a rapidly acting
acetylcholinesterase inhibitor. Onset of action is rapid (30 seconds) and
lasts for short duration (5 minutes). It reverses of muscular weakness
dramatically in myasthenia. Test dose (2 mg intravenous) is given to
check for reactions. If there is definite improvement drop further test.
If negative further 8 mg IV is given. When the test is positive, it
produces substantial improvement in weakness, ptosis, diplopia, nasal
voice, etc. within 30 seconds and lasts for up to 5 minutes. Positive test
is highly suggestive of MG and the sensitivity of the test is 80%.
Adverse effect include nausea, diarrhea, salivation, bradycardia,
syncope, abdominal cramps, fasciculation (treated with atropine-0.6
mg IV) bronchospasm and syncope.
–  Neostigmine/Prostigmine test: 15 mg oral neostigmine, long acting
and better evaluation.Ice on eyes/ice pack test (Fig. 15.17): Apply an ice pack on eye for 3 to 5
minutes. The response is positive when there is increase in at least 2 mm
of the palpebral fissure from before to after the test.Electrodiagnostic
–  Repeated nerve stimulation (RNS) test: Electric shock at 2-3 second
given to appropriate nerve and corresponding muscle action potential
measured. In normal individuals the amplitude of the evoked muscle
action potentials does not change at these rates of stimulation.
However, in myasthenic patients there is a rapid reduction of >10–15%
in the amplitude of the evoked responses during repetitive stimulation.
–  Single fiber electromyogram: Most (95%) sensitive.Other tests:
–  CT, MRI, and X-ray: to exclude thymoma.
–  CBC, ESR, RA factor, thyroid function test.

–  Pulmonary function test, fasting blood sugar, Mantoux test, antinuclear
antibody (ANA), etc. to exclude other diseases.
–  Screening for associated autoimmune disorders.
Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS)  differs from myaesthenia gravis in that in LEMS
antibodies are against presynaptic calcium channels, deep tendon reflexes are absent and autonomic
dysfunction in present and the weakness improves with activity in LEMS. It is most commonly
associated with small cell carcinoma of lung and the treatment is with aminopyridines.
Q. Write a short note on drugs used in myasthenia gravis.
Treatment
Goals:  To increase the activity of acetylcholine on the remaining receptors at the NMJ. Stop the
antibody mediated damage at the NMJ.
1. Oral anticholinesterases:  Help weakness but do not change the natural history of myasthenia.
Pyridostigmine:  Prolongs acetylcholine action by inhibiting cholinesterase. Onset of action is
within 15–30 minutes and lasts for 3–4 hours. Dose 30–60 mg/3 to 4 times daily. Cholinergic
crisis characterized by pallor, perspiration, pupillary constriction, paralysis, fasciculation and
excessive salivation can be seen with drug over dosage. Muscarinic effects (e.g. colic and
diarrhea) are treated with oral atropine/propantheline (antimuscarinic).
2. ThymectomyIndications:  It is an expert surgical procedure that should be carried out in (1) all patients with
generalized MG between the ages of puberty and at least 55 years. (2) May be required for
thymoma to prevent spread and treat MG.
Advantages:  Long-term benefit, improves prognosis, negligible medication.
3. Immunosuppression
Effective in all. Choice is guided by benefit, risk and urgency. These are used in patients who
do not respond to pyridostigmine or who develop relapse on treatment.
For immediate: Intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIg) or plasmapheresis.
For intermediate: Glucocorticoids, cyclosporine, tacrolimus for 1–3 months.
For long-term: Azathioprine, mycophenolate mofetil (less commonly used) for months/years.
For refractory: High dose of cyclophosphamide

Fig. 15.17:  Ice pack test.
.
Differences between myasthenic crisis and cholinergic crisis (Table
15.69).
Table 15.69: Differences between myasthenic crisis and cholinergic crisis.
Myasthenic crisis Cholinergic crisis
Due to disease worsening
Respiratory distress
Increased pulse and blood pressure
Poor cough
Mydriasis
Dysphagia
Weakness
Improve with edrophonium
Treatment: Ventilatory support plusDue to drug overdose
Abdominal cramps
Diarrhea
Nausea and vomiting
Excessive secretions
Miosis
Fasciculations
Weakness
Worse with edrophonium

neostigmine Treatment: Ventilatory support plus atropine
Treatment of myasthenic crisis
Exacerbation of weakness due to diaphragm and intercostal involvement.
Treat in intensive care unit (ICU) set up.
Cause: Infection (most common), cholinergic crisis due to excess anticholinesterase dose.
Respiratory assistance (preferably noninvasive, using BIPAP).
Pulmonary physiotherapy.
Plasmapheresis or IVIg.
Stop anticholinesterase if using
DISEASES OF MUSCLE
Muscle disease is rare and may be hereditary or acquired.
Hereditary muscle diseases include the muscular dystrophies, muscle
channelopathies, metabolic myopathies (including mitochondrial diseases)
and congenital myopathies.
Skeletal muscle disease or myopathies are disorders with structural
changes or functional impairment of muscle.
Muscular Dystrophies
Muscular dystrophies (hereditary myopathies) refer to a group of inherited
myopathies/disorders characterized by progressive muscle weakness and
wasting (due to destruction of muscle) and may be associated with cardiac
and/or respiratory involvement.Q. Write a short note on muscular dystrophies or hereditary
myopathies.
Muscular dystrophy is subdivided by their mode of inheritance, age at onset,
distribution of involved muscles, rate of progression, and prognosis (Table
15.70).
Table 15.70: Various subtypes and its features of muscular dystrophies.
Type and mode of
inheritanceDefective
gene/proteinOnset age linical features
Duchenne’s-XR Dystrophin Before 5 years Progressive weakness of girdle
muscles unable to walk after age 12,
progressive kyphoscoliosis,
respiratory failure in second and
third decade

Becker’s-XR Dystrophin Early childhood
to adultProgressive weakness of girdle
muscles, able to walk after age 15,
respiratory failure may develop by
4th decade
Limb-girdle-AD/AR Several Early childhood
to early adultSlow progressive weakness of
shoulder and hip girdle muscles
Emery Dreifuss-
XR/ADEmerin/Lamins Childhood to
adultElbow contractures, humeral and
peroneal weakness
Myotonica (DM1
DM2) ADDMI: Expansion
CTG repeat
DM2: Expansion
CCTG repeatChildhood to
adult, may be
infancy if mother
is affected (DM1
only)Slowly progressive weakness of
face, shoulder girdle, and foot
dorsiflexion preferential proximal
weakness in D<2
Facioscapulohumeral-
AD (Fig. 15.18)Childhood to
adultSlowly progressive weakness of
face, shoulder girdle, and foot
dorsiflexion
Oculopharyngeal-AD Expansion poly-
A RNA binding
protein5th to 6th decade Slowly progressive weakness of
extraocular, pharyngeal and limb
musclesDuchenne Muscular Dystrophy
Q. Write short essay on Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
Most common form of muscular dystrophy.
Caused by a mutation of the gene responsible for producing dystrophin.
Shows X-linked recessive inheritance and affects predominantly males.
Duchenne dystrophy is present at birth, but the disorder usually becomes
apparent between ages 3 and 5, by age 12, most patients are wheelchair
dependent.
Muscle selectively involved in order of appearance of weakness is
iliopsoas, quadriceps, Gluteus-Pretibial muscles, muscles of pectoral
girdle, muscles of leg and forearm (at the end).Clinical features: Use of Gower’s maneuver while getting up for the
floor, toe walking due to foot drop with associated lordotic posture and
pseudo hypertrophy of the calves. Cardiomyopathy (DCM) and mental
impairment are associated features. But CHF is uncommon. Mental
retardation is seen.Investigations
–  Creatine phosphokinase (CPK) levels are invariably elevated to
between 20 and 100 times normal.

–  Electromyography (EMG): Features typical of myopathy.
–  Muscle biopsy: Definitive diagnosis can be established on the basis of
dystrophin deficiency I in biopsied muscle tissue.
–  Gold standard: It is genetic testing.
Fig. 15.18:  Facioscapulohumeral dystrophy (FSHD).
Becker Muscular Dystrophy
X-linked disorder, results from defects of the same gene responsible for
Duchenne dystrophy.
Pattern of muscle wasting closely resembles that seen in Duchenne.
It is a less severe form of disease and much less frequent than Duchenne.
Clinical features: Becker patients ambulate beyond age 15, while patients
with Duchenne dystrophy are typically in a wheelchair by the age of 12;
allowing for a clinical distinction between Becker and Duchenne
dystrophy. Cardiac involvement occurs in Becker dystrophy and may
result in heart failure. Mental impairment is uncommon.Investigations: Serum CK measurement, EMG and muscle biopsy closely
resemble those in Duchenne dystrophy.

Limb-Girdle Muscular Dystrophy (LGMD)
Most are progressive and affect primarily the pelvic and shoulder girdle
muscles. Inheritances can AR or AD and it is due to defect of sarcoglycan.
Clinical features: Respiratory insufficiency from diaphragm weakness
may occur. In some patients, cardiac involvement results in congestive
heart failure or arrhythmias, occasional patients present with a
cardiomyopathy. Intellectual function remains normal.Investigations: An elevated serum CK level, myopathic EMG findings,
and muscle biopsy features indicative of myopathy.
Myotonic Dystrophy
It is an autosomal dominant disorder and is the most common adult
muscular dystrophy.
Clinical features: Frontal baldness, cataracts (Christmas tree cataract),
mental impairment, insulin resistance and gonadal atrophy. Hatchet like
face, swan neck deformity is seen. Involvement of distal > proximal, facial
muscles and handgrip myotonia are pathognomonic features. Cardiac
disturbances occur in most patients with myotonic dystrophy.
Disturbances in conduction system are common. Complete heart block and
sudden death may occur. Mitral valve prolapse also occurs commonly in
myotonic dystrophy patients. Myotonia may improve with phenytoin,
mexiletine, and quinidine.
Box 15.32: Causes of endocrine myopathies.Thyroid disorders:  Hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism
Parathyroid disorders:  Hyperparathyroidism, hypoparathyroid- overt myopathy
Adrenal disorders:  Glucocorticoid myopathy (endogenous/exogenous) most common,
Cushingoid, adrenal insufficiency, primary hyperaldosteronism (Conn’s disease)
Vitamin deficiency:  Vitamin E, vitamin D
Box 15.33: Causes of high creatinine phosphokinase.
Brain injury or stroke
Convulsions
Delirium tremens
Dermatomyositis or polymyositis
Myocarditis
Muscular dystrophies

Myopathy
Rhabdomyolysis
Pulmonary and myocardial infarction
Electric shock
Endocrine Myopathies (Box 15.32)
Q. Write a short note on causes of endocrine myopathies.
Causes of high creatinine phosphokinase (Box 15.33).
Q. List the causes of high creatinine phosphokinase.
DISORDERS OF CEREBELLAR FUNCTION
Cerebellum is an infratentorial structure in the posterior cranial fossa,
attached to the brainstem by the superior, middle and inferior peduncles.
The cerebellum is made up of two hemispheres separated by a midline
vermis. There are three lobes anterior, posterior, and flocculonodular lobe.Midline lesions can produce severe gait and truncal ataxia.
Cerebellar hemisphere lesions can produces classic ipsilateral limb ataxia
(intention tremor, past pointing and mild hypotonia).
Ataxia
Ataxia may be the result of cerebellar lesion or due to a combination of
cerebellar and extracerebellar lesions.
Classification of Ataxia (Table 15.71)
Table 15.71: Classification of ataxia.
Acquired or sporadic ataxias
Vascular:  Stroke (infarction, hemorrhage), AV malformations
Infectious/postinfectious diseases:  Acute cerebellitis, cerebellar abscess, postinfectious
encephalomyelitis, HIV, chickenpox
Toxin-induced ataxias:  Alcohol, drugs (antiepileptic agents, lithium, antineoplastics,
cyclosporine, metronidazole), heavy metals (mercury), 5-flurourocil, cytosine arabinoside
Structural and neoplastic causes:  Gliomas, ependymoma, cerebellar tumor, meningioma,
metastatic disease
Immune-mediated:  Multiple sclerosis, cerebellar ataxia with anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase
(GAD) antibodies, paraneoplastic syndrome (small-cell lung cancer, breast or ovarian cancer and
lymphoma), gluten ataxia

Deficiency:  Hypothyroidism, vitamin B 1, vitamin B 12 and vitamin E
Genetic causes
Autosomal recessive:  Friedreich ataxia
Autosomal dominant:  Spinocerebellar ataxia
Clinical Features of Cerebellar Lesions
Q. Write a short note on cerebellar signs.
Cerebellar Ataxia
Q. Write a short note on cerebellar ataxia.
Lesions of the midline vermis of the cerebellum cause truncal ataxia, while
lesions of the cerebellar hemispheres cause limb ataxia of the ipsilateral side.
1. Gait ataxia
Patients will tend to stand with feet well apart and are often frightened
to stand.
Patients tend to reel to the side unilateral lesion or from side to side if
central or bilateral (drunken gait) (even if supported).
Walking along a line of the floor (tandem gait) demonstrates minor
degrees of gait ataxia.
Instability may increase if eyes are closed but patients do not fall. This
is not a true positive Romberg’s test (true positive Romberg’s test is
present when there is impaired joint proprioception/posterior. Column
involvement is known as sensory ataxia). 2. Truncal ataxia
Patients cannot sit or stand unsupported and tend to fall backwards.
It is caused by a midline cerebellar lesion, or may be a feature of post-
chickenpox cerebellar syndrome.
Truncal tremor may be evident-constant jerking of trunk and head
(Titubation).
Lesions of the cerebellar hemisphere cause ipsilateral limb signs.
The outstretched arm tends to be held hyper pronated at rest and at a
slightly higher level than unaffected side (Riddoch’s sign) and
rebounds upwards if gently pressed downwards and then suddenly
related by the examiner.

Finger-nose and heel-knee-shin tests will demonstrate even mild limb
ataxia, with terminal intention tremor and dysmetria (past pointing).
Limb rebound can be demonstrated by gently pushing down on
outstretched arms and then suddenly releasing, causing the arm on the
affected side suddenly to fly upwards.Pendular knee jerks and hypotonia present.
3. Other signs produced by cerebellar lesions/diseases
Cerebellar dysarthria: Spluttering staccato speech. Scanning
dysarthria is a jerky and explosive speech with separated syllables may
be demonstrated by asking the patient to repeat ‘baby hippopotamus’.Dyssynergia: It is difficulty in carrying out complex movements. This
results in breaking of an act into its components.
Macrographia: Writing may be larger than normal (contrast with
micrographia of Parkinson’s disease).
Rapid alternating movements: Inaccuracies in rapidly repeated
movements (dysdiadochokinesia). This is demonstrated by getting the
patient to tap back of their own hand repeatedly with the other hand, or
to tap their foot on the floor.Tremor: Unilateral or bilateral intention tremor, or a truncal tremor.
Nystagmus: Coarse nystagmus, worse, on looking to the side of lesion
with fast component towards the affected side.
Pendular knee jerk: The reflexes are less brisk and slower in rise and
fall. This produces pendular jerk at the knee. It produces three on more
swings at the knee when the knee reflex is elicited with patient in sitting
posture and the legs hanging from bedside.Nausea and vomiting: Sudden vomiting (without warning) after a
positional change, without preceding nausea, is suggestive of a
posterior fossa lesion.
Box 15.34: Mnemonic for cerebellar signs- DANISH.
Dysdiadochokinesia and Dysmetria
Ataxia
Nystagmus
Intention tremor
Slurred speech
Hypotonia

Q. Write a short note on Romberg's sign/test (Romberg’s test is a test for Sensory Ataxia).
Romberg’s test/sign:  Patient stands upright with the feet together (touching each other) and
eyes closed. When there is proprioceptive or vestibular deficit, balance is impaired only when
eyes are closed, and the patient may fall if not caught. Minimal lesions can be demonstrated by
asking the patient to stand on his toes with eyes closed.
Principle of Romberg’s test: It is based on the principle that an individual requires at least two
of the three following senses to maintain balance while standing:
–  Proprioception (the ability to know one’s body in space)
–  Vestibular function (the ability to know one’s head position in space); and
–  Vision (which can be used to monitor [and adjust for] changes in body position).
Mnemonic for cerebellar signs (Box 15.34).
Hereditary Cerebellar Ataxia-Friedreich’s AtaxiaMost common form of inherited ataxia. Most common form degenerative
ataxia caused by unstable trinucleotide GAA expansion in chromosome
located on 9q. The protein involved is frataxin.
It affects spinal cord-dorsal column, spinocerebellar tract and pyramidal
tract. There is a also loss of dorsal root ganglion cells with depletion of
large myelinated fibers in peripheral nerves.Age of onset usually between 8 and 16 years.
Clinical Features
Progressive ataxia of gait (due to spinocerebellar tract involvement).
Lower limb areflexia and later generalized areflexia.
Leg weakness and extensor plantar responses (due to pyramidal tract
involvement).
Reduced vibration and joint position sense in lower limbs. It is due to
involvement of dorsal column.
Sensory axonal neuropathy detected on nerve conduction test.
Other features: Dysarthria, scoliosis (Fig. 15.19), nystagmus, optic
atrophy, deafness, diabetes, pes cavus and cardiomyopathy.
Causes of extensor plantar response with absent ankle jerk are listed in Box
15.35.
Investigations
Nerve conduction study(NCS): normal conduction velocity but small or

absent sensory nerve action potential (SNAP)
CT and MRI normal cerebellar anatomy, cervical atrophy.
DNA polymerase reaction to detect GAA expansion.
Treatment: No definite treatment, physiotherapy and occupational therapy, spasticity is treated
with baclofen, orthopedic advice and surgery
Spinocerebellar Ataxia (Late Onset Hereditary Ataxia)
Q Write short note on the clinical features of spinocerebellar ataxias.
Spinocerebellar ataxia (autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia/ADCA) is
an autosomal dominant disease that present with slowly progressive
cerebellar symptoms. Sometimes with associated optic atrophy,
ophthalmoplegia, pyramidal and extrapyramidal structure.MRI mostly shows olivopontocerebellar atrophy.
Fig. 15.19:  Patient with scoliosis due to Friedreich’s ataxia.
Box 15.35: Causes of extensor plantar response with absent ankle jerk.
Friedreich’s ataxia
Motor neuron disease (ALS)
Taboparesis in neurosyphilis
HIV myeloneuropathy
Subacute combined degeneration of cord (Vitamin B 12 deficiency)

Hypocupremic myelopathy
Conus-cauda lesion
MOVEMENT DISORDERS
Types of Movements
Q. Write a short note on CNS disorders characterized by involuntary
movements.
Akathisia: A subjective feeling of inner restlessness that is relieved by
movements (e.g. crossing and uncrossing legs, rocking back and forth and
pacing).
Asterixis: Sudden periods of cessation of muscle contraction best seen
when the patient’s arms are extended in front. It is a negative myoclonus.
Athetosis: Slow, sinuous, writhing movements, usually of the distal parts
of the limbs.
Ballismus: Wild flinging, movements that represent large amplitude
proximal choreiform movements. Ballismus is often unilateral
(hemiballismus).Chorea: Semipurposeful flowing movements that flit from one part of the
body to another in a continuous and random pattern. Chorea can be
defined as involuntary movements that are abrupt, unpredictable and
nonrhythmic, resulting from a continuous random flow of muscle
contractions.Dyskinesia: A general term for any excessive movement. The term
dyskinesia is often used as an abbreviation for ‘tardive dyskinesia’
(repetitive oral movements often seen in patients taking certain psychiatric
medications).Dystonia: Twisting movements that are often sustained for variable
periods of time with a directional preponderance resulting in posturing.
Algorithmic approach to movement disorders is given in Flowchart 15.4.
Q. Write a short note on myoclonus and its causes.
Myoclonus: Myoclonic movements are sudden, brief, shock-like
involuntary movements, which are usually positive (caused by muscle
contraction), but can sometimes be negative (due to brief loss or inhibition
of muscular tonus, as in asterixis—for example, when caused by hepatic

encephalopathy [‘liver flap’] or in uremic encephalopathy) (Table 15.72).
Tics: Tics are sudden and jerky movements, but in this case the keyword
for recognition is the ‘stereotyped’ character of the recurrent movements.
Repetitive, stereotypic movements or sounds that are suppressible and that
relieve a feeling of inner tension.Tremor: Regular, oscillatory movements that may be present at rest or
with action. Tremor is characterized by involuntary, rhythmic and
sinusoidal alternating movements of one or more body parts.
Q. Write a short note on hemiballismus.
Hemiballismus: Violent flinging movements of the limbs. It is usually
unilateral, and hence called hemiballismus.
Cause of some important movement disorders are listed in Table 15.72.
PARKINSON’S DISEASE
Q. Describe the etiology, clinical features/manifestations, diagnosis and
management of Parkinson’s disease.
Q. What is parkinsonism? How would you classify parkinsonism?
Discuss the management of idiopathic parkinsonism.
Parkinsonism is a syndrome consisting of a variable combination of
tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia, and a characteristic disturbance of gait
and posture.
Classification of Parkinsonian disorders (Flowchart 15.5): There are
many causes for Parkinsonism but the most common cause is Parkinson’s
disease (PD).
Table 15.72: Cause of some important movement disorders.
Name of disorder Causes Treatment
AsterixisHepatic encephalopathy
Uremic encephalopathy
Carbon dioxide narcosisHaloperidol, tetrabenazine
Chorea
Mneumonic- CHOREAChorea gravidarum
Huntington’s chorea
Oral contraceptive pillRefer pages 1014-5

and DOPA
Rheumatic chorea
Endocrine disorders
(thyrotoxicosis)
Arteriosclerotic or senile
chorea
MyoclonusEncephalitis
Myoclonic epilepsy
Drug overdose, hiccup
Creutzfeldt- Jakob
disease
SSPE (subacute
sclerosing
panencephalitis)Anoxic encephalopathy
(Lance-Adams
syndrome)Correction of underlying disease,
sodium valproate (300–12900
mg/day), clonazepam (0.5–10 mg/day)
TremorsDescribed later Refer concerned diseases
Hemiballismus Stroke affecting
subthalamic nucleus (on
contralateral side).Haloperidol 0.5-2.5 mg TID,
tetrabenazine 25-50 mg TID
DystoniaKernicterus
Previous brain injury
Familial
Degenerative disordersTetrabenazine (dopamine–depleting
drug), high-dose anticholinergics,
sodium valproate
Flowchart 15.4:  Algorithmic approach to movement disorders.

Flowchart 15.5: Classification of parkinsonian disorders.
Idiopathic Parkinson’s Disease (Paralysis Agitans)
It is a chronic, progressive disorder in which idiopathic parkinsonism
occurs without evidence of more widespread neurologic involvement.
Parkinson’s disease is distinct from other parkinsonian syndromes both
clinically and pathologically.

Age and gender: Its incidence increases sharply with age. Parkinson’s
disease (PD) generally commences in middle or late life and average age
of onset is about 60 years. Prevalence is higher in men than women (M:F
1.5:1). It leads to progressive disability with time.
Etiology
Cause of idiopathic Parkinson’s disease (PD) is not known. Probably multiple
interacting environmental risk factors and genetic susceptibility plays a role.
Environmental factors:
–  Small increased risk with rural living and drinking well water.
–  Pesticide exposure.
–  Oxidative stress: Chemical compound methyl-phenyl-
tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) is a potent mitochondrial toxin. It causes
severe Parkinsonism in young drug users of MPTP by producing
oxidative stress leading to death of neuronal cell.
–  Nonsmokers have a higher risk of PD than smokers.Genetic factors: Genetic factors may play a role and several single genes
causing parkinsonism have been identified.
–  Sporadic: Idiopathic PD is not usually familial, but there is a
significant genetic component in early onset PD (onset before 40).
–  Mutations in many genes has been found in familial cases. Several
genetic loci for Mendelian inherited monogenic forms of PD have been
identified, designated as PARK 1–11. They are rare but cause early
onset and familial PD.
Pathological FeaturesHallmark of PD: Degeneration and depletion of the pigmented
dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc),
reduced striatal dopamine, and the presence of α-synuclein and
intracytoplasmic proteinaceous eosinophilic inclusions in nigral cells
known as Lewy bodies.Probably environmental or genetic factors alter the α-synuclein protein,
rendering it toxic. This leads to formation of Lewy body within the nigral
cells. Lewy bodies are also seen in the basal ganglia, brainstem and cortex.
Lewy bodies contain tangles of α-synuclein and ubiquitin. They become

gradually more widespread and increase as the disease progresses.
The loss of dopaminergic neurotransmission in the nerve cells (>80%) in
the substantia nigra and other nuclei in the midbrain responsible for the
symptoms of Parkinson’s disease.
Clinical Manifestations
A. Motor symptoms: Always asymmetrical in onset and become bilateral
within a year.
Tremor is an early and presenting symptom in 70% of patients.
–  Frequency is 4–6 Hz tremor and is typically most prominent at rest
and worsens with emotional stress.
–  Typically tremor starts with the fingers and hands at rest.
–  Often described as pill rolling of finger and wrist, because the patient
appears to be rolling something between thumb and forefinger. It
often begins with rhythmic flexion-extension of the fingers, hand, or
foot, or with rhythmic pronation-supination of the forearm. Initially,
it may be confined to one limb or to the two limbs on one side
before becoming more generalized. It also affects jaw and chin, but
not the head.
–  Disappear on voluntary movement and sleep.
Rigidity
–  It is a sign rather than a symptom. Increased resistance to passive
movement is characteristic clinical feature that accounts for the
flexed posture of many patients. Rigidity causes stiffness and a
flexed posture.
–  Stiffness on passive limb movement is described as ‘lead pipe’
rigidity because the increase in muscle tone is present throughout
the range of movement. Unlike spasticity, it is not dependent on
speed of movement.
–  When tremor is superimposed on the rigidity, a ratchet like jerkiness
is felt, described as ‘cogwheel’ rigidity.Akinesia or bradykinesia
–  Poverty/slowing of movement are the hallmark of PD.
Slowness/difficulty of initiating voluntary movement and an
associated reduction in automatic movements, such as swinging

of the arms when walking.
–  There is fixity of facial expression  (facial immobility—mask like
face) (Fig. 15.20), with widened palpebral fissures and infrequent
blinking.
–  Repetitive tapping (at about 2 Hz) over the glabella (Glabellar tap)
produces a sustained blink response (Myerson’s sign ), in contrast to
the response of normal subject. Frequency of spontaneous blinking
decreases producing a serpentine stare.
Fig. 15.20:  Mask like facies in Parkinson’s disease.
–  The combination of tremor, rigidity, and bradykinesia results in
small, tremulous, and often illegible/difficult handwriting
(micrographia). It results in difficulty in activities such as tying
shoelaces or buttoning, and difficulty rolling over in bed.
Postural changes: A stooped posture is characteristic feature.
Gait changes: Slow shuffling, freezing and reduced arm swing, small
stride length, slow turns, festinating gait (tendency to advance rapid
short steps) and catching center of gravity. Feet may be glued to floor.
Postural instability and freezing may result in fall forward. Reduced eye
blink.Speech and swallowing: Speech becomes softer (soft voice-

hypophonia), quiet, indistinct, flat/monotonous and stuttering. Increased
salivation/drooling, and dysphagia (swallowing difficulty is a late
feature) which may lead to aspiration pneumonia as a terminal event.
Cognitive and psychiatric changes: Cognitive impairment/dementia,
depression, sleep disturbances may be present.
B. Nonmotor features (Table 15.73)
Some non-motor symptoms (NMS) may precede the onset of more typical
motor symptoms.
Table 15.73: Nonmotor symptoms of Parkinsons’s disease.
Autonomic dysfunction
Orthostatic hypotension
Urinary incontinence
Constipation
Sexual problemsNeuropsychiatric
Anxiety
Depression
Apathy
Psychosis
DementiaSensory
problems
Reduces sense
of smell
(hyposmia)Pain
Sleep disorders
Restless legs
Insomnia
Daytime somnolenceRheumatological
Frozen shoulder
Periarthritis
Swan neck deformityOther
Seborrhea
Investigation/Diagnosis
Diagnosis is made on clinical grounds.
Structural imaging (CT or MRI) is usually normal.
Functional dopaminergic imaging: By single photon emission computed
tomography (SPECT) or positron emission tomography (PET) is
abnormal and shows reduced uptake of striatal dopaminergic markers,
particularly in the posterior putamen. However, it is not specific for PD.Dopamine transporter (DaT) imaging: It is performed by the use of a
radiolabelled ligand binding to dopaminergic terminals to know the extent
of nigrostriatal cell loss. It may be rarely required to distinguish PD from
other causes of tremor, or drug-induced parkinsonism.
Stages of Parkinson’s disease (Table 15.74).
Table 15.74: Hoehn and Yahr stage of Parkinson's disease.
Stage Disease state

I Unilateral involvement only, minimal or no functional
impairment
II Bilateral or midline involvement, without impairment of
balance
III First sign of impaired righting reflex, mild to moderate
disability
IV Fully developed, severely disabling disease; patient still
able to walk and stand unassisted
V Confinement to bed or wheelchair unless aided
Q. What are the stages of Parkinson’s disease?
Differential Diagnosis
1. Secondary parkinsonism (Table 15.75).
Table 15.75: Causes of secondary parkinsonism.
Toxin:  Manganese, 1-methyl 4-phenyl
tetrahydropyridine (MPTP), carbon monoxide,
manganese, mercury, carbon disulfide, cyanide,
methanol
Viral:  Encephalitis lethargica, Creutzfeldt-
Jakob disease
Metabolic:  Wilson’s disease
Head injury: Punch drunk syndrome
Infectious:  Postencephalitic, HIV, SSPE, Prion
diseasesDrugs:  Dopamine receptor blocking drugs,
reserpine, tetrabenazine, alpha methyl dopa,
lithium, flunarizine, cinnarizine
Vascular:  Multi-infarct, Binswangers disease
Trauma:  Pugilistic encephalopathy
Others:  Parathyroid abnormalities,
hypothyroidism, brain tumors, paraneoplastic,
normal pressure hydrocephalus (NPH),
psychogenic
2. Parkinson-plus syndromes (Table 15.76).

Fig. 15-21:  Reptilian stare in progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP).
Q. What are the ‘Parkinson plus’ syndromes?
Table 15.76: Parkinson plus syndromes and its features.
Syndrome Features
Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP, Steele-
Richardson-Olszewski syndrome)Slow ocular saccades, eyelid apraxia, and
restricted eye movements with particular
impairment of downward gaze and reptilian stare
(Fig. 15.21). Frequently experience
hyperextension of the neck with early gait
disturbance and falls. MRI may reveal a
characteristic atrophy of the midbrain with
relative preservation of the pons (the
‘hummingbird sign’ on mid-sagittal images)
Multiple-system atrophy (MSA)Parkinsonian (MSA-P) or striatonigral
degeneration
Cerebellar (MSA-C) or olivopontocerebellar
atrophy
Autonomic (MSA-A) form or Shy-Drager
syndromeParkinsonism in conjunction with cerebellar
signs and/or early and prominent autonomic
dysfunction, usually orthostatic hypotension.
Cerebellar and brainstem atrophy (the pontine
‘hot cross buns’ sign in MSA-c)
Corticobasal ganglionic degeneration  (Rebeitz- Asymmetric dystonic contractions and

Kolodny-Richardson syndrome) clumsiness of one hand coupled with cortical
sensory disturbances manifest as apraxia,
agnosia, focal myoclonus, or alien limb
phenomenon
Dementia with lewy bodies Early onset dementia, visual hallucinations
Parkinsonism-dementia complex of Guam Motor neuron disease plus Parkinson’s
Guadeloupean parkinsonism Levodopa-unresponsive parkinsonism, postural
instability with early falls, and pseudobulbar
palsy
Q. Write a short essay/note on drugs used in Parkinson’s disease.
Treatment
A. Symptomatic pharmacologic treatment: Drug treatment in PD is symptomatic rather than
curative. None of the currently available drugs are neuroprotective.
Anticholinergic drugs
–   Nonselective muscarinic antagonists are helpful, especially in relieving tremor. For
example, trihexyphenidyl, benztropine, and orphenadrine.
–   Treatment is started with small dose (2 mg), which is gradually built up until benefit occurs
or side effects limit further increments.
–   Adverse effects:  Urinary retention, dry mouth, blurred vision, worsening of glaucoma,
constipation, confusion and hallucinosis in elderly. Hence, rarely used as first-line drugs
unless patient has severe tremors. They should be avoided in patient above 65 years of age.
Levodopa
–   Levodopa, the metabolic precursor of dopamine. It is the single most effective drug
available for the treatment. It provides symptomatic benefit in most patients with
parkinsonism and is often particularly helpful in relieving bradykinesia.  Resolve
hypokinesia and rigidity first and tremor later. Levodopa is metabolized by MAO
(monoamine oxidase) and COMT (catechol-O-methyl-transferase). Its plasma half-life is
around two hours. Early use lowers mortality rate. Combined with a dopa decarboxylase
inhibitor–benserazide (cobeneldopa) or carbidopa (cocareldopa) to reduce the adverse
effects (e.g. nausea and hypotension).
–   Adverse drug reactions:
◆   Postural hypotension, fluctuations in response.
◆   Mydriasis, brownish discoloration of the urine, abnormal smell, transient elevations of
transaminases and BUN.
◆   GIT effects: Nausea and vomiting.
◆   Cardiovascular: Tachycardia, ventricular extrasystoles, atrial fibrillation.
◆   Dyskinesias, behavioral disturbances.
–   ‘On/off’ effect:  Important late complications of levodopa therapy. It is like a light switch;
without warning, all of a sudden, person goes from full control to complete reversion back to
bradykinesia, tremor, etc. It lasts from 30 minutes to several hours and then get control
again. The on-off phenomenon can be controlled in part by reducing dosing, intervals,
administering levodopa 1 hour before meals and restricting dietary protein intake or
treatment with dopamine agonists.MAO-B Inhibitors

–   Monoamine oxidase type B facilitates breakdown of excess dopamine in the synapse.
They produce asymptomatic motor benefit  when used as a monotherapy and enhance the
efficacy of carbidopa levodopa formulations when used as adjuncts voided, e.g. selegiline,
rasagiline.
–   The addition of selegiline, a monoamine oxidase B inhibitor, reduces the metabolic
breakdown of dopamine and may slow down the degeneration in the substantia nigra.
Dopamine receptor agonists
–   Dopamine receptor agonists are classified as ergot derived (bromocriptine, pergolide and
cabergoline)  or non-ergot derived (pramipexole, ropinirole, rotigotine and
apomorphine) .
–   Side effects:  Produce impulse control disorders (e.g. pathological gambling, binge eating
and hypersexuality) and daytime somnolence. Dopamine agonists are contraindicated in
patients with psychotic disorders and are best avoided in those with recent myocardial
infarction, severe peripheral vascular disease, or active peptic ulceration.
–   Ergot-derived agonists are no longer recommended because of rare but serious fibrotic side
effects including cardiac valvular fibrosis.
–   Nonergot dopamine agonists are preferable to ergot-derived dopamine agonists. They are
used as an alternative or an addition to levodopa therapy.
Q. Write a short note on COMT (Catechol-O-methyltransferase) inhibitors.
COMT (Catechol-O-methyltransferase) inhibitors
–   Catechol-O-methyl-transferase produces peripheral breakdown of levodopa (e.g.
entacapone and tolcapone ). Entacapone prolongs the duration of levodopa by decreasing
its peripheral metabolism. The more potent tolcapone is less preferred because of rare but
serious hepatotoxicity.
Dopamine facilitator
–   Amantadine:  It is an antiviral agent that potentiates dopaminergic function by influencing
the synthesis, release, reuptake of dopamine. It has a mild antiparkinsonian effect and short-
lived effect on bradykinesia. Hence, it is rarely used and are reserved for patients who are
unable to tolerate other drugs. Amantadine-either alone or combined with an anticholinergic
agent, helpful for mild parkinsonism. It acts by potentiating the release of endogenous
dopamine.
–   Adverse effects:  Livedo reticularis, peripheral edema, confusion and other anticholinergic
effects.
Peripheral dopamine decarboxylase inhibitors (PDI)
–   It does not penetrate the BBB (blood brain barrier); reduce the peripheral metabolism of
levodopa. Increase plasma levels of levodopa, prolongs the plasma half-life of levodopa,
increase available amounts of dopa for entry into the brain and reduce the daily requirement
of levodopa by 75%. For example, carbidopa, benseraside.
Neuroprotective agents that alter pathogenesis
–   MAO inhibitors: Selegiline and rasagiline
–   Antiexcitotoxicity drugs: Riluzole
–   Bioenergetic antioxidant agent, coenzyme Q10
–   Antiapoptotic kinase inhibitors (e.g. CEP-1347)
–   Adenosine A2A receptor antagonists (e.g. istradefylline).
B. Surgical Treatment Indications:  Most common indications for surgery in PD are intractable tremor and drug-

induced motor fluctuations or dyskinesias.
Different surgeries are:
–   Stereotactic surgery (ventrolateral thalamotomy) tried in unilateral cases.
–   Pallidotomy improves tremor and dyskinesia
–   Deep brain stimulation (DBS): Stereotactic insertion of electrodes into the brain is most
often performed bilaterally and simultaneously. Best site is subthalamic nucleus. DBS in
these areas alleviates Parkinsonian motor signs particularly during the off periods and
reduces troublesome dyskinesias, dystonia and motor fluctuations that result from drug
administration. DBS is usually reserved for patients with medically refractory tremor or
motor fluctuations.
–   Neurotransplantation of embryonic mesencephalic dopaminergic cells directly into the
putamen.
–   Intracranial delivery of fetal cell transplantation or specific growth factors is and gene
therapy in the experimental stage and stem cells.
Characteristic Features of Extrapyramidal Lesion (Table 15.77)
Q. Write short note on characteristic features of extrapyramidal lesion.
Table 15.77: Characteristic features of extrapyramidal lesion.
Sign Site of lesion
Resting tremor Substantia nigra, red nucleus
Muscular rigidity Substantia nigra, putamen
Hypokinesia Substantia nigra, globus pallidum
Chorea Caudate nucleus
Hemiballismus Subthalamic nucleus
Dystonia, athetosis Putamen
CHOREA
Q. Write a short note on chorea and mention the disease which causes
chorea.
General Features
Irregular, semipurposeful, abrupt, rapid, brief, jerky, unsustained
movements that flow randomly from one part of the body to another.
These movements disappear during sleep.
When choreic movements are more severe, assuming a flinging,
sometimes violent, character, they are called ballism.

Causes of Chorea (Table 15.78)
Table 15.78: Causes of chorea.
Rheumatic (Sydenham’s chorea)
Huntington’s chorea
Encephalitis, e.g. Japanese encephalitis, measles, mumps
Vascular, e.g. HIV-related (toxoplasmosis, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, HIV
encephalitis)
Immunologic, e.g. systemic lupus erythematosus, antiphospholipid antibody syndrome,
paraneoplastic syndromes, acute disseminated encephalomyelopathy, celiac disease
Drugs, e.g. L-dopa, oral contraceptive, phenytoin
Degenerative disorders of the brain
Benign hereditary
Pregnancy (Chorea gravidarum)
Endocrine-metabolic dysfunction, e.g. adrenal insufficiency, hyper/hypocalcemia,
hyper/hypoglycemia, hypernatremia, liver failure
Miscellaneous, e.g. anoxic encephalopathy, cerebral palsy, kernicterus, multiple sclerosis, post-
traumatic
Signs in Chorea
Involuntary protrusion and retraction of the tongue (jack in the box).
Inability to hold the hands above head with palms facing each other as it
results in pronation of arms so that palms face outwards (pronator sign).
Milking action of patient’s fingers if asked to grasp the physician’s fingers
(milk-maid sign).
Sydenham’s Chorea (Saint Vitus Dance)
Most common cause of chorea in children.
It is self-limiting condition, non-suppurative complication of group A β -
hemolytic streptococcal pharyngitis. It follows acute rheumatic fever
by 4–6 months. Severity varies and disorder may continue for a few
months.It is due to molecular mimicry between streptococcal and central nervous
system antigens. Infection by group A β-hemolytic streptococci  in
genetically predisposed individual leads to formation of cross-reactive
antibodies. These antibodies disrupt the basal ganglia function.
Inflammation is seen in caudate nucleus.Clinical features: It is a neuropsychiatric disorder. Clinical features
include both neurological abnormalities (chorea, weakness and

hypotonia) and psychiatric disorders (such as emotional liability,
hyperactivity, distractibility, obsessions and compulsions). These
abnormalities lead to inability to perform normal activities of daily living
(ADL) including eating, talking, dressing, writing, walking, learning and
socializing, and thus impact negatively on the child’s quality of life.
Common sign is motor impersistence. It can be demonstrated by an
inability to sustain eye closure or tongue protrusion.
Evaluation for valvular heart disease is a must. Antistreptolysin-O (ASLO)
titers and ESR are often normal.
Treatment
Symptomatic
Sodium valproate 200–600 mg TID is the first line drug.
If valproate is not effective, risperidone, a potent dopamine D2 receptor blocker, may be given to
control chorea. The dose is 1–2 mg BID.
Haloperidol 0.5–1.5 mg BD or TID is used occasionally.
Other drugs include pimozide, carbamazepine, clonidine and phenobarbital.
Penicillin prophylaxis is necessary to reduce risk of cardiac involvement due to future
streptococcal infections.
Huntington’s Disease/Chorea (HD)
Q. Write a short essay on the transmission and clinical features of
Huntington’s disease.
Huntington’s disease is a progressive, fatal, highly penetrant autosomal
dominant disorder characterized by motor, behavioral, and cognitive
dysfunction. Onset is typically between the ages of 25 and 45 years.
Etiology
Huntington’s disease is caused by an increase in the number of
polyglutamine (CAG) repeats (>40) in the coding sequence of the
huntingtin gene located on the short arm of chromosome 4.
The disease manifests earlier if the number of repeats are larger.
The gene encodes the highly conserved cytoplasmic protein huntingtin,
which is widely distributed in neurons throughout the CNS, but its
function is not known.
Manifestations

Early stages: Chorea tends to be focal or segmental, but progresses over
time to involve multiple body regions. Dysarthria, gait disturbance, and
oculomotor abnormalities are common features.
Advancing disease: There may be a reduction in chorea and emergence of
dystonia, rigidity, bradykinesia, myoclonus, and spasticity.
HD patients eventually develop behavioral and cognitive disturbances, and
the majority progress to dementia. Depression with suicidal tendencies,
aggressive behavior, and psychosis can be prominent features.
Treatment
Multidisciplinary approach, with medical, neuropsychiatric, social, and genetic counseling for
patients and their families.Medical:
–   HD chorea is self-limited and is usually not disabling.
–   Psychosis can be treated with atypical neuroleptics. Depression and anxiety is treated with
appropriate antidepressant and antianxiety drugs.
–   No adequate treatment for the cognitive or motor decline.
–   Promitochondrial agents such as ubiquinone and creatine are being tested as possible disease-
modifying therapies.
TREMOR
Q. Write a short note on definition of tremor and mention its types with
examples.
Tremor is an unintentional, rhythmic muscle movement involving to-and-
fro movements (oscillations) of one or more parts of the body produced by
alternating or synchronous contractions of antagonist muscles. It is the most
common of all involuntary movements and can affect the hands, arms, head,
face, voice, trunk, and legs.
Causes of Tremor (Table 15.79)
Table 15.79: Causes of tremor.
Physiological:  Anxiety
Drugs:  Beta agonists, alcohol
Intention tremor: Cerebellar lesion
ThyrotoxicosisDrug induced:  Amphetamine, steroids
Alcohol withdrawal , liver failure
Mercury poisoning
Wilson's disease (wing beating tremor)
Types/Nature of Tremor

Resting tremor  occurs when the muscle is relaxed. For example, tremor
occurring when the hands are lying on the lap or hanging next to the trunk
while standing or walking. It may be shaking of the limb, even when the
individual is at rest. It is usually observed only in the hand or fingers and
is seen in Parkinson’s disease.Action tremor is detected during any type of movement of an affected
body part. There are several subtypes of action tremor.
Postural tremor occurs when an individual maintains a position against
gravity. For example, holding the arms outstretched.
Kinetic tremor  occurs during movement of a part of the body. For
example, moving the wrists up and down.
Intention tremor is present during a purposeful movement toward a
target. For example, touching a finger to one’s nose during a medical
examination. Task-specific tremor occurs when performing highly skilled, goal-
oriented tasks. For example, as handwriting or speaking.
Isometric tremor  occurs during a voluntary muscle contraction that is not
accompanied by any movement.
Classification
Tremor is most commonly classified by its appearance and cause or origin.
Essential tremor (benign essential tremor): It is the most common of
the forms of abnormal tremor.
–   It may be mild and nonprogressive or slowly progressive. Most
commonly observed in the hands but may involve the head, voice,
tongue, legs, and trunk. Tremor of the hands is typically present as an
action tremor.
–   Triggers: Heightened emotion, stress, fever, physical exhaustion, or
low blood sugar may trigger tremors and/or increase their severity. It
decreases on alcohol consumption.Parkinsonian tremor is characteristically as a resting tremor (refer page
1010).
Dystonic tremor  occurs in individuals affected by dystonia. It may affect
any muscle. Dystonic tremors occur irregularly and often relieved by
complete rest.

Cerebellar tremor is a slow tremor of the extremities that occurs at the
end of a purposeful movement (intention tremor). For example, trying to
press a button or touching a finger to the tip of one’s nose.
–   Caused by lesions in or damage to the cerebellum, e.g. stroke, tumor,
or multiple sclerosis. Cerebellar damage can also result in a ‘wing-
beating’ type of tremor which is a combination of rest, action, and
postural tremors. Cerebellar tremor may be associated with dysarthria
(speech problems), nystagmus (rapid involuntary movements of the
eyes), gait problems, and postural tremor of the trunk and neck.Psychogenic tremor (functional tremor) can appear as any form of tremor
movement. The characteristics may vary but generally include sudden
onset and remission, increased incidence with stress. Many individuals
have a conversion disorder or psychiatric disease.Orthostatic tremor detected as rhythmic muscle contractions in the legs
and trunk immediately after standing.
Physiologic tremor occurs in every normal individual. It may be
exaggerated by strong emotion (such as anxiety or fear), physical
exhaustion, etc. It is generally not caused by a neurological disease.
–   Rubral tremor/Holme’s tremor—seen in midbrain lesions.
ORGANIC BRAIN SYNDROME
Q. Write a short note on organic brain syndrome (OBS).
It is an abnormal mental state characterized by changes in orientation,
memory, judgment and affect. It is due to diffuse impairment of brain tissue.
The two most important types of OBS are delirium (refer page 1086) and
dementia is discussed on page 1145.
COMA
Q. How would you investigate and manage a 50-year-old patient
presenting with coma?
Definitions
Consciousness

It means the state of patient’s awareness of self and environment and his
responsiveness to external stimulation and inner need.
Consciousness is maintained by two separate anatomical and physiological
systems:
–   Ascending reticular activating system (ARAS) projecting from
brainstem to thalamus determines arousal (the level of consciousness).
–   Cerebral cortex determines the content of consciousness.
Confusion
Traditionally referred as ‘clouding of sensorium ’.
It denotes inability to think with customary speed, clarity and coherence,
accompanied by some degree of inattentiveness and disorientation.
Confusion results most often from process that influences the brain
globally, such as toxic or metabolic disturbance or a dementia.
Drowsiness
The inability to sustain a wakeful state without application of stimuli
externally is called drowsiness.
Slow arousal is elicited by speaking to the patient or applying a tactile
stimulus.
Stupor
A state in which the person can be aroused only by repeated vigorous
stimuli is called as stupor.
There is either absence or slow and inadequate response to spoken
commands.
It is common to find restless or stereotyped motor activity. In these
patients there is a reduction in the natural shifting of positions.
When left unstimulated, these patients quickly return to a sleep-like state.
Coma
Coma is a condition characterized by a deep sleep like stage from which the
patient cannot be aroused even with vigorous, continuous stimulation. The
patient does not make any localized responses. However, the patient may
grimace or show withdrawal responses to painful stimuli.
Classification of Coma (Table 15.80)

Q. Write a short essay/note on causes of coma.
Table 15.80: Classification of coma.
Coma without focal signs or meningism
Exogenous intoxicants: Alcohol, barbiturate, opiates
Endogenous metabolic disturbances:  Anoxia, hypoglycemia, diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA),
hyperosmolar non-ketotic state (HONK), uremia, hepatic failure, hyponatremia or hypernatremia,
Addisonian crisis, carbon monoxide poisoning, myxedema
Severe systemic infections:  Septicemia, typhoid fever, cerebral malaria, pneumonia, peritonitis,
Waterhouse Friedrichsen syndrome
Circulatory collapse (shock) from any cause
Postseizure states
Hypertensive encephalopathy
Hyperthermia and hypothermia
Concussion
Acute hydrocephalus
Coma with meningism
Subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH)
Acute bacterial meningitis
Viral meningoencephalitis
Neoplastic meningitis
Parasitic meningitis
Pituitary apoplexy
Coma with focal signs
Hemispheral hemorrhage or massive cerebral infarction
Brainstem infarction
Brain abscess, subdural empyema, herpes encephalitis
Epidural and subdural hemorrhage, brain contusion
Brain tumor
Miscellaneous: TTP, fat embolism, ADEM, cortical vein thrombosis, focal infarction caused by
bacterial endocarditis
Approach to a Patient with Coma
Q. How do you proceed to investigate and manage a case of coma?
History
Enquire about history of diabetes, hypertension, head injury, convulsions,
alcohol or drug use, circumstances in which patient was found,
medications in hospitalized patient like anesthetics, sedatives,

antiepileptic, opiates, antidepressants, antipsychotics.
Onset of Coma
Sudden onset of coma would suggest a vascular cause possibly SAH or
brainstem involvement.
Rapid progression from hemispheric signs to coma: Intracerebral
hemorrhage.
Protracted course: Tumor, abscess, chronic SDH.
Altered sensorium (delirium) preceeding coma, with no focal neurological
deficits indicates metabolic encephalopathy.
General Examination
Signs of trauma:  (a) Racoon eyes, (b) Battle's sign and (c) CSF rhinorrhea or logorrhea
Blood pressure:
–   Hypertension suggests: (a) hypertensive encephalopathy or (b) intracerebral hemorrhage
–   Hypotension suggests: (a) myocardial infarction, (b) septicemia, (c) Addison disease, (d)
alcohol or barbiturate intoxication, (e) internal hemorrhage.
Pulse:  Bradycardia with periodic breathing and hypertension (Cushing reflex) suggests raised ICP.
Temperature:
–   Hypothermia suggests: (a) alcohol or barbiturate intoxication, (b) myxedema, (c) advanced
tubercular meningitis, (d) peripheral circulatory failure
–   Hyperthermia suggests: (a) systemic infection, (b) meningoencephalitis, (c) heatstroke, (d)
anticholinergic drugs abuse
Signs of meningeal irritation : (a) Meningitis, (b) SAH
Fundus: Raised ICP (papilledema), subhyaloid hemorrhages (SAH), and hypertensive
encephalopathy.
Smell of breath : For ketones, alcohol and hepatic fetor.
Skin inspection:
–   Rash suggests meningococcemia, staphylococcal endocarditis, typhus, rocky mountain spotted
fever (RMSF)
–   Excessive sweating suggest hypoglycemia or shock
–   Diffuse petechiae suggest TTP, DIC, fat embolis
Neurological Assessment
Neurological assessment is done to determine the depth of coma (GCS),
brainstem function, and lateralization of pathology.
Observation first without examiner intervention.
Observe the posture of the limb, position of the eyes and head,
spontaneous movement, pattern of respiration.
Yawning and spontaneous shifting of body position indicates minimal

degree of unresponsiveness.
Multifocal myoclonus almost always indicates metabolic disorder.
Assess responsiveness by noting patient’s reaction to calling his name, or
to noxious stimuli such as supraorbital or sternal pressure.
Evaluation of Severity of Coma (Tables 15.81 and 15.82)
Table 15.81: Edinburgh classification of coma.
Grade 0 : Fully conscious
Grade 1: Drowsy, but responds to verbal command
Grade 2: Unconscious, but responds to minimal pain stimulus
Grade 3: Unconscious, but responsive to strong pain stimulus
Grade 4: Unconscious, with no response to pain.
Table 15.82: Glasgow coma score (GCS).
Score
Eye opening (E)
Spontaneous 4
To speech 3
To pain 2
None 1
Best motor response (M)
Obeys (normal) 6
Localizes (localized to pain) 5
Withdraws to pain 4
Abnormal flexion 3
Abnormal extension 2
None 1
Verbal response (V)
Oriented normal conversation 5
Confused (disoriented) conversation 4
Inappropriate words 3
Incomprehensible sounds (no words, only sounds) 2
None 1
Coma Score = E + M + V

Always present GCS as breakdown, not a sum score
(unless 3 or 15). Score<8 indicates severe injury.
Minimum sum: Deeply comatose = 3
Maximum sum: Fully conscious = 15
Q. Write short essay/note on Edinburgh classification of coma.
Q. Write short essay/note on Glasgow coma scale.
Newer Scales for Prognosis of Coma
FOUR (Full Outline of Unresponsiveness) SCALE
New Coma Scale is devised in 2005, Four components (Eye, motor, brainstem, respiration)
Each component has maximum of score of four.
AVPU:  Alertness, response to Verbal stimuli, response to Painful stimuli, or Unresponsive
ACDU: Alertness, Confusion, Drowsiness, and Unrespon-siveness
Grady Scale:  Scale of I to V along a scale of confusion, stupor, deep stupor, abnormal posturing, and
coma.
Stages of ComaGrade I: Individuals who respond with recognition when their name is called and do not lapse into
sleep  when left undisturbed.
Grade II: The person lapses into sleep when undisturbed and is aroused only when a pin is tapped
gently over the chest wall.
Grade III: Patient who winces in response to deep pain stimulus. Deep pain stimulus may result in
abnormal postural reflexes either unilateral or bilateral.
Grade IV: Deep pain stimulus may result in decorticate or decerebrate  posturing.
Grade V: The patient who maintains a state of flaccid unresponsiveness inspite of deep pain
stimulation.
Posture in Comatose Patient
Decerebrate rigidity: It consists of opisthotonus, clenching of jaws, stiff extension of limbs with
internal rotation of arms and plantar flexion of feet. Extensor posturing arises in variety of settings:
Midbrain compression, cerebellar lesions, metabolic, drug intoxication, etc.Decorticate rigidity: Arms in flexion and adduction and legs extended signify lesion rostral to
midbrain.
Extensor posture of arms with weak flexor responses of legs is seen with lesions at level of
vestibular nuclei.
Brainstem Reflexes (Brainstem Function) (Box 15.36)
Box 15.36: Brainstem reflexes.
Pupillary size and reactivity
Ocular movements
Corneal responses

Ocular-vestibular reflexes
Pattern of breathing (respiratory pattern)
Q. Write short note on brainstem reflexes.
As a rule, when these brainstem activities are preserved, particularly the pupil
reactions and eye movements, coma must be ascribed to bilateral hemispheral
disease. However, a mass in the hemispheres may cause coma and also
produce herniation.
Pupillary Reactions (Table 15.83 and Fig. 15.22)
Table 15.83: Interpretation of pupillary reactions.
Pupillary reactions InterpretationSymmetrically reactive round pupils Exclude midbrain damage
Enlarged and unreactive pupil (>5 mm) Intrinsic midbrain lesion (ipsilateral) or by
ipsilateral mass
Oval and slightly eccentric pupils Early midbrain or third nerve compression
Bilateral dilated and unreactive pupils Severe midbrain damage by transtentorial
herniation or anticholinergic drugs toxicity
(atropine, TCA)
Dilatation of one pupil  that then becomes
fixed to lightCompression of the III cranial nerve and is a
neurosurgical emergency
Reactive bilaterally small but not pinpoint
(1–2.5 mm)Metabolic encephalopathy or thalamic
hemorrhages
Bilateral pinpoint (very small less than 1
mm) but reactive pupilOpioid or barbiturate overdose or bilateral
pontine hemorrhage
Bilateral midpoint reactive pupils  (i.e.
normal pupils)Metabolic comas, coma due to sedative drugs
except opiates
Bilateral light fixed, dilated pupils Cardinal sign of brain death in deep coma of
any cause, but particularly in barbiturate
intoxication and hypothermia
Eye Movements and Position (Fig. 15.23)In light coma of metabolic origin, eyes wander conjugately from side to side in random fashion.
These movements disappear as coma deepens.
Adducted eye at rest:  6th nerve palsy. If it is bilateral it is due to raised ICT.
Abducted eye at rest:  3rd nerve palsy.
Conjugate deviation of eyes towards hemispheric  lesion and away from unilateral pontine

lesion.
Downward and inward deviation of eyes:  Lesions of thalamus and upper midbrain.
Eyes turn toward convulsing side in focal  seizures.
Ocular bobbing: It is characterized by brisk downward and slow upward movements of the eyes
associated with loss of horizontal eye movements. It is diagnostic of lesions in midbrain and pons.
Ocular dipping:  It is characterized by slow downward followed by faster upward movement in
patients with normal horizontal gaze. It indicates diffuse cortical anoxic damage and drug
intoxication.
Dysconjugate eyes (divergent ocular axes):  Brainstem lesion, e.g. skew deviation (one eye up,
one eye down)
Oculocephalic reflex:  Also called doll's-eye movement.
–   Elicited by briskly turning or tilting the head.
–   In coma of metabolic origin or due to lesions of bihemispheral structures, the response consists
of conjugate movements of eyes in the opposite direction.
–   Positive response indicates: Intact oculomotor, abducent, midbrain and pons.
–   Absent reflex indicates: Damage within brainstem. It can be also due to profound overdose of
sedatives or anticonvulsants.
Fig. 15.22:  Pupillary reactions in coma.

Fig. 15.23:  Eye movements and position.
Oculovestibular or Caloric Test
Method: Irrigate the external auditory canal with cold water.
Normal response: Causes slow conjugate deviation of eyes towards
irrigated ear followed in few seconds by compensatory nystagmus (i.e. fast
component away from irrigated ear).
Interpretation:
–   Loss of conjugate ocular movements in brainstem damage.
–   Loss of fast corrective nystagmus in metabolic or bilateral hemispheral
damage. The eyes are tonically deflected to side irrigated with cold
water and this position may be held for 2–3 minutes.
Respiratory Patterns (Figs. 15.24A to E)
Slow, shallow, regular breathing:  Metabolic or drug depression.
Cheyne-Stokes respiration (alternating hyperpnea and periods of apnea): Massive supratentorial
lesions, bilateral cerebral lesions and mild metabolic disturbance.
Central neurogenic hyperventilation:  Lesions of lower midbrain and upper pons either primary
or secondary to transtentorial herniation.

Apneustic breathing: Lower pontine lesions.
Biot's or ataxic breathing:  Lesions of dorsomedial part of medulla.
Agonal gasps:  Bilateral lower brainstem damage and terminal respiratory pattern.
Acidotic (Kussmaul) respiration  (deep, sighing hyperventilation):  In diabetic ketoacidosis and
uremia
Laboratory Studies and Imaging
Complete blood count
Random blood sugar
Renal function tests and liver function tests
Serum electrolytes
Urine examination for specific gravity, glucose, acetone and protein
content.
Arterial blood gases analysis: For acidosis or high CO levels
Chest X-ray
ECG
CT or MRI scan: Quick and effective in demonstrating all types of brain
hemorrhage and mass lesions.
Lumbar puncture: It should be performed in coma only after careful risk
assessment. It should not be performed when there is a suspicion of an
intracranial mass lesion. CSF examination may help in the diagnosis of
meningoencephalitis or other infection, or in subarachnoid hemorrhage.
Electroencephalography (EEG): It may be useful in the diagnosis of
metabolic coma, encephalitis and nonconvulsive status epilepticus.
Drugs screen: Blood alcohol and salicylates, urine toxicology (e.g.
screening for benzodiazepines, narcotics, amphetamines, etc.).
Others, e.g. cerebral malaria and porphyria.

Figs. 15.24A to E:  Respiratory patterns: (A) Cheyne-Stokes respiration; (B) Central neurogenic
hyperventilation; (C) Apneustic breathing; (D) Cluster breathing; (E) Ataxic/Biot’s breathing.
Differential Diagnosis
Coma vigil (vegetative state—VS):  Patient is comatose, but the eyelids are open giving the
appearance of being awake. Patients can open their eyes or have random limb and head
movements but there is complete absence of response to commands or to communicate. It is
usually due to extensive cortical damage. Brainstem function is intact. Hence, breathing is normal
without the need for mechanical ventilation. Patients may remain in this vegetative state for years.
Even after 12 months if there is no recovery, it is called permanent vegetative state (PVS).Minimally conscious state (MCS):  A condition in which patient have some limited/inconsistent
(fluctuating) signs of awareness (unlike patients with vegetative state). These include nonreflexive
response to sensory stimulation, awareness of the self or the environment, or language
comprehension or expression.Akinetic mutism:  It refers to a state in which the patient is partially or fully awake, but remains
entirely silent and immobile. The patient does nothing voluntarily and has sleep/wake cycles and
can maintain vital functions. It may be seen in bilateral frontal lobe lesions, hydrocephalus and a
mass in the region of third ventricle.
Locked-in-state (locked-in syndrome or pseudocoma):  The patient is fully aware and alert but
unable to communicate except through eye movements. There is complete paralysis except vertical
eye movements and intact lid movements (blinking in ventral). This syndrome is due to extensive
transverse lesions in the pontine and midbrain (infarction).
Conversion reaction:  Patients have normal pupils, corneal reflexes and plantar reflexes. These
patients may keep their eyes firmly closed and resist the opening of the eye by examiners. Their
eyes roll up when the lids are raised. It may be due to feigned or hysterical state.
Psychogenic coma.

Brainstem death is discussed below.
Treatment
General management: Comatose patients require careful nursing, maintenance of the airway, and
breathing frequent monitoring of vital functions.
Specific treatment:  Diagnosis of the underlying cause/lesion should be done as early as possible
and appropriate specific treatment is to be given. For example:
–   Diabetic with hypoglycemic coma: Administer hypertonic glucose without waiting for
reports. However, bedside estimation of blood glucose and administer dextrose only if the
blood glucose is below 100 mg/dL.
–   Alcoholic with coma: Administer glucose and vitamin B 1 100 mg intravenously, without
waiting for reports.
Longer-term management
–   Skin care:  Change the posture every 2 to 3 hours and keep the skin clean and dry to avoid
pressure/bed sores and pressure palsies.
–   Eye care: To prevent corneal damage (lid taping, irrigation).
–   Oral hygiene:  Mouthwashes and suction.
–   Fluids: Through nasogastric tube or IV. Have a secure IV line.
–   Feeding: Nutrients through a fine-bore nasogastric tube.
–   Sphincters:  Catheterization of urinary bladder and rectal evacuation.
–   Posture of the patient:  Prevent the aspiration of gastric contents by positioning the patient in
prone or lateral position.
BRAIN DEATH
Q. Write a short note on brain death.
Brain death occurs from irreversible brain injury which is sufficient to
permanently eliminate all cortical and brainstem function (i.e. loss of all
functions of the brain, including the brainstem).
Because the vital centers in the brainstem maintain cardiovascular and
respiratory functions, brain death is incompatible with survival despite
mechanical ventilation and cardiovascular and nutritional supportive
measures.It develops when intracranial pressure (ICP) exceeds cerebral perfusion
pressure (CPP) and results in cessation of cerebral blood flow (CBF) and
oxygen delivery.Significance of brain death:
–   It permits the withdrawal of costly life-saving equipment and drugs.
–   Family can be offered the opportunity for organ donation.

Diagnosis of Brain Death
Brain death is a clinical diagnosis. No other tests are necessary and complete
clinical examination including independent brain death determinations by
two licensed physicians is conclusive.
Clinical Evaluation (Prerequisites)
Establish known irreversible cause of coma.
The first and foremost critical step in establishing the diagnosis of brain
death is to establish an irreversible, untreatable cause of the brain
injury (e.g. global ischemia due to cardiac arrest, intracranial bleed and
severe head injury).
Exclude  potentially reversible conditions like hypothermia, drug
intoxication, poisoning, metabolic disorders (e.g. hypoglycemia, acidosis,
electrolyte imbalance). Hypothermia should also be excluded—rectal
temperature must exceed 35 °C.Achieve body temperature >36°C.
Achieve normal systolic BP (>100 mm Hg).
Clinical Evaluation (Neuro-assessment)
Establish coma
Establish absence of brainstem reflexes
–   Pupillary reflex (absent)
–   Eye movements
◆   Occulo-cephalic: Absent (dolls eye movements)
◆   Occulo-vestibular: Absent (cold caloric test)
–   Facial sensation and motor response: No corneal reflex, no jaw reflex,
no grimacing to deep pressure on nail bed, supraorbital ridge or
temporomandibular joint
–   Pharyngeal (gag) reflex absent
–   Tracheal (cough) reflex absent.
Establish Apnea by Apnea Test
Prerequisites for apnea test: Body temperature >36°C, systolic blood pressure ≥100 mm Hg, normal
electrolytes profile, normal PaCO 2 (35–45 mm Hg).
Procedure of apnea test

–   Connect a pulse oximeter and disconnect the ventilator.
–   Deliver 100% O 2 by catheter through endotracheal tube at 6 L/minute.
–   Observe for respiratory movement at least for 8–10 minutes.
–   Discontinue testing: If BP drops to <90 mm Hg and PaO 2 decreases to 85% by pulse oxymetry
for 30 seconds.
–   If respiratory drive/movement  is observed after 8 minutes. Take next blood sample for blood
gas studies. This indicates apnea test result is negative.
–   Absence of respiration drive: If respiratory movements are absent  and arterial PaCO 2 is 60
mm Hg or 20 mm Hg increase over a baseline normal PaCO 2 indicates apnea test result is
positive and supports the clinical diagnosis of brain death.
Ancillary Tests/Confirmatory Testing
Electroencephalography (EEG): Electrocerebral silence absence of
electrical activity during at least 30 minutes.
Cerebral angiography: Absence of intracranial blood flow.
PET: Glucose metabolism studies/dynamic nuclear brain scan: ‘Hollow-
skull’ sign of brain death.
Documentation
Time of death is the time the arterial PaCO2 reached the target value OR
when ancillary test officially interpreted.
DISEASES OF CRANIAL NERVES
I. Cranial Nerve: Olfactory Nerve
Common causes of anosmia (Table 15.84).
Table 15.84: Common causes of anosmia.
Acute/chronic inflammatory nasal disease
Heavy smoking
Intracranial tumor compressing the olfactory
bulbHead injury
Atrophy of olfactory bulb
Chronic meningeal inflammation
Parkinson’s disease
II. Cranial Nerve: Optic Nerve
Clinical Examinations
Optic nerve in tested by various modalities of vision: Visual acuity, visual

fields, color vision, fundoscopy.
Visual acuity
Snellen’s chart is used to measure visual acuity for distant vision.
Visual acuity for near vision is tested by Jaeger’s chart.
Pathway of optic nerve (Fig. 15.25)
Q. Write short essay/note on anatomy of optic nerve/visual pathway.
Q. Write short essay/note on field defects produced and localization of
lesions at various levels.
Visual fields
Visual can be impaired by damage to the visual system anywhere from the
eyes to the occipital lobes.
One can localize the site of the lesion with considerable accuracy by
mapping the visual field deficit by finger confrontation and then
correlating it with the topographic anatomy of the visual pathway.At the optic chiasma, fibers from nasal ganglion cells decussate into the
contralateral optic tract. Symmetric compression of the optic chiasm by a
pituitary adenoma, meningioma, craniopharyngioma, glioma, or aneurysm
results in a bitemporal hemianopia.A unilateral postchiasmal lesion leaves the visual acuity in each eye
unaffected, although the patient may read the letters on only the left or
right half of the eye chart.Damage to the optic radiations in the temporal lobe (Meyer’s loop)
produces a superior quandrantic homonymous hemianopia, whereas injury
to the optic radiations in the parietal lobe results in an inferior quandrantic
homonymous hemianopia.Lesions of the primary visual cortex give rise to dense, congruous
hemianopic field defects by post-cerebral artery infarct. They have
macular sparing, because collaterals from the middle cerebral artery
supply the macular representation at the tip of the occipital lobe.Destruction of both occipital lobes produces cortical blindness. This
condition can be distinguished from bilateral prechiasmal visual loss by
noting that the pupil responses and optic fundi remain normal.

Fig. 15.25:  Various visual filed defects depending on the location of lesion.
Visual loss
Lesions in any areas between the retina and the visual cortex can produce
visual loss. Patterns of visual field loss are shown in Figure 15.25.
Visual symptoms involving one eye: Due to lesions anterior to the optic
chiasm.
Transient visual loss: It is the sudden onset of visual loss lasting less than
15 minutes. It is usually due to vascular disease and may be difficult to
identify whether the visual loss was monocular (carotid circulation) or
binocular (vertebrobasilar circulation).
Color visionThe retina has three classes of cones, with visual pigments of differing
peak spectral sensitivity: red (560 nm), green (350 nm), and blue (430
nm).The red and green cone pigments are encoded on the X chromosome; the

blue cone pigment on chromosome 7.
Most common anomaly of color vision are the various types of red-green
deficiency inherited as sex-linked recessive condition. Only males are
affected (X-linked) and present in 8% males.
Ishihara color plates can be used to detect red-green color blindness.
Acquired defects of color vision occur in macular and optic nerve
diseases, and due to certain drugs (e.g. ethambutol, chloroquine).
Papilledema (Fig. 15.26)
Fig. 15.26: Fundoscopy showing papilledema.
Papilledema is the edema (swelling) of the optic disc >3 diopters. This term
has been used only for passive swelling of the optic disc secondary to raised
intracranial pressure.
Causes of papilledema (Table 15.85)
Table 15.85: Causes of papilledema.
Optic nerve damageDemyelination (optic neuritis/papillitis)
Anterior ischemic optic neuropathyRaised intracranial pressure
Cerebral mass lesion (tumor, abscess
granulomas)

Toxins (e.g. methanol)
Infiltration of optic disc by glioma, lymphoma
and sarcoidosisObstructive hydrocephalus, diffuse brain
edema
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension
Cerebral venous sinus thrombosis
Ocular blockage of venous drainage
Central retinal venous block
Cavernous sinus thrombosisSystemic disorders affecting retinal vessels
Hypertension
Vasculitis: Giant cell arteritis and other
autoimmune vasculitides
Hypercapnia, hypercalcemia
COPD (hypercapnea)
It develops due to obstruction of venous outflow along with stasis of
axoplasmic flow within the optic nerve. It also develops due to any cause that
produces edema in the head of the optic nerve (e.g. local causes).
Q. Write a short note on the causes of papilledema.
Argyll-Robertson pupil
Q. Write a short note on Argyll-Robertson pupil.
It is the pupillary change where accommodation reflex is present but light
reflex is impaired.
Findings (Box 15.37) and causes (Box 15.38)
Box 15.37:  Ophthalmological findings in Argyll-Robertson pupil.
Pupils: Small, irregular and unequal in size
Iris: Atrophy and de-pigmentation
Light reflex: Absent for direct (always) and consensual (usually stimulus)
Accommodation reflex: Intact
Ciliospinal reflex: Absent
Box 15.38:  Causes of Argyll-Robertson pupil.
Neurosyphilis (tabes dorsalis) generally bilateral
Diabetes
Multiple sclerosis
Sarcoidosis
Tumors of pineal region
Site of lesion: Tectum of the midbrain or peripherally in the branch of III
cranial nerve.

Pinpoint pupil
Q. Write a short note on the causes of pinpoint pupil.
Causes of pinpoint pupil (Box 15.39)
Box 15.39:  Causes of pinpoint pupil.
Pontine hemorrhage
Organophosphorus poisoning
Opium poisoning
Pilocarpine instillation
Thalamic hemorrhage (occasionally)
Adie’s pupil
Q. Write a short note on Adie’s pupil.
Normally, pupil reaction to light is absent or markedly reduced when
tested in the routine examination. However, Adie’s pupil reacts slowly
with prolonged maximal stimulation.
Once the Adie’s pupil reacts to accommodation, the pupil remains
tonically constricted and dilates very slowly.
Cause: Destruction of ciliary ganglion.
Causes of blindness (Box 15.40)
Box 15.40:  Causes of blindness.
Cataract leading cause (47.9%)
Glaucoma (12.3%)
Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) (8.7%)
Corneal opacities
Diabetic retinopathy
Childhood blindness
Trachoma
Q. Write a short note on causes of blindness.
Horner’s Syndrome (Fig. 15.27)

Fig. 15.27:  Left Horner’s syndrome.
Q. Write short essay/note on Horner’s syndrome.
Horner’s syndrome is a syndrome complex caused by the involvement of
the oculosympathetic tract.
Sympathetic nervous supply to the eye consist of three neuron pathway:
1. Fibers through the IIIrd nerve innervate levator muscle of eyelid
(Muller’s muscles).
2. Fibers through nasociliary nerve supply the blood vessels of eye.
3. Fibers through long ciliary nerve innervate pupil.
Damage to any part of the pathway results in Horner’s syndrome.
Components of Horner’s Syndrome (Box 15.41)
Causes of Horner’s Syndrome
Cerebral and brainstem lesions:  Hemispherectomy, massive cerebral infarction, brainstem
demyelination
Cervical cord lesions: Syringomyelia and cord tumors (e.g. ependymoma, glioma)
Thoracic root level:  Apical lung tumor (pancoast ‘tumor) or TB, cervical rib, trauma to brachial
plexus
Sympathetic chain and carotid artery in neck:  Following thyroid/laryngeal/carotid surgery,
carotid artery dissection, neoplastic infiltration, cervical sympathectomy
Miscellaneous:  Congenital Horner’s syndrome, cluster headache (transient), idiopathic.
Box 15.41:  Components of Horner's syndrome.
Miosis due to reduced pupillodilator activity
Partial ptosis of eyelid
Enophthalmos
Anhidrosis of ipsilateral half of face
Absence of ciliospinal reflex

III, IV, VI Cranial Nerves: Oculomotor, Trochlear and
Abducens Nerves
Ptosis (Fig. 15.28)
Fig. 15.28:  Unilateral ptosis.
Normal palpebral fissure 9 mm to 12 mm.
The narrowing of the palpebral fissures due to inability to open an
upper eyelid  is called ptosis.
Ptosis may be congenital or acquired, unilateral or bilateral, partial or
complete
–   Congenital ptosis: It is due to bilateral congenital hypoplasia of the
third nerve nuclei, and results in bilateral ptosis.
–   Acquired ptosis: Acquired ptosis may be unilateral or bilateral.
Causes of ptosis
Q. Write a short note on the causes of ptosis.
Causes for unilateral ptosis (Box 15.42)
Box 15.42:  Causes of unilateral ptosis.
Third cranial nerve lesion
Lesion of cervical sympathetic pathway (Horner’s syndrome)
Lesions of the upper eyelid
Causes for bilateral ptosis: Bilateral ptosis occurs when there is a lesion
of the third nerve nucleus, supplying the levator palpebrae superioris in the
midbrain (as a single nucleus in the midbrain supplies the levator

palpebrae superioris of both eyes). Its causes are listed in Box 15.43.
Partial ptosis: Occurs with lesion of the cervical sympathetic pathway
(Horner’s syndrome) due to weakness of the tarsal muscles, innervated by
cervical sympathetic nerves. The upper eyelids can however be raised
voluntarily.Complete ptosis: This occurs with third nerve lesions due to paralysis of
the levator palpabrae superiorsis, innervated by the third nerve. The
patient is not able to voluntarily open the affected eye.
Box 15.43:  Causes of bilateral ptosis.
Myopathies
Myasthenia gravis
Bilateral Horner’s syndrome
Snake bite
Botulism
Ptosis and Pupillary Size
Ptosis with a small pupil: Horner’s syndrome
Ptosis with a large pupil: IIIrd nerve palsy (compressive lesions).
Ptosis with normal papillary size: Infarction of IIIrd nerve, myasthenia gravis, myopathies or GB
syndrome.
Ophthalmoplegia
Q. Write short note on internuclear ophthalmoplegia.
Ophthalmoplegia is the paralysis or weakness of the eye muscles.
Internuclear Ophthalmoplegia (Fig. 15.29)
Caused by a lesion of the medical longitudinal fascicle (MLF), which
carries signals from the abducens nucleus to the contralateral medial rectus
oculomotor subnucleus.
The abducens nerve and MLF coordinate conjugate horizontal eye
movements with co-contraction of ipsilateral lateral rectus and
contralateral medial rectus muscles.Classic signs of unilateral internuclear ophthalmoplegia include impaired
adduction of the ipsilesional eye and abducting nystagmus of the
contralateral eye.

Despite ipsilateral adduction weakness with direct motility testing,
adduction is often intact with convergence because convergence signals to
the medical rectus nucleus are distinct from the MLF.
Multiple sclerosis and microvascular brainstem is ischemia are the most
common causes.
Fig. 15.29: Lesions of medical longitudinal fascicle (MLF).
Diplopia
Q. Write a short note on diplopia.
Diplopia means double vision. Most common subjective complain elicited by
lesions in the occulomotor system. Occurs more frequently with lesions of
the extraocular muscles or occulomotor nerves than with supranuclear lesions
which result in gaze palsies.Monocular diplopia
–   The first point to clarify is whether diplopia persists in either eye after
covering the fellow eye. If it does, the diagnosis is monocular diplopia.
–   The cause is usually intrinsic to the eye. For example, corneal

aberrations, uncorrected refractive error, cataract, or foveal traction
may give rise to monocular diplopia.
Binocular diplopia
–   Diplopia alleviated by covering one eye is binocular diplopia and is
caused by disruption of ocular alignment, occurs only if both eyes are
open.
–   Binocular diplopia occurs from a wide range or processes: For
example, infectious, neoplastic, metabolic, degenerative,
inflammatory, and vascular.
–   Here two images, one real and one false are formed. The real image is
closer to the eye and distinct; the false image is farther away from eye
and indistinct.
Nystagmus
Q. Write a short note on the causes of nystagmus.
Nystagmus is involuntary, conjugate, repetitive and rhythmic movement of
eyeballs. It is a sign of disease of the retina, cerebellum and/or vestibular
systems and their connections.
Types of nystagmus
Pendular nystagmus
A rapid to and from oscillation to either side of the midline, of equal
amplitude. It is usually vertical and present in all directions of gaze. The
causes are generally ocular such as macular abnormalities, high infantile
myopia, etc.
Jerk nystagmusIt is a fast/slow oscillation off the target, followed by a fast corrective
saccade. It is usual in neurological disease and is seen in vestibular, VIII
nerve, brainstem, and cerebellar lesions. Types of jerk nystagmus are:
–   Horizontal or rotary jerk  nystagmus is a to- and- fro movement in
the horizontal plane. It may be either of peripheral (vestibular) or
central origin (VIII nerve, brainstem, cerebellum and connections).
◆   In peripheral lesions, nystagmus is acute and transient (minutes or
hours) and accompanied by severe vertigo.

◆   In central lesions nystagmus is long lasting (weeks, months or
more). Vertigo tends to wane after days or weeks, the nystagmus
outlasting it.
–   Vertical nystagmus involves the oscillations in an up-and-down
direction. It is never labyrinthine in origin, and the quick phase is
usually upwards (upbeat nystagmus). It is caused central lesions [due
to intrinsic disturbance of the brainstem such as cerebrovascular
accidents (CVA) and drugs].
–   Rotatory nystagmus: Oscillations are of rotary character. It occurs in
both labyrinthine and brainstem disease.
–   An ataxic nystagmus involves the dissociation of rhythm in the two
eyes, seen in internuclear ophthalmoplegia, due to lesions of the
median longitudinal bundle.
Miscellaneous forms of nystagmus
–   Optokinetic nystagmus is a normal phenomenon best observed when
sitting opposite someone in a railway carriage.
–   See-saw nystagmus is spontaneous nystagmus, one eye moving up
while the other moves down. Lesion in the suprasellar region anterior
to the third ventricle.
–   Convergence-retraction nystagmus: Attempted upgaze provokes a jerk
nystagmus with the fast phase inwards, in a convergent manner. Lesion
of the upper midbrain near pineal gland.
–   Downbeat nystagmus is a vertical nystagmus, with fast phase directed
downwards. Lesion at the foramen magnum, commonly Chiari
malformations.
Vth Cranial Nerve: Trigeminal Nerve
Trigeminal Neuralgia (Tic Douloureux)Trigeminal neuralgia is also known as prosopalgia or Fothergill’s
disease. Tic Douloureux means painful jerking.
It is s a neuropathic disorder. It is defined as sudden, episodes of usually
unilateral, severe, brief, stabbing, intense, lancinating, recurring pain in
the distribution of one or more branches of the Vth cranial nerve
(trigeminal nerve).Middle age and later. Usually starts in the 6th and 7th decades and major

risk factor is hypertension.
Etiology
Q. Write a short essay/note on the causes of trigeminal neuralgia.
Usually produced due to compression of the trigeminal nerve at or near the
pons by an ecstatic vascular loop. Pain similar to trigeminal neuralgia can be
seen in other conditions (Table 15.86).
Table 15.86: Causes of trigeminal neuralgia.
Usually idiopathic
Demyelination of the nerve
Multiple sclerosis
Petrous ridge compressionPost-traumatic neuralgia
Intracranial tumors
Intracranial vascular abnormalities
Viral etiology
Clinical features
Pain
Characteristics of pain: Sudden, unilateral, intermittent (paroxysmal),
sharp, shooting/knifelike/lancinating/electric shock like. Pain rarely
crosses the midline. In extreme cases, the patient will have a motionless
face known as the ‘frozen or mask like face’. In 10–12% of cases it is
bilateral and usually due to intrinsic brainstem pathology (e.g. multiple
sclerosis) or expanding cranial tumor (acoustic schwannomas,
meningiomas, epidermoids).Duration of pain: Pain is of short duration (lasting seconds), but may
recur with variable frequency (may be many times a day). Attacks do not
occur during sleep.Pain occurs along the cutaneous distribution of the fifth nerve (Full or
branches). Pain usually commences in the mandibular division but may
spread to involve the maxillary and occasionally the ophthalmic divisions.Pain is precipitated by minor trauma to the trigger zones (e.g. slight touch,
chewing, shaving, rinsing mouth, exposure to cold wind). Common trigger
zones can be external/cutaneous (around the ala of nose, corners of lips
and check) or internal/intraoral (teeth, gingivae, tongue). Trigger area on
the face are so sensitive that touching or even air currents can trigger an
episode.

Neither objective signs of sensory loss nor signs of V nerve dysfunction
can be demonstrated on examination.
Differential diagnosis: Re-activation of the varicella zoster virus (refer
pages 152-4) is seen in older people and has predilection for ophthalmic
division of the trigeminal nerve.
Q. Write a short essay/note on treatment of trigeminal neuralgia.
Treatment
First line of treatment: Carbamazepine (anticonvulsant) to be started with a dose of 100–200
mg/day, increase in 2–3 weeks to 200–400 mg TID.
Second line of treatment: Baclofen, lamotrigine, oxcarbazepine, phenytoin, gabapentin,
pregabalin, sodium valproate.
Long-acting anesthetic agents: Localized pain is managed by injecting any of the following into
the particular branch of the nerve.
–   Alcohol injection
–   Peripheral glycerol injection
Surgery: Indicated if drug fails or not tolerated.
–   Peripheral neurectomy (nerve avulsion)
–   Open procedures (intracranial procedures)
–   Microvascular decompression
–   Percutaneous rhizotomies
–   Gamma knife radiosurgery: Using stereotactic imaging of the trigeminal nerve root entry zone,
radiation to delivered to trigeminal nerve.
VIIth Cranial Nerve: Facial Nerve (Fig. 15.30)
Causes of Facial Nerve Palsy (Table 15.87)Q. Write a short essay/note on:
Causes of LMN type of VIIth cranial nerve palsy.
Causes of VIIth cranial nerve palsy.
Table 15.87: Causes of facial nerve palsy.
Unilateral Bilateral
Upper motor neuron (UMN)
Vascular (stroke)
Tumor
Multiple sclerosisUpper motor neuron (UMN)
Vascular (multi-infarct dementia)
Motor neuron disease
Lower motor neuron (LMN) Lower motor neuron (LMN)

Bell’s palsy
Ramsay Hunt syndrome
Parotid tumor
Head injury
Skull base tumor
Basal meningitis
Diabetes mellitus
Hypertension
Chronic suppurative otitis mediaGuillain-Barré syndrome
Sarcoidosis (uveoparotid tumor)
Leprosy
Lyme’s disease
Leukemia
Lymphoma
Moebius
Melkersson Rosenthal
Toxin: Thalidomide
Bilateral Bell’s palsy
Fig. 15.30: Facial nerve anatomy.
Bell’s Palsy
Q. Discuss the etiology, clinical features, differential diagnosis and
management of Bell’s palsy.
Q. Write a short essay/note on Bell’s palsy.
Most common form of unilateral isolated lower motor neuron (LMN) type of

facial paralysis is Bell’s palsy.
Pathophysiology
Main cause of Bell’s palsy is thought to be latent herpes viruses (herpes
simplex virus type 1 and herpes zoster virus), which are reactivated from
cranial nerve ganglia. It causes swelling of nerve within  the tight petrous
bone facial canal.
Herpes zoster virus shows more aggressive biological behavior than
herpes simplex virus type 1.
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) techniques have isolated herpes virus
DNA from the facial nerve during acute palsy.
Inflammation of the nerve initially results in a reversible neurapraxia,
Clinical manifestations
Race: Slightly higher in persons of Japanese descent. Familial incidence
4.1%.
Age and gender: Highest in persons aged 15–45 years. It is rare below the
age of 15 and above the age of 60. No gender difference exists.
Onset is fairly abrupt, with pain around the ear  preceding the unilateral
facial weakness (maximal weakness by 48 hours). Patients often describe
the face as ‘numb’ and sometimes give the history of exposure to cold.
Associated symptoms: Hyperacusis, decreased production of tears and
saliva, and altered taste, otalgia or aural fullness and facial or
retroauricular pain.Less common in pregnancy but prognosis is significantly worse in
pregnant women.
Examination: Shows features of isolated lower motor neuron facial
paralysis. On the affected side following features are observed. These
include:
–   Paralysis of all the muscles of facial expression (Fig. 15.31A) .

Figs. 15.31A and B: Bell’s palsy (A) with Bell’s phenomenon (B).
–   Dropping of corner of mouth, effacement of creases and skin fold.
–   Involvement of frontalis makes frowning difficult. Eye closure is weak
because of involvement of orbiculiaris occuli
–   Drooling of saliva from angle of mouth.
–   Action of the levator anguli oris on the normal side, makes the angle of

mouth to deviate to the opposite side of the lesion, when the patient
shows his teeth.
–   When the closure of the eyelid is attempted, the eye on the paralyzed
side rolls upwards (Bell’s phenomenon)(Fig. 15.31B).
–   Due to exposure of the cornea, patient may develop exposure keratitis
and corneal ulceration.
Investigation
No specific confirmatory diagnostic test.
CSF may show mild lymphocytosis.
MRI may reveal swelling and uniform enhancement of the geniculate
ganglion and facial nerve and in some cases, entrapment of the swollen
nerve in the temporal bone.
Differences between upper motor and lower motor neuron facial palsy
(Table 15.88).
Table 15.88: Differences between upper motor and lower motor neuron
facial palsy.
UMN (upper motor neuron) facial palsy LMN (lower-upper motor neuron) facial palsyLower part of the face is involved Both lower and upper part of the face is
involved
No Bell's phenomenon Bell's phenomenon is seen
Taste is not effected Taste is effected
No hyperacusis Hyperacusis may be present if nerve to
stapedius is involved
Usually associated with hemiplegia Usually not associated unless any pontine
lesion is present causing crossed hemiplegia
Site of the lesion is above facial nucleus
usually in the internal capsuleUsually in the nucleus or distal to the nucleus
No wasting or atrophy Wasting or atrophy may be present
Differences between bilateral upper motor and bilateral lower motor
neuron facial palsy (Table 15.89).
Sequelae of Bell’s palsy
Table 15.89: Differences between bilateral upper motor and bilateral

lower motor neuron facial palsy.
Bilateral UMN palsy Bilateral LMN Palsy
Emotional fibers-spared
Emotional incontinence present
Associated with bilateral long tract
signs
Jaw jerk—exaggerated
Corneal reflex—present
Taste sensation—spared
Gag reflex—exaggeratedBell’s phenomenon present
Emotional fibers—affected
Long tract signs—absent
Jaw jerk—normal
Corneal reflex—absent
Taste sensation—absentIncomplete recovery:  Facial asymmetry persists; eye cannot be closed resulting in epiphora. A
weak oral sphincter causes drooling and difficulty in taking food.
Exposure keratitis:  Eye cannot be closed, tear film from the cornea evaporates causing dryness,
exposure keratitis and corneal ulcer.
Synkinesis (mass movement):  When the patient wishes to close eye corner of mouth also twitches
or vice versa.
Tics and spasm:  Result of faulty regeneration of fibers. Involuntary movements are seen on the
affected side of face.
Contractures:  Results from fibrosis of atrophied or fixed contraction of a group of muscles.
Crocodile tears (gustatory lacrimation):  Unilateral lacrimation with mastication. Due to faulty
regeneration of parasympathetic fibers which now supply lacrimal gland instead of the salivary
glands.
Frey’ syndrome (gustatory sweating): Sweating and flushing of skin over the parotid during
mastication. It results from parotid surgery.
Anomalous regeneration of the seventh nerve fibers. Originally connected with the orbicularis
oculi come to innervate the orbicularis oris, closure of the lids may cause a retraction of the mouth.
Jaw opening causing closure of the eyelids on the side of the facial palsy is termed Marcus–Gunn
jaw-winking phenomenon.
TreatmentSevere facial weakness may produce inability to blink and lead to exposure keratitis. Use of
lubricating eye drops  may be needed, and paper tape  to close the eye during sleep.
Massage of weekend muscles.
Medical treatment of Bell’s palsy.
Steroids (Prednisolone) 1 mg/kg/day for 5–7 days and then tapered over the next one week.
Antiviral agents: for 5–7 days.
–   Famciclvir 500 mg BD.
–   Valacyclovir 500 mg BD.
–   Aciclovir 800 mg five times a day.
Surgical decompression—only if no resolution of symptoms after 2 weeks.

INTRACRANIAL PRESSURE
Q. Discuss the clinical manifestations and management of increased
intracranial pressure.
Raised Intracranial Pressure
Normal intracranial pressure in adults is less than 10–15 mm Hg. There
are normal regular waves due to pulse and respiration.
With increased pressure ‘pressure waves’ appear. With continued rise of
ICP, the perfusion pressure (PP) falls. When PP falls cerebral blood flow
(CBF) is reduced. Electrical cortical activity fails if CBF is 20 mL/100
gm/min.When intracranial pressure reaches mean arterial pressure circulation to
the brain stops.
Raised intracranial pressure (RIP) may be caused by mass lesions, cerebral
edema, obstruction to CSF circulation causing hydrocephalus, impaired
CSF absorption and cerebral venous obstruction.
Common Causes of Raised ICP (Table 15.90)
Clinical Features
Q. Write short note on clinical manifestations of increased intracranial
pressure/tension.
Signs and symptoms of underlying cause.
Features of raised ICP (Box 15.44).
Box 15.44: Features of raised intracranial pressure (ICP).
Diffuse anterior headache worse on lying/straining
Vomiting
Diplopia (6th nerve involvement)
Papilledema
Bradycardia, raised blood pressure
Impaired conscious level: Drowsiness and mental deterioration
Seizures
The speed of increase in the pressure influences presentation.

Table 15.90: Common causes of raised intracranial pressure.
Primary or intracranial causes
Mass lesions
Intracranial hemorrhage (traumatic or
spontaneous): Extradural or subdural
hematoma, intracerebral hemorrhage
Brain tumor: Posterior fossa tumor or high-
grade gliomas
Infective:  Cerebral abscess, tuberculomas,
cysticercosis, hydatid cyst
Colloid cyst  (in ventricles)Disturbance of CSF circulation
Obstructive  (noncommunicating)
hydrocephalus: Obstruction within
ventricular system
Communicating hydrocephalus:
Obstruction outside ventricular system
Obstruction to venous sinuses
Cerebral venous thrombosis
Trauma (fractures overlying sinuses)
Diffuse brain edema or swelling
Meningoencephalitis
Trauma (diffuse head injury, near-drowning)
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
Metabolic (e.g. water intoxication)
Idiopathic intracranial hypertension
Postneurosurgery
Secondary or extracranial causes
Hypoxia or hypercarbia (hypoventilation)
Hyperpyrexia
Drug and toxins (e.g. valproate sodium, lead
intoxication)Hepatic failure
Seizure
Reye’s syndrome
High-attitude cerebral edema
–   Acute: If ICP has risen acutely (as in aggressive tumors), there is no
time for compensatory mechanisms to develop and causes leading
early symptoms, including sudden death. The pulse rate is slower, BP
may be elevated (Cushing’s reflex) and respiratory depression
(Cushing’s triad).
–   Slow: Compensatory mechanisms develop (e.g. alteration in the
volume of fluid in CSF spaces and venous sinuses) which minimize
symptoms. Raised ICP of more than a few days will result in
papilledema.VI cranial nerve palsy: Due either to stretching of the long slender nerve
or to compression against the petrous temporal bone ridge. It may be
unilateral or bilateral.Other cranial nerve III, V and VII may also be involved.
Herniation Syndromes

Raised ICT may cause displacement and herniation of the brain. Types of
herniation are presented in Figure 15.32.
Fig. 15.32:  Types of herniation.
Supratentorial Herniation
Uncal: Most frequent herniation in which downward displacement of the
medial temporal lobe (uncus) through the tentorium occurs.
Results in ipsilateral pupil dilatation, decreased level of consciousness,
changes in respiratory patterns, respiratory arrest, and contralateral
hemiplegia.Subfalcine herniation results in opposite lower limb weakness (ACA
involvement).
Central/Transtentorial Herniation
Results in loss of consciousness, small reactive pupils advancing to
fixed/dilated pupils, respiratory changes leading to respiratory arrest and
decorticate posturing advancing to flaccidity.
Infratentorial Herniation
Downward herniation of the cerebellar tonsils through the foramen magnum

may compress the medulla oblongata (tonsillar coning) causing respiratory
and cardiac arrest.
Uncal Syndrome
Herniation of the temporal lobe (medial) transtentorially results in uncal
syndrome.
It produces drowsiness in early stages and is accompanied by unilateral
pupillary dilatation.
Sometimes due to lateral mass effect, opposite cerebral peduncle is
crushed against the tentorium. This causes Babinski sign and weakness of
arm and leg ipsilateral to the lesion (Kernohan Woltman sign).
InvestigationsDepending on the underlying lesion/etiology.
CT head: It may show midline shift and compression of basal cisterns.
ICP monitoring: It is done in selected cases. For example, patients with
Glasgow coma scale ≤8 and CT scan show hematoma, contusion, edema,
herniation or compressed basal cisterns.
Q. Write short essay/note on initial management of raised intracranial
tension.
Q. Write short essay on management of increased intracranial pressure.
Treatment/Management of Increased Intracranial Pressure
Aims (Box 15.45)
Box 15.45:  Aims of management of increased intracranial pressure.
Relieve the cause (e.g. surgical decompression of mass).
Steroids to reduce vasogenic edema or shunt.
Procedure to relieve hydrocephalus.
Supportive treatment: Maintenance of fluid balance, blood pressure control, head elevation, and
use of diuretics such as mannitol. Intensive care support may be required.
Airway management
–   GCS <8 require intubation to protect airway.
Head positioning:  Head should be kept in midline, with around 15–30 degree elevation.
Temperature control:  Temperature can be lowered with acetaminophen and cooling blankets.
Shivering prevented by neuromuscular block.
Hemodynamic management: Maintain mean arterial pressure above 90 mm Hg. Administer
normal saline to achieve a central venous pressure of 5 to 10 mm Hg. Serum sodium to be

maintained between 140 and 150 mmol/L.
Seizure management:  Prophylactic antiepileptics (phenytoin)
Analgesia, sedation and neuromuscular block
–   Analgesia: Opioid like fentanyl and morphine
–   Sedation: Benzodiazepines like lorazepam and midazolam
–   Neuromuscular block: Pancuronium and vecuronium
Specific Therapy
Mannitol:  Osmotic diuretic
–   Mechanism: Rheologic and osmotic
–   Adverse effect: (1) intravascular volume depletion and (2) acute renal failure
Glycerol  acts in a similar fashion but is used less often.
–   Glycerol has caloric value and is beneficial for nutritional support.
–   Renal function do not determine the diuretic action. Hence, it can be given to patients with
renal insufficiency.
–   Side effect: is intravascular hemolysis, which can be prevented by giving a low concentration
(<20%) at a slow infusion rate (>1 hour).
–   Glycerol is most effective via enteroduodenal administration.
Frusemide:  20 mg 8 hourly.
Hypertonic saline:  A more recent treatment for increased ICP is IV administration of 3–23.4%
hypertonic saline. IV boluses can reduce ICP and augment CPP for several hours. Creates an
osmotic gradient and draws water from the intracellular and extracellular spaces into the
intravascular compartment. Potential side effects are listed in Box 15.46.
Box 15.46:  Side effects of treatment by hypertonic saline in raised ICP.
Hyperosmolar central pontine myelities
Congestive heart failure
Subdural hematomas
Coagulopathy (rarely)
–   The trauma guidelines recommend: Continuous infusion of 3% saline between 0.1 and 1.0
mL/kg/hour. Administration on a sliding scale, with the minimal dose needed to maintain ICP
less than 20 mm Hg. Care to be taken while using hypertonic saline to decrease ICP, the
osmolarity has to be maintained below 360 mOsm/L.Steroids: Dexamethasone  4 mg 6 hourly. Helps only in reducing vasogenic edema around tumor,
abscess or subdural hematoma. Routine administration of steroids should be avoided in patients
with traumatic brain injury and raised ICP.
Barbiturate coma in refractory cases:  Pentobarbital 5 mg/kg lowers ICP by lowering the rate of
the body’s metabolic process, oxygen consumption and carbon dioxide production. Burst
suppression correlates with maximal metabolic suppression.
Hyperventilation:  Mechanism by which hyperventilation decreases raised intracranial tension is
by decreasing cerebral blood volume by vasoconstriction. Hyperventilation resulting in drop in
PaCO 2 to around 25–35 decreases cerebral blood flow.
Management of underlying cause  wherever possible or applicable.
Surgical Management
Management of underlying cause of raised ICP.

Mass lesion:  Surgical decompression of mass lesion, removal of space-occupying lesion. Surgical
decompression is a life-saving procedure in which limited frontal or temporal lobectomies are
done.
Hydrocephalus: Ventriculoatrial or ventriculoperitoneal shunting.
TUMORS OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM
Among CNS tumors glial tumors are the most common, accounting for 50 to
60% of primary brain tumors. Meningiomas account for about 25% and
schwannomas for about 10%. Few primary tumors are listed in Table 15.91.
Table 15.91: Few common tumors of CNS.
Astrocytomas
–   Low-grade astrocytoma
–   High-grade astrocytoma
Oligodendrogliomas
EpendymomasMedulloblastoma
CNS lymphoma (more common in HIV
patients)
Meningiomas
Schwannomas
Cerebellopontine (CP) Angle Tumors
Q. Write a short note on cerebellopontine angle (CP angle) tumors.
Cerebellopontine (CP) angle is an area of lateral cistern containing CSF,
arachnoid tissue, cranial nerves and its associated vessels.
CP angle tumors constitute the most common posterior fossa tumors and
majority of them are benign.
Various CP angle tumors are listed in Table 15.92.
Table 15.92: Cerebellopontine angle tumors.
Vestibular schwannoma/acoustic neuroma
Meningioma
Cerebellar gliomaLess likely: Arachnoid cyst, nonacoustic cranial
nerve schwannomas, vascular malformations,
dermoids, teratomas, and lipomas
Clinical Features
Most common: Progressive unilateral sensory neural hearing loss (SNHL)
(retrocochlear) present in 95% of cases and often accompanied by tinnitus
which is present in 65% of cases.
Rare presentations include facial numbness or pain, earache or facial

weakness, cerebellar ataxia or symptoms of hydrocephalus (headache,
visual disturbance, mental status change, nausea, and vomiting).
Signs
Ear: Normal otoscopy
Cranial nerves:
–   5th cranial nerve: Earliest sign is impaired corneal reflex. Motor
functions are affected rarely.
–   7th cranial nerve: Sensory first; loss of sensation in the posterior
superior aspect of external auditory canal (EAC) called Hitselberger
sign. Lower motor neuron facial palsy develops later.
–   9th and10th cranial nerve: Palsy-palatal, pharyngeal and laryngeal
paralysis.
Eyes: Nystagmus.
Cerebellar signs present (ipsilateral).
Investigations
Audiological tests: It show features of retrocochlear hearing loss (high
frequency SNHL), recruitment negative, poor speech discrimination score
and presence of roll-over phenomenon.Acoustic reflex: Nearly in 75% patients the stapedial reflex is lost.
Caloric test: It is diminished or absent. Normal test finding does not
eliminate the diagnosis.
Plain X-ray: The best view is perorbital view; difference of 1 mm in the
vertical height of internal acoustic meatus is significant.
CT-scan (Fig. 15.33): It cannot detect intermeatal tumors.

Fig. 15.33:  CT showing CP angle tumor.
MRI: With gadolinium enhancement is gold standard.
Treatment
Surgical excision
Radiotherapy: Stereotactic radiosurgery (gamma knife) may stop the growth of vestibular
schwannoma mainly in small intracanalicular and extracanalicular lesions
Radiosurgery is recommended in bilateral vestibular schwannomas (e.g. Morbus Recklinghausen)
but only when the tumors are small.
Annual imaging is recommended for all patients being managed conservatively for the rest of their
life or until vestibular schwannoma growth is seen to a certain limit.
Acoustic Neuroma (Schwannoma)
Q. Write short note on acoustic neuroma.
It is a benign tumor which arises from Schwann cells of the 8th cranial
(vestibular) nerve. Majority are sporadic and unilateral.
Common between the fourth and sixth decade of life, with a slight female
preponderance.
Site: Commonly arises near the nerve’s entry point into the medulla or in
the internal auditory meatus and extends into the cerebellopontine angle.

Constitutes 80–90% of tumors at the cerebellopontine angle.
Clinical features: Unilateral progressive hearing impairment/loss, sometimes
with tinnitus. Large tumors may manifest signs and symptoms of cerebellar
and brainstem involvement.
Investigations: MRI is the investigation of choice.
Management:  Total surgical excision is the treatment of choice. Stereotactic radiosurgery
(radiotherapy) may be used for some tumors.
MISCELLANEOUS
Neuroimaging
Q. Write a short note on radiological investigation used in neurology.
About 90% of neurological cases can be diagnosed by history alone, with
a lesser contribution from examination and investigation.
Investigations include assessment of structure (imaging) and function
(neurophysiology).
Neurological imaging is used for assessment of structure. Various
techniques include X-rays (plain X-rays, computed tomography (CT), CT
angiography, myelography and angiography), magnetic resonance [MR
imaging (MRI), MR angiography (MRA)] and ultrasound (Doppler
imaging of blood vessels). However, it is now possible to use imaging
techniques to assess CNS function also.Single photon emission clinical tomography (SPECT) scanning can be
used to mark cerebral blood flow by using a lipid-soluble radioactive
tracers. It is useful in dementia or epilepsy. SPECT is also useful in the
diagnosis of movement disorders (e.g. by examining dopamine activity
to assess the function of the basal ganglia in patients with suspected
parkinsonism).Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is an imaging technique used mainly in
medical field to produce high-quality images of the inside structures of the
human.
The principle of MRI is based on the presence of hydrogen atom in all

human tissues. A hydrogen nucleus/atom is a proton whose electrical charge
creates a local electrical field. Protons in body tissue are aligned to the
magnetic axes. When protons are surrounded by a sudden strong magnetic
impulses/field (as in an MRI machine), the protons are aligned along the
field. Application of a radiofrequency wave at right angles to their alignment
and are imaged. Then the field is suddenly reduced and the protons resonate
and spin, then revert to their normal alignment. When the magnitude and rate
of energy release occurs with return to baseline alignment, images are made
at different phases of relaxation. They are known as T2, T2, T2 STIR, FLAIR,
diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) and other sequences. Recording is done
by a coil. These intensities are used to produce images. T2-weighted sequence
accentuate substances that contain fat and T2-weighted sequence accentuates
substances that contain water.
Interpretation: In the brain, T2-weighted images reveal the nerve
connections of white matter and appear white (hyperintense), the
congregations of neurons of gray matter appear gray, and cerebrospinal fluid
appears dark. These are reversed in T2-weighted imaging.Neurological indications for MRI (Box 15.47)
Box 15.47: Neurological indications for MRI.
MRI is the investigation of choice for the evaluation all neurological disorders:
Structural imaging: Produces high-quality soft tissue images. Useful in the investigation of disease
of posterior fossa and temporal lobes, inflammatory conditions (e.g. multiple sclerosis), and in
investigating epilepsy
Magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) to study blood vessels in the neck or brain
Functional MRI: Mainly research tools
MR spectroscopy: Mainly research tools
Q. Write a short note on neurological indications for MRI.
Advantages and Disadvantages of MRI
Advantages and disadvantages of MRI are presented in Table 15.93.
Table 15.93: Advantages and disadvantages of MRI.
Advantages of MRI Disadvantages
High-quality soft tissue images
No ionizing radiation involvedExpensive and time consuming
Less widely available

Non-invasive
Distinguishes between white and gray matter
both in the brain and cord
Spinal cord and nerve roots are directly
imaged
Pituitary imaging
Resolution superior to CT
Useful for demonstration of tumors (posterior
fossa and temporal lobes), infarction,
hemorrhage, MS plaques, posterior fossa,
foramen magnum and cord. Detailed and
accurate evaluation of breast cancersMR angiography (MRA) images blood vessels
without contrast
Cardiovascular MRI: Gold standard for
quantifying ventricular volumes, ejection
fraction and myocardial massMRA images blood flow, not vessel anatomy
Spatial resolution not as good as CT
Requires experienced reader
Not good for evaluation of bone cortex
Claustrophobic
Less effective than CT in detecting air (lungs)
or gas (as in infection or bowel perforation)
Contrast (gadolinium) reactions
Contraindications for MRI include: Implanted
cardiac pacemakers, vagus nerve stimulators,
implanted cardiodefibrillators (ICD), cochlear
implants and deep brain stimulators
Contrast MRIGadolinium is used as intravenous contrast to assess the vascularity in
tumors and inflammatory lesions.
Side effects: Headache, nausea, pain and sensation of cold at the injection
site, dizziness, and rarely nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (fibrosis of
dermis, joints and internal organs including lungs and heart). Contrast
(gadolinium) imaging can worsen renal failure, so its best avoided in
Acute kidney injury (AKI)/chronic kidney disease (CKD).
Special forms of MRIDiffusion MRI: To measure the movement or diffusion of extracellular
water molecules.
MR angiography helps us to evaluate intracranial vessels noninvasively to
find for aneursyms, stenosis or malformations.
Magnetic resonance spectroscopy
Functional MRI to assess blood flow during specific tasks (e.g. speaking,
remembering, calculation).
Complications: MRI is a safe procedure. However, if a metal is present
nearby serious injuries may develop when metal gets attracted to strong
magnets of MRI and may act like a missile.
X-ray/CT Plain X-rays, CT, CTA

Applications: Radiculography, myelography, intra-arterial angiography
–   X-rays: For fractures or foreign bodies
–   CT: First line for stroke
–   Intra-arterial angiography: Gold standard for vascular lesions.
Advantages: Easily available, relatively economical, and relatively quick.
Ultrasound-Doppler Studies
Cheap, quick and noninvasive.
B mode and color ultrasound are useful in identifying carotid stenosis.
Radioisotope
For establishing the diagnosis, we need to do radioisotope scan, single photon
emission tomography (SPECT) and positron emission tomography.
Q. Discuss the differential diagnosis for ‘Ring enhancing lesions’.
It is abnormal radiological findings observed in MRI or CT scans obtained
using radio-contrast. On the image, it appears as an area of decreased density
surrounded by a bright rim from concentration of the enhancing contrast dye
(Fig. 15.34).
Fig. 15.34: Ring enhancing lesion on MRI.
Causes in the Brain
Infections: Early brain abscess, tuberculoma, CNS toxoplasmosis, cysticercosis, fungal infections

(nocardiosis, cryptococosis), neurosyphilis.
Inflammatory: Demyelinating disorders (multiple sclerosis, ADEM), sarcoidosis, Behcet's disease,
Whipples disease.
Vascular: Cerebral venous thrombosis and several other vasculitic disorders.
Neoplastic: Primary (e.g. glioblastoma, low-grade gliomas, CNS lymphoma) and metastasis.
NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL TESTING
Q. Write a short note on electroencephalography.
Electroencephalography (Fig. 15.35)
Fig. 15.35: Normal adult brain waves seen in electroencephalography.
–   The electroencephalogram (EEG) recorded from scalp by placing
electrodes on the scalp. It is used to detect electrical activity arising in
the cerebral cortex. Rhythmic activity is recorded as waves (alpha,
beta, gamma, theta, mu, and delta).
–   Usefulness
◆   In progressive and continuous disorders such as reduced
consciousness, classification and prognosis in epilepsy and diffuse
brain diseases [encephalitis, prion (Creutzfeldt–Jakob) diseases and
metabolic states (e.g. hypoglycemia, hepatic coma)].
◆   Role in epilepsy: To confirms the clinical diagnosis and
differentiation of primary generalized attacks from focal epilepsies. Video EEG: Useful in definitive diagnosis of epilepsy.
Ambulatory EEG  is analogs to Holter monitor for cardiac arrhythmias.

Lathyrism
Q. Write short note on lathyrism.
Lathyrism is a paralyzing disease caused by eating seeds of Lathyrus sativus
(khesari dal).
Epidemiology: It is prevalent mostly people in India (e.g. Madhya Pradesh,
Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and Odisha), Bangladesh, Pakistan, Nepal and Algeria.
Etiology: Lathyrus sativus (khesari dal) is a good source of protein. It is
relatively cheap pulse and is consumed mostly by the poor agricultural
laborer. But it contains L-ODAP (β-N-oxalyl-l-α -diamino propionic acid)
also called β -N-oxalyl-amino-L-alanine, or BOAA, which is an excitatory
neurotoxin and glutamate agonist. If the diets containing more than 30% of
this dhal is consumed over a period of 2–6 months will produce lathyrism.
Clinical features: Affects mainly young males between 15 and 45 years of
age. In humans it mainly affects nervous system and is called neurolathyrism
which produces pure motor spastic paraplegia. Sensations and sphincters
are preserved.
StagesLatent stage: Patient appears healthy but when subjected to physical
stress exhibits ungainly gait. If the disease is recognized at this stage, age,
withdrawal of pulse from the diet will result in complete remission of
disease.No-stick stage: During this stage, the patient walks with difficulty having
short jerky steps but does not need the aid of a stick.
One-stick stage: The patient walks with a crossed gait with a tendency to
walk on toes and develops musculoskeletal stiffness. Use of a stick is
necessary to maintain balance.Two-stick stage: Symptoms are more severe at this stage. Due to
excessive bending of the knees and crossed legs, the patient requires
support by two crutches for support. The gait is slow and clumsy and
complains of easy tiredness after walking a short distance.Crawler stage: Finally spastic paralysis develops which becomes
irreversible. It becomes impossible to maintain erect posture as the knee
joints cannot support the weight of the body. The thigh and leg muscles
become atrophied and patient crawls by throwing his weight on his hands.

Prevention
Vitamin C prophylaxis 500–1000 mg for a week
Banning the crop  if possible
Removal of toxin:
–   Steeping method: Soaking the pulse in hot water for 2 hours and the
soaked water is drained off completely. The pulse is washed again with
clean water and then drained off and dried in the sun. There will be
loss of vitamins and minerals by this method.
–   Parboiling: Suitable for large scale operation and is similar to
parboiled rice. It destroys trypsin inhibitors.

Toxicology

CHAPTER
16
Clinical Assessment of Ingested Poison
Q. Enumerate the clinical features in general that would help you in
diagnosing the poison ingested.
Various parameters in clinical assessment to determine the type of poisons
are listed in Table 16.1.
Table 16.1: Characteristic features and the type of poisons.
Characteristics Type of poison
ODOR
Bitter almonds Cyanide
Acetone Isopropyl alcohol, methanol, paraldehyde, salicylates
Alcohol Ethanol
Wintergreen Methyl salicylate
Garlic Arsenic, thallium, organophosphates
OCULAR SIGNS
Miosis (small pupil size) Narcotics (except meperidine), organophosphates, muscarinic
mushrooms, clonidine, phenothiazines, chloral hydrate, barbiturates
(late), PCP (phencyclidine)
Mydriasis (large pupil size) Atropine, alcohol, cocaine, amphetamines, antihistamines, tricyclic
antidepressants, cyanide, carbon monoxide
Nystagmus Phenytoin, barbiturates, éthanol, carbon monoxide
Lacrimation Organophosphates, irritant gas or vapors
Retinal hyperemia Methanol
Poor vision Methanol, botulism, carbon monoxide
CUTANEOUS SIGNS
Needle tracks Heroin, phencyclidine (PCP), amphetamines
Bullae Carbon monoxide, barbiturates
Dry, hot skin Anticholinergic agents, botulism

Diaphoresis Organophosphates, nitrates, muscarinic mushrooms, aspirin, cocaine
Alopecia Thallium, arsenic, lead, mercury
Erythema Boric acid, mercury, cyanide, anticholinergics
Cyanosis CNS depressant
ORAL SIGNS
Salivation Organophosphates, salicylates, corrosives, strychnine
Dry mouth Amphetamines, anticholinergics, antihistamine
Burns Corrosives, oxalate-containing plants
Gum lines Lead, mercury, arsenic
Dysphagia Corrosives, botulism
INTESTINAL SIGNS
Cramps Arsenic, lead, thallium, organophosphates
Epigastric tenderness Salicylates, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
Diarrhea Antimicrobials, arsenic, iron, boric acid
Characteristics Type of poison
Constipation Lead, narcotics, botulism
Hematemesis Aminophylline, corrosives, iron, salicylates
CARDIAC SIGNS
Tachycardia Atropine, aspirin, amphetamines, cocaine, cyclic antidepressants,
theophylline
Bradycardia Digitalis, narcotics, mushrooms, clonidine, organophosphates,
β-blockers, calcium-channel blockers
Hypertension Amphetamines, LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide), cocaine, PCP
Hypotension Phenothiazines, barbiturates, tricyclic antidepressants, iron, β -
blockers, calcium-channel blockers
Cardiac conduction delays
(Wide QRS)Cocaine, tricyclic antidepressants, lignocaine, propoxyphene,
antiarrhythmics (e.g. quinidine, flecainide)
RESPIRATORY SIGNS
Depressed respiration Alcohol, narcotics, barbiturates
Increased respiration Amphetamines, aspirin (salicylates), ethylene glycol, carbon
monoxide, cyanide
Pulmonary edema Hydrocarbons, heroin, organophosphates, aspirin
CNS SIGNS
Ataxia Alcohol, antidepressants, barbiturates, anticholinergics,
phenytoin, narcotics
Coma Sedatives, narcotics, barbiturates, PCP, organophosphates,
salicylates, cyanide, carbon monoxide, cyclic antidepressants, lead
Hyperpyrexia Anticholinergics, quinine, salicylates, LSD, phenothiazines,
amphetamines, cocaine

Hypothermia CNS depressant (opioids, chlorpromazine)
Muscle fasciculation Organophosphates, theophylline
Muscle rigidity Cyclic antidepressants, PCP, phenothiazines, haloperidol
Extrapyramidal signs Phenothiazines, haloperidol, metoclopramide
Paresthesia Cocaine, camphor, PCP, MSG (monosodium glutamate)
Peripheral neuropathy Lead, arsenic, mercury, organophosphates
Altered behavior LSD, PCP, amphetamines, cocaine, alcohol, anticholinergics,
camphor
Seizures Tricyclic antidepressants (TCA), INH, selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs)
METABOLIC
Metabolic acidosis Cyanide, ethylene glycol, metformin, methanol, salicylates
Toxidromes (Table 16.2)
Q. List the common toxidromes that are commonly encountered in
clinical practice.
Based on history and clinical findings, it may be possible to define a
syndrome associated with certain poisons. This is called toxidrome.
Q. Write short essay on general principles of management of an
ingested a poison.
Management/Treatment
Goals of Treatment
These include: (A) Support of vital signs, (B) Reduce absorption of the toxin, (C) Enhance of poison
elimination and (D) Neutralize toxin.
A. Supportive care
Patients who are seriously poisoned must receive early appropriate management. Outcome depends
on appropriate nursing and supportive care, and on appropriate treatment of complications. The aims
are:
To maintain physiologic homeostasis till poison is eliminated from the body and the patient
resumes normal physiological functions.
To prevent and treat secondary complications:  Supportive therapy for central nervous system (
e.g. cerebral edema), cardiopulmonary system (e.g. pulmonary edema, pneumonia) and renal
system with proper care for coma, seizures, hypotension, bedsores, arrhythmias, sepsis,
thromboembolic disease, coagulopathy, hypoxia and acute renal failure.
B. Reduce Absorption of the Toxin
Inhalational exposure:  Evacuation from toxic environment and provision of supplemental oxygen.
Dermal exposure:  Removal of contaminated clothing and shower or irrigation of affected site (dust
before shower for dry chemical).
For eye exposure:  Removal of chemicals by copious irrigation of the affected eye by up to 1 liter of

saline or symptomatic improvement occurs.
Oral exposure:  Inducing emesis, performing gastric lavage, activated charcoal, whole bowel
irrigation, cathartics.
Gastric decontamination
Emesis induction:  Forced emesis, if patient is awake (using saline, ipecac).
Gastric lavage should be considered for life-threatening poisons that cannot be treated effectively
with other therapies.
–  Time of lavage:  Gastric lavage decreases absorption by 42% if done 20 minutes and by 16% if
performed at 60 minutes.
–  Method:  Performed by first aspirating the stomach and then repetitively instilling and
aspirating fluid. Choice of fluid is tap water— 5–10 mL/kg. Left lateral position better and
delays spontaneous absorption.
No evidence that larger tube better. Simplest, quickest and least expensive way is by using funnel.
Box 16.1:  Complications of gastric lavage.
Aspiration pneumonia
Perforation of the esophagus
Laryngospasm/hypoxia/tension pneumothorax
Tachycardia and cardiac dysrhythmias (atrial and ectopic beats)
Fluid and electrolyte imbalance—hypernatremia; water intoxication.
Preferably done on awake patients. Presence of an ET tube does not prevent aspiration, and is
preferred, if GCS (Glasgow Coma Scale) is low.
Contraindication:  Comatose patients, corrosive poisoning, kerosene (hydrocarbons) poison and
in patients with convulsions.
Complications of gastric lavage (Box 16.1):
Activated charcoal administration:  50–100 g activated charcoal should be administered at a rate
of not less than 12.5 g/h through nasogastric tube.
Cathartics:  Sorbitol magnesium citrate, magnesium sulphate, sodium sulphate as cathartic. for
patients who have ingested materials that are absorbed slowly.
Dilution-milk/other drinks:  Advised only after the ingestion of corrosives (acids, alkali).
Whole bowel irrigation:  1500–2000 mL/h through a nasogastric tube. It is performed by
administering a bowel-cleansing solution containing electrolytes and polyethylene glycol by
gastric tube. It may be used for potentially toxic ingestions of sustained release or enteric-coated
drugs or to remove illicit drug.
Endoscopic or surgical removal  of ingested substance may be useful in rare situations (e.g.
ingestion of a potentially toxic foreign body that fails to transit the gastrointestinal tract).
C. Enhance of Poison Elimination
Indications:  Increased elimination is possible only if
–  Drug is distributed predominantly in the ECF (extracellular fluid) and drugs that have a low
protein binding.
Methods:  Keep a good urine output 150–200 mL/hr.
–  Alkalinization of urine using sodium bicarbonate to produce urine with a pH ≥ 7.5:  For
salicylate, methotrexate and phenobarbital poisoning.
–  Extracorporeal removal:

♦  Hemodialysis:  For barbiturates, salicylates, acetaminophen, valproate, alcohols, glycols.
♦  Hemoperfusion:  For theophylline, digitalis, paraquat lipid-soluble drugs.
D. Neutralize Toxin
Q. Write short note on antidote.
By toxin-specific antidotes (Table 16.3).
Table 16.2: Various toxidrome and related findings.
Toxidrome Vital signs Mental status Pupils Other
findingsExamples
Anticholinergic
(Fig. 16.1)Hyperthermia,
tachycardia,
hypertensive,
tachypneaHyperthermia
agitated,
hallucinatingMydriasis Dry flushed
skin, urinary
retentionAntihistamines,
TCAs, atropine,
scopolamine,
antispasmodics
Cholinergic (Fig.
16.2)Bradycardia
(muscarinic),
tachycardia
and
hypertension
(nicotinic)Confused,
comaMiosis SLUDGE
(Salivation,
lacrimation,
urination,
diarrhea, G I
upset, emesis)Organophosphate
pesticides, nerve
agents,
physostigmine
Hallucinogen Hyperthermia,
tachycardia,
hypertensionHallucination,
synesthesia,
agitationMydriasis Nystagmus PCP
(phencyclidine),
LSD (lysergic
acid
diethylamide),
mescaline
Opioid Hypothermia,
Bradycardia,
Hypotension,
bradypneaCNS
depression,
comaMiosis Hyporeflexia,
pulmonary
edemaOpioids (heroin,
morphine,
methadone,
dilaudid, etc.)
Sedative-hypnotic Hypothermia,
bradycardia,
hypotension,
bradypneaCNS
depression,
confusion,
comaMiosis Hyporeflexia Benzodiazepines,
barbiturates,
alcohols
Serotonin
syndrome (Fig.
16.3)Hyperthermia,
tachycardia,
hypertension,
tachypneaConfused,
agitated comaMydriasis Tremor,
myoclonus,
diaphoresis,
hyperreflexia,
trismus,
rigidityMAOIs, SSRIs,
meperidine,
dextromethorphan
Sympathomimetic
(Fig. 16.4)Hyperthermia,
tachycardia,
tachypneaAgitated
hyperalert,
paranoiaMydriasis Diaphoresis,
tremors,
hyperreflexia,
seizuresCocaine,
amphetamines,
pseudoephedrine

Fig. 16.1:  Anticholinergic toxidrome.

Fig. 16.2:  Cholinergic toxidrome.

Fig. 16.3:  Serotonin syndrome.
Fig. 16.4:  Sympathomimetic toxidrome.

Table 16.3: Toxin-specific antidotes.
Toxin/poison Specific antidote Toxin/poison Specific antidote
Acetaminophen N-acetyl cysteine Methanol Ethanol, fomepizole
Anti-cholinergics Physostigmine Methemoglobinemia Methylene blue
Benzodiazepines Flumazenil Glycol Ethanol, fomepizole
Beta- blockers Glucagon Opioid Naloxone
Calcium Oral hypoglycemics Glucose
Insulin + dextrose/lipid
emulsion therapyOrganophosphate Atropine/2-PAM
(pralidoxime)
Calcium-channel
blockersGlucagon
Insulin+dextrose
(hyperinsulinemia
euglycemia therapy)Snake bites Snake antivenom
Calcium/lipid emulsion
therapySulfonylurea Octreotide + dextrose
Carbamate Atropine Tricyclic
antidepressantsSodium bicarbonate
Carbone monoxide Hyperbaric oxygen Warfarin Vitamin K
Copper Penicillamine,
dimercaprol, Ca EDTA
Cyanide Amyl nitrite pearls
Sodium nitrite (3%
solution)
Sodium thiosulfate
(25%)Iron Desferroxamin
Lead CaEDTA, dimercaprol,
British anti-Lewisite
(BAL)
Mercury DMPS (2,3-
Dimercapto-1-propane
sulfonic acid), DMSA
(dimercaptosuccinic
acid), BAL
Digoxin Digoxin antibodies Arsenic BAL and derivatives
Heparin Protamine sulfate Antimony BAL and derivatives
INH Pyridoxine
INSECTICIDE POISONINGQ. Write short essay/note on clinical manifestations, diagnosis,
complications and management of organophosphorus and
carbamate poisoning.
Organophosphate and Carbamate Poisoning

Organophosphorus (OP) compounds are widely used as pesticides in
developing countries and are a common cause of poisoning.
Classification of Organophosphate and Carbamate (Box 16.2)
Box 16.2: Classification of organophosphate and carbamate.
Organophosphorus
–  Diethyl organophosphorus:  Quinalphos, chlorpyriphos, diazinon, triazophos, phorate
dimethoate, parathion-ethyl
–  Dimethyl organophosphorus:  Monocrotophos, dichlorvos, acephate, malathion, fenthion,
mathamidophos and phosphamidon
Carbamate:  Methomyl
Organochlorine:  Endosulfan, endrin
Pyrethroids:  Cypermethrin, alphacypermethrin, deltamethrin, cyhalothrin.
Neonicotinoid:  Imidacloprid, acetamiprid.
Mode of intoxication: It may occur through ingestion, inhalation or dermal
absorption.
Mechanism of OP Toxicity (Fig. 16.5)
Fig. 16.5:  Mechanism of organophosphorus poisoning.

OP compounds irreversibly bind to serine-OH group at the active site of
acetylcholinesterase (AChE) and phosphorylate. This inactivates the
enzyme AChE.
It leads to the accumulation of acetylcholine (ACh) in cholinergic
synapses.
Spontaneous hydrolysis of the OP-enzyme complex allows reactivation of
the enzyme. However, loss of a chemical group from the OP-enzyme
complex prevents further enzyme reactivation, a process known as
‘aging’. Aging is characterized by loss of alkyl group + strengthening of
covalent bond.Phosphorylated AChE is very stable. Inhibition of enzyme activity →
accumulation of ACh in the synapse and NMJ. It causes overstimulation
of cholinergic receptors. After aging has taken place; new enzyme needs
to be synthesized before function can be restored.
Clinical Course after Acute Poisoning (Table 16.4)
Q. Write short essay/note on clinical signs of organophosphorus
poisoning.
Triphasic Illness
1. Acute cholinergic syndrome
Onset: Cholinergic symptoms within first 24 hours.
Features: Garlic-like odor in the breath/vomit/clothes, bradycardia
(80%), miosis, fasciculations, twitching, convulsions, flaccid paralysis
of limbs and extraocular muscles, central depression of respiratory
system. 2. Intermediate syndrome
Onset: 24–96 hours after poisoning, after the cholinergic phase settles
Mechanism: Excess Ach at NMJ causes down-regulation of nicotinic
receptors and muscles affected.
Features: Characterized by proximal neck muscle leading to
respiratory distress and failure without muscarinic signs, without
intervention, cyanosis, coma and death occurs rapidly.Duration: Lasts for few days to about 3 weeks.
3. OP-induced delayed polyneuropathy (OPIDN)

Onset: 1–3 weeks after acute exposure
Mechanism: Due to degeneration of long myelinated nerve fibers. Pure
motor or sensor-motor.
Features: Characterized by cramps in the legs, numbness and
paresthesia in the distal upper and lower limbs, shuffling gait, foot and
wrist drop. Other features are: wasting, DTR reduced/absent, pyramidal
tract signs absent.Recovery is incomplete.
Table 16.4: Clinical course after acute organophosphorus poisoning.
Time of manifestation Mechanism Manifestation
Due to cholinergic excess
Acute (minutes to 24
hours)
Acute cholinergic
syndromeNicotinic receptor
actionMusculoskeletal:  Weakness, fasciculations,
cramps, paralysis
Cardiovascular: Tachycardia, hypertension
Muscarinic receptor
actionGastrointestinal: Increased salivation, nausea,
vomiting, abdominal pains, diarrhea, fecal
incontinence
Genitourinary: Urinary incontinence
Cardiovascular: Bradycardia, hypotension
Respiratory:  Rhinorrhea, stridor, bronchospasm,
bronchorrhea, cough
Ocular: Lacrimation, miosis
Skin:  Flushing, diaphoresis, cyanosis
Central receptors Anxiety, restless, convulsions, insomnia, tremors,
respiratory depression
Other than cholinergic excess
Delayed (24 hours to 2
week)-Intermediate
syndromeNicotinic receptor
actionIntermediate syndrome
Muscarinic receptor
actionBradycardia, miosis, salivation
Central receptors Coma, extrapyramidal manifestation
Late (beyond 2 week) :
Delayed
polyneuropathyPeripheral neuropathy
target esterasePeripheral neuropathy
Diagnosis of Organophosphate Poisoning
Clinical diagnosis: Dreisbach’s severity of organophosphorus poisoning
is presented in Table 16.5.

Laboratory:
–  Red cell cholinesterase
–  Plasma [Pseudo, Butyryl (Bu)] cholinesterase.
–  ECG: The most common ECG abnormality was prolonged QTc and
sinus tachycardia
–  ABG: Hypoxemia.
Table 16.5: Dreisbach’s classification showing severity of poisoning.
Grade Symptoms
Mild Nausea
Moderate Lacrimation, salivation, miosis, fasciculation
Severe Incontinence, apneic spells, ARDS, areflexia
seizures, coma
Q. Write short essay/note on drugs used with dosage and treatment of
organophosphorus poisoning.
Management of Organophosphate
Acute Cholinergic Syndrome
StepsAssess and record 15-point Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) (Refer Table 15.82)
Measure pulse rate and blood pressure and auscultate the lungs.
Make patients to lie down in the left lateral position:  With head lower than the feet.
Start oxygen.
Intubate, if the patient has a respiratory distress. Start atropine quickly to reduce bronchorrhea
responsible for respiratory distress.
Set-up an infusion of 0.9% normal saline. Aim at systolic blood pressure 80 mm Hg and urine
output >30 mL/h.
Remove the contaminated clothes and thoroughly wash the skin with soap and water.
Perform gastric decontamination with gastric lavage once the patient is stabilized and within two
hours of ingestion. Skin exposure would require irrigation of the skin with copious amounts of
water and liberal use of soap. Eye exposure should be irrigated with copious amount of normal
saline.Give activated charcoal (50 g in 200 mL) (Not much benefit due to rapid absorption of poison into
blood).
Drugs Used
1. Atropine
Early use of sufficient doses of atropine is life-saving in patients with severe toxicity. It reverses
ACh-induced bronchospasm, bronchorrhea, bradycardia and hypotension.
When the diagnosis is uncertain:

–  Atropine test:  To be performed, if not sure that the patient has consumed OP.
♦  Inject 0.6–1 mg IV atropine:  If pulse rate goes up by 25 per minute or skin flushing develops
patient has mild or no toxicity or OP poisoning is unlikely.
Dose and mode of administration of atropine
Bolus
–  Inject 1.8–3 mg (3–5 mL) of atropine bolus.
–  Check three things after five minutes:  pulse, blood pressure and chest crepitations.
–  Aim for heart rate >80 beats per minute, SBP >80 mm Hg, and a clear chest.
–  If the above-mentioned objectives are not achieved, double the atropine dose every five
minutes.
–  Review patient every 5 minutes. Once these parameters start improving, repeat last same or
smaller dose of atropine. If there is persistent and satisfactory improvement in these parameters
after 5 min, atropine infusion can be planned.
Atropine infusion
–  Calculate total dose of atropine required for rapid atropinization.
–  Start hourly atropine infusion at 10–20% of total dose of atropine required for atropinization.
–  Most patients do not need >3–5 mg per hour of atropine infusion.
–  Use three-point checklist (secretions, heart rate, pupils)  to reduce infusion rate by 20% every
4 hourly once the patient is stable. Target end points for atropine infusion are presented in Box
16.3.
–  Bronchorrhea is the most important sign for titrating dose of atropine once patient is stable.
Atropine toxicity = absent bowel sounds + fever + confusion
–  Stop atropine infusion for 60 min, if patient has developed atropine toxicity. Re-start infusion at
lower rate, once the temperature comes down and the patient gets calm. If atropine is
contraindicated, glycopyrrolate can be used for bronchorrhea. Glycopyrronium bromide can be
an alternative for peripheral symptoms.
Box 16.3:  Target end points for atropine infusion.
Clear chest on auscultation
Heart rate >80 beats per min (WHO recommends >100 bpm)
Systolic BP >80 mm Hg
Pupils no longer pinpoint
Dry axillae
Q. Write short essay/note on pralidoxime (2-PAM).
2. Pralidoxime (2-PAM):  Pralidoxime reactivates acetylcholinesterase enzymes by removing the
phosphoryl group deposited by the organophosphate.
Only to treat organophosphorus poisoned patients.
Bolus dose:  30 mg/kg (i.e. 1–2 g for adults) in 100 mL normal saline over 15–30 minutes.
Maintenance dose: Continuous infusion of 8–12 mg/kg per hour.
PAM must be given by infusion. Go slow, both for bolus and maintenance. A fast infusion can
cause vomiting, hypertension, cardiac arrhythmia or a cardiac arrest.
Give PAM until atropine is no longer required.
3. Benzodiazepines

Agitation and seizures : Diazepam 10 mg slow IV push, repeated as necessary. Up to 30–40 mg
diazepam per 24 hours can be given.
Ventilator
Ventilatory support should be started before the patient develops respiratory failure.
Other therapies:
Magnesium sulfate blocks ligand-gated calcium channels, resulting in reduced acetylcholine
release from presynaptic terminals, thus improving function at neuromuscular junctions, and
reduced CNS over-stimulation mediated via NMDA receptor activation.
Sodium bicarbonate in place of oximes.
Alpha2-adrenergic receptor agonist  clonidine also reduces acetylcholine synthesis and release
from presynaptic terminals.
Hemodialysis and hemofiltration  role not yet clear.
Butyryl cholinesterase scavenges OP in plasma, reducing the amount available to inhibit acetyl
cholinesterase in synapses.
Drugs for future:  Huperzine A and ZT-1:  HupA has been proven to be a powerful, highly specific,
and reversible inhibitor of acetylcholinesterase.
Chronic Organophosphate Poisoning
Clinical features
Delay polyneuropathy (OPIDN)
Neuropsychiatric disorder
Triorthocresyl phosphate (To CP) poisoning associated polyneuropathy
also called as Ginger Jake Paralysis. Owing to the consumption of ginger
which was used in manufacture of bootleg alcohol and was adulterated
with TOCP. It usually manifests after about 10 to 20 days causes distal
predominant neuropathy.Diagnosis: Clinical diagnosis, by suspicious and exclusion.
Treatment:  Not established. Only supportive measures.
Carbamates
Q. Discuss management of carbamate poisoning.
Examples: Sevin, baygon, lannate, carbaryl, aldicarb
Medicinal forms include physostigmine, pyridostigmine and neostigmine.
Cholinesterase inhibitors that are structurally related to organophosphates. Transiently and
reversibly inhibit cholinesterase (< 6 hrs). Regeneration of enzyme occurs within minutes to hours,
therefore aging does not occur.
Symptoms of intoxication are similar to organophosphates, but are of shorter duration.
Carbamates do not effectively penetrate into CNS, so less central toxicity and no seizures.
Atropine therapy usually not needed for longer than 6-12 hours.

Avoid pralidoxime (2-PAM):  Since irreversible binding does not occur, it is not needed, and
potentially can worsen some carbamate poisonings.
ORGANOCHLORINE POISONING
Q. Write short essay on organochlorine poisoning.
Classification of Organochlorine (Box 16.4)
Acute Organochlorine Poisoning
Prodromal symptoms:  Tremor, ataxia, myoclonus, dizziness, confusion, paresthesia of month,
nausea, vomiting.
Typical presentation:  Status epilepticus  followed by respiratory failure, cardiac arrhythmias,
rhabdomyolysis and acute renal failure.
Box 16.4:  Classification of organochlorine.
Dichlorodiphenyl methane: DDT, methoxychlor
Hexachlorocyclohexane: Lindane
Cyclodienes
Aldrin, chlordane, dieldrin
Endrin, endosulfan, heptachlor
Chlordecone (kepone): Mirex
Treatment:
–  Control seizure:  The same way as ‘status epilepticus’: Benzodiazepines, phenobarbital,
phenytoin.
–  Prevent complications
Subacute Organochlorine Poisoning
Hyperexcitability stage:  Tachycardia, tremor, hyperreflexia.
Treatment
–  Symptomatic treatment:  Anxiolytic
–  Enhance elimination:  Cholestyramine
Chronic Organochlorine Poisoning
Organochlorine insecticides interfere with endocrine and reproductive systems.
Individuals who work with the insecticides show low sperm count and motility, infertility and
abortion.
The insecticides can be carcinogenic to animals.
SNAKEBITE

Q. Name the commonly encountered poisonous snakes. Discuss the
clinical manifestations, diagnosis and management of snakebites.
Box 16.5: Classification of poisonous snakes.
1. Elapidae (neurotoxic):  Examples
–  Common cobra/nag or kalsap or najanaja.
–  King Cobra: Raj nag or najahanna or najabangarus .
–  Krait: Subgrouped into: (a) common krait or bangarus caeruleus; (b) banded krait or bangarus
fasciatus; (c) coral snake; (d) tiger snake; (e) mambas; and (f) death adder.
2. Viperidae (vasculotoxic):  They are grouped into:
–  Pitiless Vipers:  These include: a) russel viper; and b) saw-scaled viper.
–  Pit Vipers:  These include: (a) pit viper—crotalidae; and (b) common green pit viper.
3. Hydrophidae (myotoxic):  About 20 types of sea snakes are found in India. All are poisonous.
Classification of Poisonous Snakes (Box 16.5)
India is estimated to have the highest snakebite mortality in the world. World
Health Organization (WHO) estimates place the number of bites to be 83,000
per annum with 11,000 deaths.
Snake Venom
Snake may be venomous or nonvenomous. When a venomous snake bites, it
may excrete venom. Snake venom is a toxin (hematotoxin, neurotoxin, or
cytotoxin). Composition of snake venom is mentioned in Table 16.6.
Table 16.6: Various components of snake venom and their actions.
Component Action
Serine proteases Hemolysis
Other proteases Hemolysis
Phospholipase A2 Myotoxic, cardiotoxic, neurotoxic, increases
vascular permeability
Hyaluronidase Local tissue destruction
Neurotoxin
Alpha-bungarotoxin, cobrotoxin Postsynaptic inhibition
Beta-bungarotoxin, crotoxin Presynaptic inhibition
Snakebite
Teeth bite marks difference between poisonous and nonpoisonous snakes
(Fig. 16.6).

Poisonous: Two fang marks with or without marks of outer teeth.
Nonpoisonous: Two fang marks with number of small teeth marks.
Differences between poisonous and nonpoisonous snakes are shown in
Figures 16.6A and B and Table 16.7.
Clinical Feature of Snakebite
Q. Write short essay/note on:
Clinical features of poisonous snakebite.
Cobra bite envenomation—features and treatment.
Q. Write short essay/note on complications of poisonous (cobra).
Signs, symptoms and complications of snakebite are listed in Table 16.8.
Asymptomatic (dry bite): Significant proportion of snakebites do not result
in envenomation. Patients without clinical features of local or systemic
envenomation should be closely observed for 24–48 hours.
Box 16.6: Prognosis assessment in snakebite.
Time of bite
Activity at the time of bite
First aid action taken since the bite
Clinical examination
Twenty minutes whole blood clotting test (WBCT).
Prognosis Assessment in snakebite (Box 16.6).
Table 16.7: Differences between poisonous and nonpoisonous snake.
Points Poisonous snakes Nonpoisonous
1. Belly scales Large:  They cover the entire
breadth of bellySmall:  They never cover
2. Head scales a. Usually small in vipers
b. May be large in pit vipers
c. Cobras and Coral snakes
where third labial touches the
eye and nasal shields
d. Kraits, where there is no pit
and the third labial does not
touch the nose and eyeAre usually large with exceptions
as outlined under poisonous
snakes
3. Fangs Are hollow-like hypodermic Short and solid

needle
4. Tail Compressed Not markedly compressed
5. Habits Usually nocturnal Not so
6. Teeth bite marks Two fang marks with or without
marks of other teethTwo fang marks with number of
small teeth marks
Figs. 16.6A and B:  Differences between poisonous (A) and nonpoisonous snake (B).
Table 16.8: Local and systemic features/complications of snakebites.
Local features Systemic features
A. Elapid bite
Fang marks, burning pain, swelling and
discoloration, serosanguineous discharge.
Local symptoms are milder than in viperine bitePreparalytic stage:  Vomiting, headache,
giddiness, weakness and lethargy
Paralytic stage: Ptosis , ophthalmoplegia,
drowsiness, convulsion, bulbar paralysis,
respiratory failure, death, paradoxical respiration:
Intercostal muscle paralysis, stomach pain
(Krait), submucosal hemorrhage in stomach.
Neck muscle weakness (Broken neck sign)
Krait bites:  Present in early morning with
paralysis and can be mistaken for STROKE.
B. Viperid biteRapid swelling at bite site
Discoloration
Blister formation
Bleeding from bite site
PainGeneralized bleeding:  Epistaxis, hemoptysis,
hematemesis, bleeding gums, hematuria,
malena, hemorrhagic areas over skin and
mucosa
Lateralizing neurological symptoms  such as
asymmetrical pupils, intracranial bleed
Hypotension:  Resulting from

hypovolemia/direct vasodilation
Low back pain, indicative of early renal
failure
Muscle pain:  Rhabdomyolysis
Muscle pain:  Rhabdomyolysis
Parotid swelling:  Conjunctival edema,
subconjunctival hemorrhage
Renal failure:  Russel viper, hump nosed pit
viper.
Long-term complication:  Hypopituitarism
and cardiotoxicity
Saw-scaled viper generally does not cause
renal failure
C. Hydrophid bite
Local swelling
PainStiffness, myoglobinuria, renal failure
Laboratory Investigations
Nonspecific: Hemogram, serum creatinine, serum amylase, creatine
phosphokinase (CPK).
PT, FDP and fibrinogen level in viper bite as it interferes with clotting
mechanism.
ABG, and electrolyte: For systemic manifestation.
Urine examination: For proteinuria, myoglobinuria.
ECG: Nonspecific changes such as bradycardia and AV-block.
Q. Write short essay/note on management of viper bite.
Management
The first aid (Box 16.7) being currently recommended is based around the mnemonic: ‘Do it
R.I.G.H.T.’
Box 16.7:  First aid currently recommended for snakebite “Do it R.I.G.H.T.”
R = Reassure the patient. Seventy percent of all snakebites are from nonvenomous species. Only
50% of bites by venomous species actually envenomate the patient.
I = Immobilize in the same way as a fractured limb. Use of bandages or cloth is to hold the splints
and should to block the blood supply or apply pressure. Do not compress by tight ligatures, because
they can be dangerous!
GH = Get to Hospital Immediately. Traditional remedies have NO PROVEN benefit in treating
snakebite.
T = Tell the physician about any systemic symptoms that develop on the way to hospital (e.g.
ptosis).

A. Specific treatment
Antisnake venom (ASV)
Indications for ASV are presented in Table 16.9.
Q. Write short essay/note on indications for anti-snake venom therapy.
Classification of severity of snake bite is presented in Table 16.10.
Dosage of ASV: Ideally administer with in 4 hour but effective, if given within 24 hours:
–  In mild cases, 5 vial (50 mL); in moderate cases, 5 to 10 vial and in severe cases, 10 to 20
vial.
Additional infusion containing 5 to 10 vials are infused until progression of swelling ceased and
systemic symptoms are disappeared.
Mode of administration  ASV is given slowly as IV injection or infusion @ rate of 2 mL/minute.
AVS dilute 5–10 mL/kg body weight of normal saline or 5% dextrose and infused over 1 hour.
ASV should never give locally at site of snakebite.
Adverse reaction of ASV (Box 16.8):  It may develop in 20% patients.
Table 16.9: Indications for antisnake venom (ASV).
Neurotoxicity
Bleeding/coagulopathy
–  Spontaneous systemic bleeding
–  WBCT (20 minutes whole blood clotting
test) > 20 min
–  Thrombocytopenia (platelet < 1 lac)
Myoglobinuria/hemoglobinuriaCardiac toxicity
Local swelling involving more than half of
the bitten limb
Rapid extension of swelling
Development of an enlarged tender lymph
node draining the bitten limb
Acute renal failure
Table 16.10: Classification of severity of snake bite.
Envenomation
Absent Mild Moderate Severe
Fang marks +/– + + +
Local reaction
Pain
Local edema
Erythema
Ecchymosis–
Absent
Absent
Absent
AbsentModerate
Minimum
(0–15 cm)
+
+/–Severe
Moderate
(15–30 cm)
+
+Severe
Severe
>30 cm
+
+
Systemic features No No Weakness,
sweating,
syncope, nausea,
vomiting,
thrombocytopeniaHypotension,
paresthesia,
ptosis, broken
neck sign, coma,
pulmonary
edema,
respiratory failure

Table 16.11: Any one of the following suggests early anaphylactic reaction.
Urticaria Chills Diarrhea Hypotension
Itching Nausea Abdominal cramps Bronchospasm
Fever Vomiting Tachycardia Angioedema
B. Supportive therapy
For coagulopathy:  If it does not reverse after ASV therapy. Fresh- frozen plasma, cryprecipitate
(fibrinogen, factor VIII), fresh whole blood, platelet concentrate can be administered.
For bulbar paralysis and respiratory failure.
–  ASV alone not sufficient.
–  Tracheostomy, endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation.
–  Inj. of neostigmine : About 50 to 100 µg/kg/4 hours as a continuous infusion.
–  Glycopyrrolate:  About 0.25 mg can be given before neostigmine in place of atropine as
glycopyrolate does not cross blood brain barrier.
Renal failure: Hemodialysis/peritoneal dialysis.
Capillary leak syndrome: Methyl prednisolone (10 mg/kgQ8H) × 3 days.
Compartment syndrome: Fasciotomy.
Surgical debridement of wound
Care of bitten part: Antibiotic prophylaxis and tetanus toxoid.
Box 16.8:  Adverse reactions of antisnake venom (ASV).
1. Early anaphylactic reaction (Table 16.11):  It may develop within 10 minutes to 3 hours.
Patient should be monitored closely.
–  Treatment of anaphylactic reaction:
♦  Discontinue ASV.
♦  Adrenaline:  1:1000 IM (0.5 mg/kg in adult and 0.01 mg/kg in children). It can be repeated
every 5 min, if necessary.
♦  H1 antihistaminic:  IV 1 mg of chlorphenaramine maleate (CPM).
♦  IV hydrocortisone.
2. Late serum sickness: Develops in 1–12 days. Characterized by fever, nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, arthritis, nephritis, myoglobinuria, etc. Treatment consists of:
–  Oral antihistaminic:  5 days course of oral anti histaminic. For adults—CPM 2 mg/6 hour and
for children—0.25 mg/kg/day in divided dose.
–  Prednisolone:  For patient who fail to response within 24 hour. Dose: 5 mg/6 hour in adult and
0.7 mg/kg/day in divided dose in children.
Algorithm approach to the identification of type of snakebite is presented in
Flowchart 16.1.
Flowchart 16.1:  Algorithm approach for the identification of type of snake bitten by clinical syndrome
in snakebite

SCORPION BITE
Q. Write short essay on clinical features, diagnosis and treatment of
scorpion sting bite.
Scorpion venom:
–  It is clear, colorless toxalbumin and can be classified as either
neurotoxic or hemolytic.
–  Toxicity is more than snake. However, during bite only small quantity
is injected.
–  Venom is strong autonomic stimulator and releases large amount of
catecholamine from adrenals.
–  Mortality (except in children) is negligible, and can cause acute
pancreatitis.
Signs and Symptoms
1. In case of hemolytic venom:
Reaction is predominantly local and simulates the viper snake bite.
However, the scorpion sting bite shows only one hole in the center of
reddened area at the site of bite.
The extremity will have severe pain and edema.

2. In case of neurotoxic venom:
Symptoms are similar to cobra bite.
Usually no mark reaction in local area.
Symptoms: Nausea, vomiting, severe restlessness, paralysis, fever,
cardiac arrythmia, convulsions, cyanosis, coma, and respiratory
depression. Death may occur within hours from pulmonary edema and
cardiac failure.
Diagnosis is confirmed by ELISA testing.
TreatmentImmobilize the limb and apply a tourniquet above the sting.
Pack sting in ice, and incise and use suction, and wash with weak solution of ammonia, borax or
potassium permanganate.
A local anesthetic (2% novocaine or 5% cocaine) is injected at site of pain.
A specific antivenom is available for most species.
Calcium gluconate IV to control local swelling.
Adrenergic symptoms (hypertension and/or pulmonary edema): Prazosin (selective peripheral
alpha-1 adrenergic antagonist).
Barbiturate to reduce convulsions.
Morphine is contraindicated. Give intravenous fentanyl 1 mcg/kg for pain.
Atropine is valuable to prevent pulmonary edema.
Treatment of massive pulmonary edema: By oxygen, intravenous aminophylline or intravenous
nitroprusside.
Hymenoptera (Bee, Wasp, Hornet) Stings
In sensitized individuals, a single sting may result in rapid and potentially
fatal anaphylaxis with hypotension (shock), bronchospasm, angioedema.
Intramuscular 0.1% adrenaline can be life-saving.
Mass attacks by bees can be life-threatening even in non-sensitized
individuals, through the direct action of venom causing hemolysis,
rhabdomyolysis, pulmonary edema, acute renal failure and adrenergic
effects.No antivenom is available.
Treatment is symptomatic.
SEDATIVE DRUG POISONING
Benzodiazepines Poisoning (BZD)

Q. Write short essay/note on benzodiazepine overdose and
management.
Mode of Action
BZDs exert their effect via modulation of the gamma-aminobutyric acid A
(GABA-A) receptor.
Gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) is the main inhibitory
neurotransmitter of the central nervous system.
Types (Table 16.12)
Table 16.12: Various categories of benzodiazepines.
Hypnotic Antianxiety Anticonvulsant
Diazepam
Flurazepam
Nitrazepam
Alprazolam
Temazepam
TriazolamDiazepam
Chlordiazepoxide
Oxazepam
Lorazepam
AlprazolamDiazepam
Lorazepam
Clonazepam
Clobazam
Clinical Features of Over Dosage
Oral benzodiazepines (BZD) taken in overdose without a coingestant rarely
cause significant toxicity. The classic presentation of a patient with an
isolated BZD overdose consists of CNS depression with normal vital signs.
Toxic symptoms: Sedative action on the CNS.
Large doses: Neuromuscular blockade.
Intravenous injection: Peripheral vasodilation, fall in BP, shock.
Propylene glycol (1, 2 propanediol) is the diluent used in parenteral
formulations of diazepam and lorazepam which itself causes cardio and
neurotoxicity.
Of note, most intentional ingestions of BZDs involve a coingestant, the most
common being ethanol . Acute poisoning
Mild: Drowsiness, ataxia, weakness
Moderate to severe: Vertigo, slurred speech, nystagmus, partial ptosis,

lethargy, hypotension, respiratory depression, coma (stage 1 and 2).
COMA (Stage 1): Responsive to painful stimuli but not to verbal or
tactile stimuli, without any disturbance in respiration or BP.
COMA (Stage 2): Unconscious, not responsive to painful stimuli, no
disturbance in respiration or BP.
General Diagnostic Testing
Fingerstick glucose, to rule out hypoglycemia as the cause of any
alteration in mental status.
Acetaminophen and salicylate levels, to rule out these common
coingestions.
Electrocardiogram (ECG), as it affect the QRS or QTc intervals.
Pregnancy test in women of childbearing age.
Life Supportive Procedures and Symptomatic/Specific Treatment
Airway, breathing and circulation.
Endotracheal intubation.
Assisted ventilation.
Supplemental oxygen intravenous fluids, inotropes, if needed.
Decontamination
Gastrointestinal decontamination with activated charcoal (AC) (usually of no benefit in cases of
isolated BZD ingestion and increases the risk of aspiration).
Antidote Treatment: Flumazenil
Mode of action:  competitive antagonism. Complete reversal of benzodiazepine effect with a total
slow IV dose of 1 mg.
Administered in a series of smaller doses beginning with 0.2 mg and progressively increasing by
0.1–0.2 mg every minute until a cumulative total dose of 3.5 mg is reached.
Resedation occurs within ½ hr–2 hours.
Side effects:  nausea, vomiting, arrhythmias, convulsions.
Contraindication:  Status epilepticus.
Barbiturate Poisoning
Q. Write short essay on clinical features and treatment of barbiturate
poisoning.
Nonselective CNS depressants.
Mode of action: Direct CNS depressants-bind to GABA receptors →
prolongs the opening of chloride channel. Inhibits excitable cells of the
CNS.

Classification (Table 16.13)
Table 16.13: Classification of barbiturates.
Long acting (6–12
hours)Intermediate acting
(3–6 hours)Short acting (<3
hours)Ultrashort acting
(<15–20 min)
Mephobarbital
PhenobarbitoneAmobarbital
Aprobarbitone
ButobarbitoneHexobarbitone
Pentobarbitone
SecobarbitalThiopentone
Methohexitone
Signs and Symptoms (Table 16.14)
Table 16.14: Adverse and toxic effects of barbiturate poisoning.
Adverse effects Toxic effects Residual depression
Paradoxical excitement
Hypersensitivity reactions—localized swelling
of eyelid, cheek or lip, erythematous or
exfoliative dermatitis
Synergistic action with ethanol and
antihistaminesSlurred speech, ataxia, lethargy, confusion,
headache, and nystagmus
CNS depression, coma, shock
Pupils—first constricted, later dilate because
of hypoxia
Hypothermia
Cutaneous bullae  (blisters) (Fig. 16.7)
Death due to respiratory arrest or cardio-
vascular collapse
Fig. 16.7:  Barbiturate blister.
Management of Barbiturate Poisoning
No Specific antidote.

Barbiturate poisoning is more dangerous  than benzodiazepine poisoning.
Management is supportive.
–  Cardiorespiratory support.
–  Clean the air ways by thorough suctioning and insertion of oral airways.
–  If the patient is comatose, prompt intubation is strongly advocated because of worsening of
respiratory failure.
–  Correction of dehydration by CVP-guided fluid therapy depending on the serum electrolytes.
–  Treat hypotension by intravenous infusion of plasma expanders and vasopressors. In refractory
cases, steroids are given.
–  Measures to prevent absorption:
♦  Gastric lavage.
♦  Activated charcoal is administrated orally or by nasogastric tube.
–  Measures for removal barbiturates:
♦  Frequent doses of activated charcoal.
♦  Forced diuresis with alkalization of urine.
♦  Hemodialysis and hemoperfusion.
ANALGESIC POISONING
Paracetamol (Acetaminophen) PoisoningQ. Write short essay on paracetamol poisoning and its treatment.
Toxicity unlikely to result from a single dose of less than 150 mg/kg in
child or 7.5 to 10 g for adult.
Toxicity is likely with single ingestions greater than 250 mg/kg or those
greater than 12 g over a 24-hour period.
Virtually all patients who ingest doses in excess of 350 mg/kg develop
severe liver toxicity unless appropriately treated.

Fig. 16.8: Acetaminophen metabolism.(NAPQI, N-acetyl-p-benzoquinone imine).
Mechanism of Paracetamol Toxicity (Fig. 16.8)
Toxicity is due to formation of an intermediate reactive metabolite,
which binds covalently to cellular proteins, leading to cell death. This causes
hepatic and occasionally renal failure. In therapeutic doses, the toxic
intermediate metabolite is detoxified in reactions requiring glutathione. With
overdose, glutathione reserves become depleted .
Clinical Manifestations of ToxicityStage I (0.5 to 24 hours)
–  No symptoms; nausea, vomiting and malaise.
Stage II (24 to 72 hours)
–  Subclinical elevations of hepatic aminotransferases (AST, ALT).
–  Right upper quadrant pain, with liver enlargement and tenderness. Elevations of prothrombin
time (PT), total bilirubin, and oliguria and renal function abnormalities may become evident.
Acute kidney injury is due primarily to acute tubular necrosis.
Stage III (72 to 96 hours)
–  Fulminant hepatic failure; Jaundice, confusion (hepatic encephalopathy), a marked elevation in
hepatic enzymes, hyperammonemia, and a bleeding diathesis hypoglycemia, lactic acidosis,
renal failure (25%) and death.
Stage IV (4 days to 2 weeks)
–  Recovery phase that usually begins by day 4 and is complete by 7 days after overdose.
Treatment Options
Activated charcoal:
–  Within four hours of ingestion.

–  May reduce absorption by 50–90%.
–  Single oral dose of one gram per kilogram.
–  Disadvantage: Inhibits absorption of oral methionine.
Gastric lavage:  Only for massive ingestions (e.g. >600 mg/kg).
Gastric lavage:  Only for massive ingestions (e.g. >600 mg/kg).
Antidote: N-acetylcysteine (NAC) (Box 16.9)
–  Properties:
♦  MOA:  A glutathione precursor.
♦  Limits the formation and accumulation of NAPQI.
♦  Powerful anti-inflammatory and antioxidant effects.
–  Dosage and administration:
♦  IV infusion or oral tablets.
♦  150 mg/kg over 15 minutes; 50 mg/kg over next 4 hours; 100 mg/kg over next 16 hours up to
36 hours.
♦  Most effective, if started within 8–10 hours after ingestion. Beyond 8 hours, NAC efficacy
progressively decreases.
–  Oral N-acetylcysteine treatment regimen consists of a 72-hour oral course given as a 140 mg/kg
loading dose followed by 17 doses of 70 mg/kg every four hours (total dose 1330 mg/kg). This
regimen has the theoretical advantage of delivering the antidote to the portal circulation in
patients with oral ingestions. Side effects include nausea, flushing, urticaria, bronchospasm,
angioedema, fever, chills, hypotension, hemolysis and rarely, cardiovascular collapse.Alternate medication: oral methionine.
Liver transplantation (Box 16.10)
It is life-saving for fulminant hepatic necrosis.
Box 16.9:  Indications for N-acetylcysteine in paracetamol poisoning.
All patients with a serum acetaminophen concentration above the possible hepatic toxicity line
on the Rumack-Matthew nomogram
Patients with an estimated ingestion of greater than 140 mg/kg
Patients with an unknown time of ingestion.
Patients with a presentation more than 24 hours after ingestion with elevated. transaminases.
Box 16.10:  Indications for liver transplantation for paracetamol poisoining (King’s College Criteria).
Acidosis (pH <7.3), or
PT (Prothrombin time) >100 sec
Creatinine >3.4 mg/dL
Grade 3 encephalopathy (or worse)
Aspirin Toxicity
Q. Write short note on salicylates poisoning and its management.

Mechanism of Toxicity
Acetyl salicylic acid (ASA) is hydrolyzed to salicylic acid. Responsible
for therapeutic and toxic effects.
Direct stimulation of respiratory center: Medulla
Uncouples oxidative phosphorylation:
–  Increase in O2 consumption and CO2 production
–  Increase respiration leading to respiratory alkalosis.
Renal excretion of bicarbonate, Na and K: Metabolic acidosis
Inhibition of mitochondrial respiration: Increase pyruvate and lactic acid
→ metabolic acidosis.
Disruption of Kreb’s cycle metabolism and glycolysis → Hyperglycemia,
ketonemia.
Signs and Symptoms (Table 16.15 and Box 16.11)
Salicylate poisoning can occur in two settings—an acute toxicity and a
chronic toxicity (Table 16.16).
Management of Aspirin Overdose
Initial supportive therapy.
Specific Management
A. Decreasing absorption
Activated Charcoal:  Given in those who have taken more than 250 mg/kg body weight less than
1 hour ago.
Gastric lavage:  It is advised in patients who have taken more than 500 mg/kg body less than 1
hour ago.
B. Increasing drug elimination
Urinary alkalinization:
–  Alkalinizing urine from pH 5 to 8 increases renal elimination of ASA from 1.3 mL/min to 100
mL/min.
–  Serum half-life decreases from 48 hours to 6 hours.
–  This is done by giving an infusion of sodium bicarbonate.
Hemodialysis (Box 16.12):
–  Used in severe life-threatening overdose.
–  Aims to correct the acid-base disturbances while removing the salicylate.
Box 16.11:  ASPIRIN mnemonic.
Altered mental status (lethargy—coma)
Sweating/diaphoresis
Pulmonary edema

Increased vital signs (hypertension, increased respiratory rate, tachycardia)
Ringing in the ears
Irritable
Nausea and vomiting
Table 16.15: Differences between acute and chronic aspirin toxicity.
Feature Acute Chronic salicylism
Age Young adult Older adults/infants
Cause Overdose Treatment misuse
Coingestion Frequent Rare
Mental status Normal Altered
Clinical presentation Early Late
Mortality Low with treatment High
Serum levels (mg/dL) 40 to ≥120 30 to ≥ 80
Table 16.16: Features of salicylate poisoning.
Central nervous system Signs and symptoms Laboratory findings
Hyperactivity
Irritability
Delirium
Agitation
Vertigo
Slurred speech
Hallucination
Lethargy
Stupor
Seizures
Coma
Cerebral edemaNausea, vomiting
Tinnitus, hearing loss
Pulmonary edema
Hyperventilation (tachypnea
and/or hyperpnea)
Hyperthermia Tachycardia
Volume depletion
Arrhythmias
DiaphoresisRespiratory alkalosis
Anion gap metabolic acidosis
Coagulation abnormalities
Urinary ketones
Hyperkalemia
Hyperlactatemia (mild)
Box 16.12: Absolute indications for hemodialysis in aspirin toxicity.
Renal failure
Congestive heart failure
Acute lung injury
Persistent CNS disturbances
Progressive deterioration in vital signs
Severe acid-base or electrolyte imbalance, despite appropriate treatment
Hepatic compromise with coagulopathy
Salicylate concentration (acute) >100 mg/dL (in the absence of the above).

CYANIDE POISONING
Q. Write short essay on management of cyanide poisoning.
Cyanide
Present in bitter almonds (250 mg CN/100 g plant tissue), cassava (104
mg CN/100 g plant tissue), wild cherries (140–370 mg CN/100 g plant
material) and other foods.
Used extensively in industry for fumigation, electroplating, and mining
activities.
Routes of Exposure of cyanide is mentioned in Box 16.13.
Box 16.13: Routes of exposure of cyanide.
Gas:  Inhalation (e.g. hydrogen cyanide and cyanogen chloride).
Liquid:  Inhalation (aerosol), ingestion, skin contact (e.g. hydrocyanic acid).
Solid:  Inhalation, ingestion, skin contact (e.g. cyanide salts).
Clinical Manifestations of Cyanide Poisoning
Onset of cyanide poisoning
–  Inhalation (rapid onset, seconds to minutes), ingestion  and skin
contact (delayed onset, 15–30 minutes).
Death may occur within 6–8 minutes after inhalation of a high
concentration. 2–5 mg/kg of it is lethal
Mechanism: Inhibits mitochondrial cytochrome oxidase and an
‘asphyxiating’ agent.
Common final pathway for cyanide intoxication is cellular hypoxia.
–  Metabolic acidosis: Nonspecific symptoms.
–  CNS: Dizziness, nausea, vomiting, drowsiness, tetanus, trismus,
hallucations.
–  CVS: Dysrhythmia, hypotension . Tachycardia and hypertension may
occur transiently in early stages.
–  Respiratory: Dyspnea, initial hyperventilation followed by
hypoventilation and pulmonary edema. Cyanosis not apparent, since
blood is adequately oxygenated.

Laboratory Diagnosis
Blood cyanide levels can be estimated, but empiric treatment is almost
always required before laboratory results are available.
High anion gap metabolic acidosis.
Arterial and venous pO2 may be elevated.
Treatment
Activated charcoal:  For alert, asymptomatic patients following ingestion.
Supplemental oxygen:  100% for suspected exposure.
Supportive care.
Sodium nitrite:
–  Mechanism: Forms methemoglobin , competes with cytochrome oxidase for free cyanide;
combines with cyanide to form cyanmethemoglobin.
–  Dose: (1) Adults: 300 mg IV over 5 minutes; slower if hypotension develops and (2) children:
0.12–0.33 mg/kg IV infused as above.
Amyl nitrite:  An inhaled drug, similar to sodium nitrite but with little systemic distribution.
Second line agent used when sodium nitrite is not available.
Sodium thiosulfate:
–  Mechanism:  Sulfur donor promotes rhodanese activity, detoxifies cyanide as it is released from
cyanmethemoglobin. Directly detoxifies cyanide by conversion to thiocyanate; too slow to be
useful as a first-line intervention.
–  Dose: (i) Adults: 12.5 g IV over 10–20 minutes following administration of sodium nitrite, and
(ii) Children: 412.5 mg per kg IV over 10–20 minutes.
Hydroxocobalamin
–  Mechanism:  Direct binding agent, chelates cyanide.
–  Dose: 4 to 5 g IV
Dicobalt edetate  is an intravenous chelator of cyanide which can be used.
Anticholinergic Toxidrome
Q. Write short essay/note on causes of anticholinergic syndrome.
Causes of Anticholinergic Toxidrome (Table 16.17)
Table 16.17: Various causes of anticholinergic syndrome.
Natural alkaloids
Atropine (from the plant Atropa
belladonna/Deadly nightshade)
Hyoscine (Scopolamine) (from Hyoscyamus
niger/henbane)
Datura stramonium (plant—JimsonSynthetic compounds
Mydriatics: Tropicamide (eye drops)
Antisecretory antispasmodics:
Glycopyrrolate, oxybutynin
Antiparkinsonian drugs: Benzhexol,
benztropine

weed/Angel’s trumpet)
Semisynthetic derivatives
Homatropine (eye drops)
Tiotropium bromideMiscellaneous
Tricyclic antidepressants, e.g. Amitriptyline
Phenothiazines, e.g. Prochlorperazine
Antihistamines, e.g. Cyclizine
Neuroleptics, e.g. Olanzapine
NEUROTOXIC PLANT POISONS
Datura Poisoning
Q. Write short essay/note on clinical feature and management of datura
poisoning.
Datura stramonium (jimson seed) causes anticholinergic syndrome. The
active toxic agents include atropine and scopolamine. Atropine and
related compounds block acetylcholine at the receptor sites o f
postganglionic synapses of the cholinergic nerves.
All the parts of datura plant (Figs. 16.9A and B) are poisonous, but the
seeds and fruit are the most toxic.
Mode of poisoning: Most popular mode of poisoning is by mixing the
seeds in sweets and given to others with the intention of thefts.

Figs. 16.9A and B:  Datura: (A) Seed; (B) Flower.
Clinical Features
Toxic symptoms often appear within 30 minutes of ingestion and last for
24–48 hours.
Clinical features include tachycardia and the other features are described
as ‘blind as a bat, mad as a hatter, red as a beet, hot as a hare, dry as a
bone, the bowel and bladder lose their tone, and the heart runs alone.’
–  Hot as a hare: Cutaneous vasodilatation leading to anhidrotic
hyperthermia.
–  Blind as a bat: Ciliary muscle paralysis, mydriasis, dilated pupils.
–  Dry as a bone: Anhidrosis, dryness of mouth, urinary retention,
decreased bowel motility.
–  Red as a beet: Cutaneous vasodilatation causing flushing.
–  Mad as a hatter: CNS arousal, agitation, delirium, hallucinations.
–  In can be fatal-producing stupor, coma and convulsions. Death is due to
respiratory paralysis or cardiovascular collapse.
ManagementGastric lavage and supportive therapy.
Activated charcoal adsorbs the alkaloids.
Control of hyperthermia.
Benzodiazepines to treat agitation.
Role of physostigmine, a cholinesterase inhibitor is not clear.
CARDIOTOXIC PLANT POISONS (FIGS. 16.10A
to C)
Cardiotoxic plant poisons inhibit Na+/K+-ATPase pump leading to overall
increase in intracellular Na+ ions and secondary increase in intracellular Ca2+
levels.Symptoms: On ingestion, they produce burning sensation, abdominal pain,
nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, dizziness and numbness in oral and perioral
region.
Most important cardiotoxic effects are sinus bradycardia, varying degrees

of heart block, ventricular ectopics, ventricular tachycardia which can be
fatal.
Management of Cardiotoxicity
Atropine 0.6 mg, orciprenaline 10 mg to maintain heart rate around 80/minute. Severe bradycardia
may need pacemaker insertion.
Sodium bicarbonate 50 ml IV 6th hourly, if ABG shows acidosis.
Figs. 16.10A to C: (A) Oleander plant; (B) Cleistanthus collinus; (C) Calotropis.
GASTROINTESTINAL TOXIC PLANT POISONS
Ricinus communis (Fig. 16.11A) contains ricin and abrus precatorius (Fig.
16.11B) contains abrin.
Clinical Features
Gastrointestinal upset, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pain, GI bleeding.
Hematuria, acrocyanosis, shock, dehydration and hemolysis.
Abnormal liver function tests (LFT) and renal function tests (RFT).
Treatment: Supportive.


Figs. 16.11A and B:  (A) Ricinus communis contains ricin; (B) Abrus precatorius contains abrin.
OPIOID POISONING
Q. Write short essay/note on opiate over dosage, clinical features of
opioid tolerance and its management.
Opium is extracted from poppy seeds (Paper somniforum) (Fig. 16.12).
Opioid agonists: Morphine, heroin, hydromorphone, fentanyl, codeine.
Opioid Tolerance
Tolerance is a diminished responsiveness to the drug’s action that is
seen with many compounds.
Tolerance can be demonstrated by a decreased effect from a constant dose
of drug or by an increase in the minimum drug dose required to produce a
given level of effect.
Physiological tolerance involves changes in the binding of a drug to
receptors or changes in receptor transductional processes related to the
drug of action. This type of tolerance occurs in opioids.Molecular basis of tolerance involves glutaminergic mechanisms
(glutamate-excitatory amino acid neurotransmitter).
Physiological dependence occurs when the drug is necessary for
normal physiological functioning—this is demonstrated by the
withdrawal reactions.
Withdrawal reactions are usually the opposite of the physiological
effects produced by the drug.
Fig. 16.12:  Poppy seeds.
Opioid toxicity is related to opioid receptors in non-nociceptive pathways

and counter-opioid responses. It is determined by genetics, organ function,
and co-medications.
Acute action and withdrawal signs of opioids are listed in Table 16.18.
Treatment of opioid toxicity
Ensure adequate ventilation
Management of complications such as ARDS
Antidote—Naloxone, Naltrexone
MOA:  Pure opioid antagonist competes and displaces narcotics at opioid receptor sites.
Naloxone:  IV (preferred), IM, intratracheal, subcutaneous: 0.4–2 mg every 2–3 minutes as
needed.
Table 16.18: Acute action and withdrawal signs of opioids.
Acute action Withdrawal signs
Analgesia
Respiratory depression
Euphoria
Relaxation and sleep
Tranquilization
Decreased blood pressure
Constipation
Pupillary constriction
Hypothermia
Drying of secretions
Reduced sex drive
Flushed and warm skinPain and irritability
Hyperventilation
Dysphoria and depression
Restlessness and insomnia
Fearfulness and hostility
Increased blood pressure
Diarrhea
Pupillary dilation
Hyperthermia
Lacrimation, runny nose
Spontaneous ejaculation
Chilliness and ‘gooseflesh’
Carbon Monoxide
Q. Write short note on carbon monoxide poisoning—signs and
symptoms.
Carbon monoxide (CO) is a colorless, odorless gas generated by faulty
appliances burning organic fuels. It is also present in vehicle exhaust fumes.
It produces toxicity by binding with hemoglobin and cytochrome oxidase,
which decreases the delivery of oxygen to tissue and inhibits cellular
respiration.
Clinical Features
Acute severe carbon monoxide poisoning produces non-specific symptoms

such as headache, nausea, irritability, weakness and tachypnea. Later, ataxia,
nystagmus, drowsiness and hyperreflexia may develop leading to coma,
respiratory depression, cardiovascular collapse and death. Myocardial
ischemia/infarction, cerebral edema, and rhabdomyolysis (with
myoglobinuria and renal failure) may occur. Long-term exposure can lead to
Parkinsonism.
Treatment of Carbon Monoxide Poisoning
Administration of normobaric 100 percent oxygen is the therapy of choice for
most cases, while hyperbaric oxygen therapy is reserved for severe
poisonings.
Methanol PoisoningQ. Write a short note on toxicity, clinical features and management of
methanol poisoning.
Methanol is a mild CNS depressant.
Metabolism: Methanol itself is not toxic. However, its metabolites namely
formaldehyde and formic acid are responsible for its toxicity.
Clinical Features
Early clinical features are due to methanol, whereas late features are due
to the methanol metabolite formic acid.
–  Features due to methanol: Methanol produces nausea, vomiting,
abdominal pain, headache, vertigo, confusion, obtundation,
convulsions and coma.
–  Features due to formic acid: Metabolic acidosis and retinal injury.
The retinal manifestations include clouding and diminished vision,
dancing and flashing spots, dilated or fixed pupils, and hyperemia of
the optic disc, retinal edema and blindness.Other manifestations: Rapid breathing due to metabolic acidosis,
myocardial depression, bradycardia, shock and anuria.
Complication: Putaminal necrosis producing rigidity, tremor, masked
faces and monotonous speech.
Diagnosis
Confirmation by measurement of serum methanol level, which is

usually more than 20 mg/dL.
Methanol-induced formic acidosis can be confirmed by a large anion gap,
low serum bicarbonate and elevated serum formate levels.
Osmolol gap is elevated due to methanol.
Management
In early stages:
–  Gastrointestinal decontamination .
–  Correction of systemic acidosis  with sodium bicarbonate.
Ethanol therapy:  Indicated in patients with visual symptoms or methanol level exceeding 20–30
mg/dL. Ethanol blocks conversion of methanol to formic acid by inhibiting alcohol
dehydrogenase.
Hemodialysis:  Indicated (i) when methanol level exceeding 50 mg/dL, (ii) those with visual signs,
and (iii) those with metabolic acidosis unresponsive to bicarbonate.
Antidote of methanol poisoning: 4-methylpyrazole or fomepizole is a direct, potent inhibitor of
alcohol dehydrogenase. It may be more effective than ethanol, which is a competitive antagonist.
Co-factor therapy:  Folinic acid (leucovorin) is given in addition to ethanol or 4-methylpyrazole.
It acts by enhancing the rate of degradation of formic acid to carbon dioxide.
Ethylene Glycol Poisoning
Produces similar symptoms as methanol poisoning, however, renal failure
is more common.
Treatment is on same lines as methanol poisoning. Supplementation of
thiamine and pyridoxine as cofactor therapy.
ALUMINIUM PHOSPHIDE POISONING
Q. Discuss the clinical features and management of aluminum
phosphide poisoning.
Aluminum phosphide (ALP) poisoning is known worldwide, especially in
developing countries such as India. Lethal dose of ALP is 1–1.5 g.
ALP, when ingested, liberates a lot of phosphine gas → phosphine leads
to non-competitive inhibition of the cytochrome oxidase of mitochondria,
blocking the electron transfer chain and oxidative phosphorylation, producing
an energy crisis in the cells.
The severe toxicity of ALP particularly affects the cardiac and vascular
tissues, which manifests as profound and refractory hypotension, congestive
heart failure, methemoglobinemia, myocarditis, pericarditis and

subendocardial infarction, cardiac arrhythmias, lactic acidosis and respiratory
failure.
Management
It is supportive, the main objective is to provide effective oxygenation, ventilation and circulation till
phosphine is excreted. Gastric decontamination using activated charcoal, potassium permanganate
and medicated liquid paraffin have been tried. No definite antidote available.
RODENTICIDE POISONING
Rodenticides are composed of superwarfarins, thallium, barium carbonate,
aluminum phosphide (ALP) and zinc phosphide.
Rodenticides containing aluminum or zinc phosphide are hepatotoxic and
can cause acute fulminant hepatic failure (ALF). Patients admitted with
aluminum or zinc phosphide poisoning often develop hepatic necrosis,
renal failure, metabolic acidosis and refractory hypotension.Superwarfarin rodenticides cause coagulopathy and bleeding > Followed
by a next line with treatment background.
Treatment is supportive. Fresh frozen plasma, cryoprecipitate
supplementation. N acetyl cysteine for ALF. Liver transplantation for
fulminant ALF.

Nutrition and Environmental
Medicine

CHAPTER
17
HALLMARKS OF CANCER
Q. Write short essay/note on:
Proto-oncogene, oncogene and tumor suppressor gene.
Genetic basis of transformation of a normal cell into a malignant
cell.
Regulation of Cancer Cell Growth
Normal cell may undergo malignant transformation by corrupting any one of
the normal steps involved in cell proliferation. Abnormal regulation of cell
growth in cancer can occur as the result of several mechanisms. All cancers
show eight fundamental changes in cell physiology. These are considered the
hallmarks of cancer and include:
Table 17.1: Examples of oncogenes and associated tumors.
Classification of oncogenes Example/s of associated tumor/s
Growth Factors
PDGF (platelet-derived growth factor) Non-small cell cancer of lung
TGF -α (tumor growth factor-alpha) Hepatocellular cancer
Growth Factor Receptors
EGFR  (epidermal growth factor receptor) Lung and gastrointestinal tumors
Her 2/neu receptor Breast cancer
Signal Transducing Proteins
KRAS Adenocarcinoma of colon, lung, and pancreas
NRAS Hematopoietic tumors, melanomas
ABL Chronic myeloid leukemia, acute lymphoblastic
leukemia
Nuclear-Regulatory Proteins/Transcription Factors
C-MYC Burkitt lymphoma

N-MYC Neuroblastoma
Cell Cycle Regulators
Cyclin D Breast, esophageal, and liver cancers
1. Self-sufficiency in growth signals (activation of cell growth): Proto-
oncogenes are normal cellular genes, which encode a number of nuclear
proteins that regulate normal cell proliferation, differentiation, and
survival . Genes that promote autonomous cell growth  in cancer cells are
called oncogenes and are altered/mutated versions of proto-oncogenes.
Oncogenes and Oncoproteins: Oncogenes can promote cell growth in the
absence of normal growth-promoting/mitogenic signals. Oncoproteins are
products of oncogenes and resemble the normal products of proto-
oncogenes. Oncoproteins production is not under normal regulatory
control → cells proliferate without the usual requirement for external
signals and are freed from checkpoints → growth becomes autonomous.
Classification of oncogenes (Table 17.1): Oncogenes are classified
depending on the function of gene product (oncoprotein).2. Insensitivity to growth-inhibitory signals (inhibition of tumor
suppressor genes):
Normally, the products of tumor suppressor genes have a negative
regulatory control of cell growth.
Second mechanism of carcinogenesis results from failure of growth
inhibition, due to deficiency of normal tumor suppressor genes and
their products.
Tumor suppressor genes apply brakes to cell proliferation and prevent
uncontrolled/abnormal cell proliferation and induce repair or self-death
(apoptosis). Important tumor suppressor genes are RB, p53, BRCA1 and
BRCA2 genes.Structural abnormalities associated with oncogenes are presented in
Table 17.2. and few examples of tumor suppressor genes and tumors in
which they are affected are listed in Table 17.3.3. Growth-promoting metabolic alterations: Cancer cells show a
distinctive form of cellular metabolic alteration (even in the presence of
adequate oxygen) characterized by high levels of glucose uptake and
increased conversion of glucose to lactose (fermentation) via the glycolytic
pathway. This is known as the Warburg effect or aerobic glycolysis.

4. Evasion of cell death/apoptosis: Apoptosis is a programmed cell death
and is one of the normal protective mechanism by which a cell with DNA
damage (mutation) undergo cell death. Mutations in the genes that regulate
apoptosis may lead to neoplasm. Example, Some members of the Bcl-2
family (Bcl-2, Bcl-XL) are anti-apoptotic, while others (Bax, Bak) are pro-
apoptotic. In few malignant cells, decreased apoptoses are associated with
increased levels of Bcl-2/Bcl-XL or decreased levels of Bax/Bak.5. Limitless replicative potential: All malignant tumors contain cells that
are immortal and have limitless replicative potential.
Cancer stem cells: At least few cells in all cancers have stem cell-like
properties and are called cancer stem cells.
Reactivation of telomerase: During the course of repeated cell cycles,
there is progressive shortening of telomeres, which is prevented by an
enzyme called telomerase. Cancer cells can replicate an infinite number
of times and this is associated with maintenance of telomere length. 6. Development of sustained angiogenesis: Solid tumors cannot grow
without vascularization and are achieved mainly by neoangiogenesis.
7. Ability to invade and metastasize (invasion and metastasis): Invasion
into surrounding tissues is associated with loss of cell-cell cohesion, which
is mediated by cell adhesion molecules (CAMs). Metastasis of tumor cells
occurs through intravasation into the vascular and lymphatic vessels.8. Ability to evade the host immune response.
Table 17.2: Structural abnormalities associated with oncogenes.
Oncogene Aberration Neoplasm
abl t(9;22) CML, AML, ALL
myc t(8;14) Burkitt lymphoma, B-ALL, T-
ALL
bcl-1, bcl-2 t(11;14) B-cell lymphoma
tcl-1, tcl-2 t(11,14) T-cell lymphoma
p53, erb-A, erb-B t(15;17) APML
mos, ets-2 t(8;21) AML-M2
ets-l, sis t(11;22) Ewing’s sarcoma
myc t(3;8) Renal cell carcinoma
myb t(6;14) Ovarian carcinoma

(CML: chronic myeloid leukemia; AML: acute myeloid leukemia; ALL: acute lymphoid leukemia;
APML: acute promyelocytic leukemia)
Table 17.3: Few examples of tumors suppressor genes and tumors in which
it is affected.
Gene (locus) Function Tumors in which gene is affected
Familial Sporadic
DCC (18q) Cell surface interaction Not known Colorectal cancer
Rb1 (13q) Transcription Retinoblastoma Small cell carcinoma of
lung
p53 (17p) Transcription Li-Fraumeni syndrome Cancer of breast, colon
and lung
BRCA1(17q) Transcription Carcinoma breast Carcinoma
breast/ovaryBRCA2 (13q) Regulator/DNA repair
WT1 (11p) Transcription Wilms’ tumor Lung cancer
CANCER TREATMENT
Cancer treatments are divided into four main types: surgery, chemotherapy
(includes hormone therapy and molecular targeted therapy), radiation therapy
(includes photodynamic therapy), and biologic therapy (includes
immunotherapy and gene therapy). Most often used in combination. For
example, surgery and radiation therapy.Q. Write short note on adjuvant and neoadjuvant chemotherapy.
The primary goal of cancer treatment is to cure the cancer. In situations
where cure cannot be achieved, the goal shifts towards palliation, the
amelioration of symptoms, and preservation of quality of life. Treatment of
cancers may be undertaken in spite of severe and perhaps life-threatening
toxicities.Palliation: Palliation is the relief of tumor symptoms, preservation of
quality of life and prolongation of life of patient with cancer. When cure is
not possible, palliation is possible in many cancers. Aim of palliative
chemotherapy is to improve the quality of life with minimal toxicity. It
may cause a small increase in survival.Adjuvant treatment: It is administered after surgery. Main aim is to
increase the disease-free and overall survival.

Neoadjuvant treatment: It is the treatment given to patients without
macroscopic evidence of metastases and who are at risk of recurrence
from micrometastases, following treatment given for the primary lesion. It
is given as chemotherapy, radiotherapy or hormonal treatment before
primary surgery. This is aimed to shrink the tumor, to improve the local
excision, treat any micrometastases and improve the survival.Chemoprevention: It is the use of pharmacological agents to prevent
cancer developing in individuals who are identified as having a risk of
particular cancer.
Surgical Treatment
Surgical intervention is of pivotal importance for diagnosis (biopsy). Also
surgery can be used for curative or palliative purposes.
Systemic Chemotherapy
Q. Write short note on classification of chemotherapeutic agents.
Mechanism of Action (Fig. 17.1)
Combination Therapy
It consists of combination of chemotherapeutic agents. Combinations usually
include drugs from different classes. They aim at targeting several pathways
and gaining maximum therapeutic effect. Purpose of combination therapy
are: (i) to prevent drug resistance, (ii) to gain maximum therapeutic effect and
(iii) to limit the side effects of different drugs.
Adverse/Side Effects
The five most common side effects include vomiting, hair loss, tiredness,
myelosuppression, and mucositis.
Cyclophosphamide
Q. Write short note on cyclophosphamide.
Cyclophosphamide is a direct DNA-interactive alkylating agent that inhibits
the DNA synthesis. Uses and toxicity of cyclophosphamide are presented in
Table 17.4.

Table 17.4: Uses and toxicity of cyclophosphamide.
Uses Toxicity
Autoimmune disorders: Systemic lupus
erythematosis (SLE), rheumatoid arthirits,
Wegener’s granulomatosis, polyarteritis
nodosa (PAN) and other systemic vasculitis
refractory ITP.Lymphomas
Leukemias, carcinoma breast, Ewing’s
sarcoma,gestational trophoblastic tumors
Stem cell transplant conditioning
Nephrotic syndrome, (corticosteroid refractory
or intolerant)Bone marrow depression resulting in
cytopenias
Chemical cystitis and bladder carcinoma.
Severe cystitis can be prevented/treated by 2-
mercaptoethanesulfonate (MESNA)
Hepatotoxicity
Sporadic interstitial pneumonitis leading to
pulmonary fibrosis
Cardiac dysfunction (high dose)
Alopecia, oligospermia, sterility, amenorrhea
Fig. 17.1:  Mechanism of action of various chemotherapeutic drugs.
Methotrexate
Q. Write short note indications/uses and toxicity of methotrexate.
Methotrexate is an indirectly DNA-interacting, folic acid antagonist,

which function as an antimetabolite. Methotrexate inhibits dihydrofolate
reductase enzyme. These cells without reduced folates die a ‘thymine-less’
death.
Uses and toxicity of methotrexate (Table 17.5).
Table 17.5: Uses and toxicity of methotrexate.
Uses Toxicity
Choriocarcinoma
Rheumatoid arthritis and other connective
tissue disorders
Leukemias: Meningeal leukemia prophylaxis
or treatment
Psoriasis, acute graft versus host disease
prophylaxis, lupus nephritisBone marrow suppression
Hepatotoxicity, increase in transaminases,
hepatic fibrosis (chronic low-dose)
Megaloblastic anemia
Mucosal irritation: Ulcerative enteritis,
ulcerative dermatitis
Renal failure itself at high doses
Pulmonary fibrosis
Chemical arachnoiditis and CNS dysfunction
(with administration to the intrathecal space)
The toxicity of methotrexate is antagonized by administering folinic acid
(citrovorum factor).
Cisplatin
Q. Write short note on cisplatin.
Cisplatin is a platinum-based chemotherapy drug (others include
carboplatin and oxaliplatin) that produces cross-linking of DNA
preventing division of cells.
Uses and toxicity of cisplatin (Table 17.6).
Table 17.6: Uses and toxicity of cisplatin.
Uses Toxicity
Sarcomas
Carcinomas
–  Small cell cancer of lung
–  Ovarian carcinoma
–  Bladder carcinoma
–  Breast carcinomaLymphoma
Germ cell tumorsNephrotoxicity
Electrolyte disturbances: hypomagnesemia,
hypokalemia and hypocalcemia
Nausea and vomiting
Neurotoxicity (stocking-and-glove
sensorimotor neuropathy)
Ototoxicity: Hearing loss
Alopecia
Bone marrow suppression

Hormone Therapy
Hormones act as growth factors. For example estrogen is capable of
stimulating the growth of breast and endometrial cancers and androgen the
growth of prostate cancer. Removal of these growth factors may result in
apoptosis and regression of the cancer. Examples are given in Box 17.1.
Immunotherapy
Stimulation of the patient’s immune system can sometimes change the
natural history of a malignancy. Example, interferons are naturally occurring
cytokines that mediate the cellular immune response. They are used in the
treatment of melanoma and lymphoma, and they are beneficial as adjuvants
(after surgery and chemotherapy respectively) to delay recurrence.
Rituximab  is an antibody against the common B-cell antigen CD20, and
improves survival in diffuse large cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma when
combined with chemotherapy, and is also as a palliative therapy in advanced
follicular non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Activation of the immune system by
using Bacillus Calmette-Guérin  (BCG) is used for bladder cancer.
Box 17.1: Hormone therapy in cancer.Antiestrogen therapy:  Breast tumors with positive estrogen receptor (ER) by tamoxifen
Toremifene, Raloxifene.
Pure antiestrogen receptor downregulator:  Fulvestrant for carcinoma breast
Somatostatin analogues:  Octreotide for pituitary tumors
LHRH and anti-androgens:  In prostate cancer, luteinizing hormone releasing hormone (LHRH)
analogues such as goserelin and/or anti-androgens such as bicalutamide, flutamide
Aromatase inhibitors:  Letrozole, Anastrozole, Exemestan used for carcinoma breast
Progestogen:  Endometrial and breast cancer.
Biological Therapies
Q. Write short essay/note on various types of targeted therapy in cancer
patients.
Molecular targets are usually located in tumor cells. However, some
targeted agents may target other cells that may affect the growth of tumor
cells (e.g. antiangiogenic agents may target endothelial cells).Targeted therapies have a high specificity toward tumor cells and
decreased toxicity to normal tissues.
Targeted therapies are often used in combination with chemotherapy or

radiation to produce additive or synergistic activity.
Common Types of Targeted Therapy (Fig. 17.2)
Monoclonal antibodies
Various monoclonal antibodies, their targets and cancers in which it is
used are presented in Table 17.7.
Intracellular signal inhibitors
Many cancer cells are transformed by the activity of the oncoproteins
(products of oncogenes) that act on growth factor receptors. They produce
growth signal by phosphorylation of tyrosine residues on the intracellular
portion of growth factor receptors. Examples:
Fig. 17.2:  Sites of targeted therapy.
Table 17.7: Various monoclonal antibodies, their targets and cancers in
which it is used.

Monoclonal antibodies Target Cancer(s)
Alemtuzumab CD52 CLL
Bevacizumab VEGF Colon, lung, breast, kidney, and
brain
Cetuximab EGFR1 Colon, H&N
Panitumumab EGFR1 Colon
Rituximab CD20 Lymphomas
Trastuzumab HER-2 Breast
Olaparib, rucaparib Poly ADP ribose polymerase
(PARP)Ovary
Onartuzumab, emibetuzumab HGF–cMET Non-small cell lung cancer
Ipilimumab CTLA-4 Unresectable melanoma
Nivolumab, pembrolizumab PD-1 Refractory non-small cell lung
cancer
Tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) (Table 17.8).
Inhibitor of Her2: Lapatinib inhibits Her2 and increases the survival in
breast cancer.
Inhibitor of signaling by EGFR and VEGFR: TKIs sunitinib and
sorafenib inhibit signaling by EGFR and VEGFR in metastatic renal
cancer. Erlotinib and gefitinib are effective in lung cancer.
Table 17.8: Various tyrosine kinase inhibitors and the cancers in which it is
used.
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors Cancer in it is used
Imatinib CML, GIST, others
Dasatinib CML, ALL
Nilotinib CML
Gefitinib Lung
Erlotinib Lung, pancreas
Lapatinib Breast
Sorafenib Kidney, liver
Sunitinib Kidney
Proteasome inhibitors
Inhibition of the proteasome leads to apoptosis in cancer cells.
Bortezomib  is the proteasome inhibitor used in myeloma
(relapsed/refractory) and in some types of NHL.

The first molecular target for targeted cancer therapy was the cellular
receptor for the female sex hormone estrogen (Box 17.2), which many breast
cancers require for growth. Currently approved conjugated antibodies are
listed in Box 17.3.
Box 17.2: Therapy targeted at the estrogen receptor.
Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs)
–  Tamoxifen
–  Toremifene
Estrogen receptor inhibitor and destroyer
–  Fulvestrant
Estrogen synthesis inhibitors–aromatase inhibitors (AIs)
–  Anastrozole
–  Letrozole
–  Exemestane
Box 17.3: Conjugated antibodies currently approved.
Radio-conjugated antibodies
–  Tositumomab
–  Ibritumomab
–  Both used against refractory lymphomasToxin-conjugated antibody
–  Gemtuzumab ozogamicin
–  Used against AML
Radiation Therapy (Radiotherapy)
It involves treating the cancer with ionising radiation and it may be curative
for certain localized cancers. Ionising radiation can be delivered by radiation
emitted from the decay of radioactive isotopes or by high-energy radiation
beams (e.g. X-rays).
Principle: Radiation delivers energy to tissues exposed to radiation. It causes
ionization and excitation of atoms and molecules. The biological effect is
brought through the generation of single- and double-stranded DNA breaks.
This, in turn, induces apoptosis of cells through the production of short-lived
free radicals (e.g. oxygen-derived free radicals) which damage proteins and
membranes.
Methods employed: Usually employed methods are:External beam (or teletherapy) from a linear accelerator source is the

most commonly used form of radiotherapy. It involves application from a
distance by a linear accelerator.
Brachytherapy is the direct application of a radioactive source in close
contact with the tissue or into a tumor. This delivers a very high (intense
exposure), localized dose of radiation. It is used for localized cancers of
the head and neck and cancer of the cervix, prostate and endometrium.Fractionation  is the delivery of the radiation dose in increments separated
by at least 4–6 hours. It tries to exploit any advantage in DNA repair
between normal and malignant cells.
Hyperfractionation  is when more than one fraction/day is given. This
method improves the outcome in head and neck and lung cancer.
Intravenous injection of a radioisotope (Systemic radionuclides): It can
be delivered by intravenous or intracavitary routes. It provides radiation
targeted to particular tissue uptake via surface antigens or receptors.
Examples include 131-iodine for cancer of the thyroid and 89-strontium
for the treatment of bone metastases from prostate cancer.Presently used other types of cancer therapy are listed in Box 17.4.
Biotherapeutic agents are listed in Box 17.5.
Box 17.4: Other novel types of cancer therapies now in use.
Proteasome inhibitors (Bortezomib)
mTOR inhibitors (Temsirolimus, Everolimus)
DNA demethylating agents (Azacytidine, Decitabine)
Histone deacetylase inhibitors (Vorinostat)
Translocation targeters (retinoic acid)
Antiangiogenic agents (Thalidomide, Lenalidomide)
Box 17.5: Biotherapeutic agents.
Interferons
Interleukins
Cancer vaccines
Immunomodulatory agents
Colony-stimulating factors
Monoclonal antibodies
Gene therapy
Side Effects of Radiotherapy

Early side effects: They may occur within days to weeks of treatment and
it depends on tissue sensitivity, fraction size and treatment volume. These
include anorexia, nausea, malaise, mucositis, esophagitis, diarrhea,
alopecia, and myelosuppression.Later side effects: They occur from months to years later. They are not
related to the severity of the acute effects and are brought out by different
mechanism. Late effects are due to loss of slowly proliferating cells and
ischemia and fibrosis produced due to local endarteritis. The tissue
involved includes skin, bone, mouth, bowel, bladder, vagina, lung, heart,
etc.Secondary malignancies following radiotherapy may develop 10–20 years
after the cure of the primary cancer. These include hematological
malignancies and solid tumors at the irradiated tissues.
Box 17.6: Immunosuppressive drugs.
Calcineurin inhibitors (specific R cell inhibitors): For example, cyclosporine, tacrolimus
Antiproliferative drugs (cytotoxic drugs): Azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, methotrexate,
chlorambucil, mycophenolate mofetil (MMF)
Glucocorticoids: Prednisolone and others
Antibodies: Muromonab CD3, antithymocyte globulin (ATG), Rho (D) immunoglobulin
Immunosuppressive Drugs
Q. Write short note on immunosuppressive drugs.
These drugs inhibit cellular and/or humoral immunity response and have
major role in organ transplantation and autoimmune diseases.
Immunosuppressive drugs are listed in Box 17.6.
ONCOLOGIC EMERGENCIES
Q. Write short note on:
Emergency conditions related to tumors.
Clinical features and treatment of tumor lysis syndrome.
Oncologic emergencies are listed in Table 17.9.
Table 17.9: Oncologic emergencies.

Metabolic or hormonal
problems:
Hypercalcemia
Syndrome of inappropriate
antidiuretic hormone
secretion (SIADH)Lactic acidosis
Hypoglycemia
Adrenal insufficiencyTreatment related:
Tumor lysis syndrome
Human antibody infusion
reactions
Febrile neutropenia
Thrombocytopenia
Pulmonary infiltrates
Hemorrhagic cystitis
Hyperviscosity syndrome
Disseminated intravascular
coagulation
Hypersensitivity reactions to
antineoplastic drugsPressure or obstruction:
Superior vena cava syndrome
Epidural spinal cord
compression
Pericardial effusion/cardiac
tamponade
Intestinal obstruction
Urinary obstruction
Tumor Lysis Syndrome (TLS) (Fig. 17.3)
Tumor lysis syndrome (TLS) is treatment related complication.
It can develop 1–5 days post-chemotherapy treatment of leukemias and
lymphomas.
Metabolic triad of hyperuricemia, hyperkalemia, hyperphosphatemia.
Can also lead to renal failure and hypocalcemia as secondary
complications.
It is due to release of the breakdown products of dying tumor cells.
Chemotherapeutic agents cause cell lysis and cell death with release of
intracellular components into the bloodstream.Breakdown of nucleic acid, catabolism of hypoxanthine and xanthine lead
to elevated uric acid.
Potassium and phosphate are present at high levels in cytoplasm.
Risk factors are: Large tumor burden, high-growth fraction, increased pre-
treatment LDH or uric acid, or pre-existing renal insufficiency.
Clinical Features
Lysis of malignant cells causes several metabolic abnormalities/disturbances.
These include hyperkalemia (leads to cardiac arrhythmias),
hyperphosphatemia (produces acute renal failure), hyperuricemia
(produces acute renal failure), hyperuricosuria, hypocalcemia (results in
seizures, muscle cramps, tetany and arrhythmia), and consequent acute uric
acid nephropathy and renal failure.

Fig. 17.3:  Mechanism of tumor lysis.
Prophylaxis
Patient at high risk: Leukemia, high grade lymphoma, rapidly proliferating
bulky solid tumor (e.g. small cell) must receive vigorous prehydration,
allopurinol and careful metabolic monitoring.
Treatment Intravenous hydration is of prime importance.
Rasburicase (works for prevention and treatment)
–  Contraindicated in G6PD deficiency.
–  Rasburicase (recombinant urate oxidase) converts uric acid into allantoin, which is an inactive
and soluble metabolite and is easily excreted by the kidneys.
Alkalinization of urine to promote uric acid excretion is controversial (it may worsen hypocalemic
tetany). Allopurinol can be used to decrease uric acid.
Management of life-threatening hyperkalemia with antihyperkalemic measures.
For hypocalcemia, infuse calcium gluconate under ECG monitoring. Hyperphoshatemia can be
treated by giving aluminium hydroxide orally or hemodialysis.
Early dialysis (hemodialysis is preferred) is required when uric acid >10 mg/dL, phosphorus >10
mg/dL or creatinine >10 mg/dL.
Febrile Neutropenia/Neutropenic Sepsis/Neutropenic Fever

Q. Write short essay/note on febrile neutropenia.
Neutropenia (decrease of neutrophils below normal range) is a common
complication of malignancy. It can occur secondary to chemotherapy,
radiotherapy (if large amounts of bone marrow are irradiated) or as a
component of pancytopenia due to infiltration of the bone marrow by
malignancy.Neutropenic fever is defined as a fever/pyrexia of 38°C for more than 1
hour in a patient with a neutrophil count <500/mm3. The risk of sepsis is
dependent on the severity and duration of neutropenia and the presence of
other risk factors (e.g. intravenous or bladder catheters).
Clinical Features
The typical presentation is with high fever. Neutropenic patients are prone
to bacterial and fungal infection, most often from endogenous source (e.g.
enteric bowel flora). Carefully examine for potential foci of infection.
However, examination usually does not define the primary source of the
infection. Signs and symptoms of infection may be minimal, particularly
in patients receiving corticosteroids.Apart from fever, patients may also have nonspecific symptoms (e.g.
nausea, diarrhea, drowsiness, breathlessness).
Hypotension is a bad prognostic feature and may lead to systemic
circulatory shutdown and organ failure.
Investigations
Full blood count, cultures (urine, sputum, stool depending on the case),
chest X-ray, and swabs for culture (throat, central line, wound). Before
antibiotic therapy, two sets of blood cultures from a peripheral vein and
any indwelling venous catheters should be sent.
TreatmentAntibiotics (Flowchart 17.1).
Antifungal: If there is no response for antibiotics after 72–96 hours, treatment with amphotericin B
or voriconazole should be given to cover fungal infection.
Growth Factors: G-CSF, GM-CSF are given to improve the blood counts.
Other supportive therapy: Patients with signs of systemic illness, such as tachycardia, hypotension,
oliguria require urgent admission and resuscitation with intravenous fluids to restore circulatory
function. Other supportive therapy includes inotrope therapy, ventilation or hemofiltration.

Prophylactic fluoroquinolones
It is given to high-risk and intermediate risk groups (consists of patients
receiving high-dose chemotherapy and those with hematological
malignancy) in which the anticipated duration of neutropenia is more than
7 days.Prophylactic fluoroquinolones are not indicated in patients with solid
tumors undergoing standard outpatient cyclical chemotherapy in which the
anticipated duration of neutropenia is less than 7 days, because it may lead
to microbial resistance.
Flowchart 17.1:  Algorithm for the antibiotic and their mode of administration in febrile neutropenia.
INVESTIGATIONS IN ONCOLOGY
Tumor Markers
Q. Write short essay/note on tumor markers with examples/serum
tumor markers.
Tumor markers are biochemical substance/product of malignant tumors
that can be detected in the cells themselves or in serum/blood and/or body
fluids.
Tumor markers can be a normal endogenous products produced in excess
by cancer cells or products of newly switched on genes that remained

quiescent in the normal cells.
Concentration increases with tumor progression, highest levels when
tumors metastasize.
Include diverse molecules, such as serum proteins, oncofetal antigens,
hormones, metabolites, receptors and enzymes
Tumor markers may be useful in management in certain cancers (Box
17.7). In a particular patient, rising and falling levels of the tumor marker
are usually associated with increasing or decreasing tumor burden,
respectively.
Box 17.7: Usefulness of tumor markers.
Screening populations at risk
Diagnosis
Prognosis
Detection of recurrence
Monitoring response to treatment
Immunodetection of metastatic sites
Disadvantage
Tumor markers are not in themselves completely specific enough for the
diagnosis of malignancy. They may also be raised in few benign lesions. Few
markers are specific for a single individual tumor. Most are found with
different tumors of the same tissue type. They are present in higher quantities
in blood from cancer patients than in blood from both healthy subjects and
patients with benign diseases. However, once a malignancy has been
diagnosed and shows elevated levels of a tumor marker, the marker can be
used to assess response to treatment.
Types of Markers (Table 17.10)
α-fetoproteinQ. Write short note on α-fetoprotein.
α-fetoprotein is an oncofetal antigen produced by the liver and
gastrointestinal tract epithelium in the fetus. The α-fetoprotein (AFP) gene
is completely repressed in fully matured fetus and disappears immediately
after birth.

It is abundant in fetal blood and its level in normal adults is below 15
ng/mL after birth.
Causes of raised α-fetoprotein
During prenatal period: Amniotic fluid AFP is elevated with open spina
bifida, anencephaly and atresia of esophagus.
Postnatal life:
–  Hepatocellular carcinoma: In about 70% of patients it shows very
high levels ranging from 500 ng/mL to 5 mg/mL.
–  Nonseminomatous testicular tumors: Embryonal carcinoma,
teratomas, choriocarcinoma and yolk sac carcinoma.
–  Germ cell tumors of ovaries and extragonadal germ cell tumors.
–  Neoplasms of gastrointestinal tract.
–  Liver disorders:
♦  Hepatitis: Minimal elevation in acute or chronic hepatitis.
♦  Hepatocellular carcinoma: High AFP level (≥400 ng/mL) is
associated with large tumor size, bilobar involvement, portal vein
thrombosis and a lower median survival rate.
–  Normal pregnancy: May be elevated up to 500 ng/mL in maternal
serum.
Table 17.10: Common tumor markers.
Tumor marker Associated tumors
1. EnzymesAlkaline phosphatase (ALP) Hepatoma, secondaries in liver, ovarian, lung,
gastrointestinal cancers and Hodgkin’s disease.
Placental alkaline phosphatase
(PLAP)Seminoma
Prostatic acid phosphatase (PAP) Prostate carcinoma
Neuron-specific enolase (NSE) Small-cell carcinoma of lung, neuroblastoma
Tartarate-resistant acid
phosphatase (TRAP)Hairy cell leukemia
2. Hormones
Human chorionic gonadotropin
(hCG)Trophoblastic tumors, nonseminomatous tumors of testis

Calcitonin Medullary carcinoma of thyroid
Catecholamine Pheochromocytoma
Ectopic hormones Paraneoplastic syndromes (Table 17.11)
3. Oncofetal antigens
α-Fetoprotein Cancer of liver, nonseminomatous germ cell tumors of
testis
Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) Carcinomas of the colon, pancreas, lung, and stomach. May
also be elevated in cigarette smoking, peptic ulcer disease,
inflammatory bowel disease, pancreatitis, hypothyroidism,
cirrhosis and biliary obstruction
4. Carbohydrate markers/mucins and other glycoproteinsCA-125 Ovarian cancer
CA 15-3 Breast carcinoma, pancreatic, lung, ovarian, colorectal and
liver cancer in some benign breast and liver diseases
CA 19-9 Pancreatic and colorectal cancer
5. Specific proteins
Immunoglobulins Multiple myeloma and other gammopathies
Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) Prostate carcinoma. Other conditions include prostatitis,
benign prostatic hypertrophy, prostatic trauma and after
ejaculation
Ferritin Nonspecific, Hodgkin lymphoma, leukemia, liver, lung and
breast cancer
Thyroglobulin Differentiated thyroid cancer
S-100 Melanoma
İnhibin A & B Granulosa cell tumor
Catalase, profilin 1,CD59 Oral squamous cell carcinoma
6. Receptor markers
Estrogen and progesterone
receptorsBreast cancer as indicators for hormonal therapy
C-erbB2 (HER-2 Neu) Co-receptor in epidermal growth factor action,
overexpression associated with cancer
7. Genetic changes
Bcr-Abl mutation Chronic myeloid leukemia
8. New molecular markers
p53, APC, RAS mutants in stool
and serumCarcinoma colon
p53 and RAS mutants in sputum Lung cancer

and serum
9. Mitochondrial markers mT DNA Carcinoma breast, prostate, lung, thyroid, colon
Significance of elevated AFP and hCG is listed in Box 17.8.
Box 17.8: Significance of elevated AFP and hCG.
Elevated AFP only
Non-neoplastic
Ataxia telangiectasia
Hereditary persistence of AFP
Viral hepatitis
Substance-induced liver damage
Malignancy
Hepatocellular carcinoma
Elevated hCG only
Non-neoplastic
Marijuana use
Primary hypogonadism
Neoplastic
Pure seminoma
Gonadotroph adenoma
Elevated AFP or hCG or both
Neoplastic
Nonseminomatous germ cell tumor
Gestational trophoblastic disease
Poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma
AFP = α fetoprotein, hCG = human chorionic gonadotropin
PARANEOPLASTIC SYNDROMES
Q. Write short essay/note on paraneoplastic syndromes.
Definition: Paraneoplastic syndromes are symptom complexes in cancer
patients which are not directly related to mass effects or invasion or
metastasis or by the secretion of hormones indigenous to the tissue o f
origin.
Frequency: Though they occur in 10–15% of patients, it is important
because:
May be the first manifestation  of an occult neoplasm.
May be mistaken for metastatic disease leading to inappropriate

treatment.
May present clinical problems which may be fatal .
Certain tumor products causing paraneoplastic syndromes may be useful
in monitoring recurrence in patients who had surgical resections or are
undergoing chemotherapy or radiation therapy.
Some paraneoplastic syndromes, their mechanism and common cancer
causing them are listed in Table 17.11.
Table 17.11: Paraneoplastic syndromes.
Clinical syndromes Cause/mechanism Associated cancer (example)
1. ENDOCRINOPATHIES
Cushing syndrome ACTH or ACTH-like substance Small-cell carcinoma of lung
Syndrome due to
inappropriate antidiuretic
hormone secretionAntidiuretic hormone or atrial
natriuretic hormonesSmall-cell carcinoma of lung
Hypercalcemia Parathyroid hormone-related
protein (PTHRP), TGF-α, TNF,
IL-1Squamous cell carcinoma of
lung
Renal carcinoma
Carcinoid syndrome Serotonin, bradykinin Bronchial carcinoid
Hypoglycemia Insulin or insulin-like substance Fibrosarcoma
Polycythemia Erythropoietin Renal carcinoma, hepatocellular
carcinoma
2. NEUROLOGIC (NEUROMYOPATHIC) SYNDROMES (refer Table 6.101)
3. CUTANEOUS SYNDROMES
Acanthosis nigricans (refer
Fig. 22.8)Immunological; secretion of
epidermal growth factorCarcinoma of stomach, lung and
uterus
Paraneoplastic pemphigus Immunological B-cell lymphoproliferative
disorders (80%), CLL,
Castleman disease, thymoma
Dermatomyositis Immunological Bronchogenic, breast carcinoma
Sign of Leser-Trelat (Rapid
increase in number and size
of seborrheic keratosis)Immunological Adenocarcinoma (stomach,
rectum, breast, lungs, colon)
Exfoliative dermatitis Immunological Lymphoma
Acquired diffuse
palmoplantar keratoderma
(Fig. 17.4)Immunological Cancers of breast, lung, stomach
and leukemia
Bazex syndrome Immunological Squamous cell carcinoma of the

(Acrokeratosis
paraneoplastica)(Fig. 17.5)upper aerodigestive tract
Pityriasis rotunda Immunological Hepatocellular, gastric and
prostate cancer, leukemia,
lymphoma
Paget’s disease Invasive breast carcinoma
Erythema gyratum repens Immunological Transitional carcinoma of the
kidney and adenocarcinoma of
lung, breast and esophagus
Sweet’s syndrome Leukemia
Pyoderma ganagrenosum AML, CML, myeloma
Necrolytic migratory
erythemaGlucagonoma
4. CHANGES IN OSSEOUS, ARTICULAR, AND SOFT TISSUE
Hypertrophic
osteoarthropathy and
clubbing of the fingersNot known Bronchogenic carcinoma
5. VASCULAR AND HEMATOLOGIC SYNDROMES
Venous thrombosis
(Trousseau syndrome)Tumor products like mucins
which activate clottingPancreatic carcinoma
Bronchogenic carcinoma
Disseminated intravascular
coagulationProcoagulant substance:
Cytoplasmic granules (e.g.
acute promyelocytic leukemia
cells), or mucus
(adenocarcinomas)Acute promyelocytic leukemia,
prostatic adenocarcinomas
Nonbacterial thrombotic
endocarditisHypercoagulability Advanced mucus-secreting
adenocarcinomas
6. RENAL SYNDROMES
Nephrotic syndrome Tumor antigens, immune
complexesVarious cancers
7. AMYLOIDOSIS
Primary amyloidosis Immunological (AL-amyloid
light chain protein)Multiple myeloma
Secondary amyloidosis AA (amyloid associated)
proteinRenal cell carcinoma and other
solid
(ACTH: adrenocorticotropic hormone; IL: interleukin; TGF: transforming growth factor; TNF: tumor
necrosis factor)

Fig. 17.4: Plantar keratoderma.
Fig. 17.5:  Bazex syndrome.
POSITRON EMISSION TOMOGRAPHY
Q. Write short note on the role of positron emission tomography in
oncology.

Positron emission tomography (PET) detects metabolic activity of tumor
cells following injection of small amounts of radioactive tracers, such as
fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG).
Uses:
–  It is used for screening for (1) preliminary diagnosis, (2) accurately
assess the severity and spread of cancer, (3) biopsy guidance, (4)
staging, (5) prognostication, (6) therapeutic planning and (7) judging
response to therapy.
–  PET has been found to be useful in several malignancies including
melanoma, lymphoma, lung cancer, esophageal cancer, head and neck
cancer, breast cancer and thyroid cancer.
–  Useful in diagnosing certain cardiovascular and neurological diseases
because it highlights areas with increased, diminished or no metabolic
activity.
–  Also positive in patients with granulomatous diseases, like tuberculosis
and sarcoidosis.Method:
–  FDG is injected intravenously and is transported from the plasma to the
cells by glucose transporters (GLUT 1 and GLUT 4).
–  It undergoes phosphorylation within the cell by the enzyme hexokinase
and is converted to FDG-6-phosphate. FDG-6-phosphate is not further
metabolized and gets trapped in the cell.
Cancer cells have increased anerobic glycolysis and decreased levels of
glucose-6-phosphatase. Because of this, cancer cells limit further
metabolism of the tracer in cancer cells.PET-CT combines the functional information from a PET scan with the
anatomical information from a CT scan. It can pinpoint the exact location
of abnormal activity. It is used to evaluate patients with various cancers
(e.g. including lung cancer and lymphoma)(Figs. 17.6A and B).

Fig. 17.6A and B:  PET images of a case of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. (A) Before chemotherapy; (B)
After 2 cycles of ABVD.
ONCOGENIC VIRUSES
Various viruses implicated in human tumors and associated lesions are listed
in Table 17.12.
Table 17.12: Various viruses implicated in human tumors and associated
lesions.
Type of virus Lesions
ONCOGENIC RNA VIRUSES
Human T-cell lymphotropic virus type-1 Adult T-cell leukemia/lymphoma
ONCOGENIC DNA VIRUSES
1. Human Papillomavirus
A. Low-oncogenic risk HPV—benign lesions of squamous epithelium
♦  HPV types 1, 2, 4, and 7 Benign squamous papilloma (wart)
♦  HPV-6 and HPV-11 Condylomata acuminata (genital warts) of the
vulva, penis, and perianal region
Laryngeal papillomas
B. High-oncogenic risk HPV—malignant tumors
♦  HPV types 16 and 18 Squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix and
anogenital region
Oropharyngeal cancers (tonsil)

2. Epstein-Barr Virus Burkitt lymphoma (requires cofactor-malaria)
Nasopharyngeal cancer
3. Hepatitis B and C Viruses Hepatocellular carcinoma
4. Human Herpes Virus-8 Kaposi’s sarcoma
Pleural effusion lymphoma, multicentric
Castleman disease
5. Merkel Cell Polyoma Virus Merkel cell carcinoma

Psychiatry

CHAPTER
18
Mental State Examination
Q. Write short essay on mental status examination and its definition.
Assessment of mental status involves different spheres as listed in Box 18.1:
General Appearance and Behavior
Grooming: Note whether patient is well-groomed or has poor hygiene
Attitude of patient: Cooperative/Hostile/Agitated
Signs of anxiety: Excess perspiration, tensed voice
Otto Veraguth sign: Increased forehead marking seen in depression.
Note any abnormalities of alertness or motor behavior (e.g. restlessness or
retardation)
Arousal-determine the level of consciousness (especially in case of
delirium).
Box 18.1: Features to be observed during assessment of mental status.
General appearance and behavior
Speech
Mood and affect
Thought—form, content, possession, flow
Perception
Cognition—arousal, orientation, memory, attention, abstract thinking
Judgment and intellectual ability
Insight
Speech
Observe the speed and fluency, including slow (retarded) speech and word-
finding difficulty.

Mood and Affect
Mood: Ask the patient how he feels. For example,
sad/happy/anxious/tensed/worried/anhedonic (lack of ability to experience
pressure from previously pleasurable activities).
Affect: Assessed by observing facial expression, posture, movements. For
example, depressed/elated. Elevated mood with excess energy and reduced
need for sleep (suggests mania). Feeling guilty or hopeless (suggests
depression). Note whether patient has thoughts of self-harm? If so, enquire
about plans. Note whether patient is excessively worried about many
things (suggests anxiety).
ThoughtsFormation: Is the speech coherent? Or is there loosening of association?
(suggests schizophrenia).
Content: Determined by asking “What are your main concerns?” Look for
presence of delusions, obsession. Ask the patient whether he or she thinks
of himself as powerful, important or gifted (grandiose delusion) which
suggests mania.Possession: Ask the patient if the thoughts are his own or if it is controlled
by external source. For example, thought insertion, withdrawal, broadcast.
Cognitive Function
Q. Write short essay on how is memory tested clinically?
Memory
Registration of memories/Immediate memory: It is judged by asking
the patient to repeat simple new information (e.g. name and address,
immediately after hearing it).Short-term memory: It is judged by asking the patient to repeat simple
new information (as mentioned above) after an interval of 1–2 minutes,
during which time the patient’s attention should be diverted elsewhere.Long-term memory: It is judged by asking the patient to recall previous
events (>/=6 minutes).
Memory functions can also be classified as episodic memory (for specific
events and contexts) and semantic memory (for vocabulary and

concepts).
Concentration: It is assessed by serial 7s test in which the patient is asked
to subtract 7 from 100 and then 7 from the answer, and so on.
Orientation: This is assessed by asking the patient during psychiatric
interview about place (exact location); time (during the examination i.e.
day, date, month and year) and person/details of personal identity (e.g.
name, date of birth, marital status and address).Intellectual ability: This can be assessed from the history and can also be
assessed during the interview from the patient’s speech, vocabulary and
grasp of the interviewer’s questions.
Patients’ own understanding of their symptoms (‘insight’)Ask the patient about what he or she thinks about their symptoms, and
whether they need treatment.
Lack of insight is characterized by a failure to accept that one is ill and/or
in need of treatment and is a feature of acute psychosis.
Delusions and Hallucinations
Q. Write short note on delusions.
Delusions: It is a belief held with strong conviction despite superior evidence
to the contrary (strongly held false beliefs). It is a disorder of content of
thought.
Types of delusion: These are based on their content.
Persecutory: e.g. Conviction that others are out to get me, conviction that
individual has cancer.
Grandiose: e.g. belief that one has special powers or status.
Nihilistic: e.g. conviction that ‘My head is missing’, ‘I have no body’, ‘I
am dead’.
Erotomanic delusions (e.g. believing a movie star loves them)
Somatic delusions (e.g. believing head is filled with air/ worms)
Delusions of reference (e.g. believing story in a book is referring to them)
Delusions of control /passivity (e.g. believing one’s thoughts and
movements are controlled by aliens).
Other delusions are delusions of misinterpretation, hypochondrial
delusions, fantastic/bizzare delusions, delusions of passivity, delusions of

jealousy, delusion.
In contrast, overvalued ideas are strongly held but not fixed.
Q. Write short note on hallucinations, its definition and types.
Hallucinations: These are perceptions without external stimuli (wakeful
sensory experiences of content that is not actually present). They can
occur in any sensory modality, most common being visual or auditory. For
example, hearing voices when no one else is present, or seeing ‘visions’.
Other types include tactile (cocaine bug), olfactory, gustatory, command
kinesthetic/psychomotor, lilliputian and complex hallucinations.
Pseudohallucinations: These are hallucinations that are perceived as
originating in the external world, not in the patient’s own mind. In
Narcolepsy 2 specific hallucinations are seen. Hypnagogic: They occur when
falling asleep. Hypnopompic: They occur on waking.
Box 18.2: Serotonin syndrome.Life-threatening condition associated with increased serotonergic activity in the central nervous
system most often due to SSRI overdose.
Symptoms are diaphoresis, tachycardia, hyperthermia, hypertension, vomiting, diarrhea, tremor,
muscle rigidity, myoclonus, hyperreflexia, and bilateral Babinski sign
Treatment involves stopping of all serotonergic agents, Supportive care to normalize vital signs,
hyperthermia and autonomic instability, sedation with benzodiazepines and administration of
serotonin antagonists (Cyproheptadine)
Box 18.3: Features of cheese reaction.
Cheese, beer, wine, meat, fish, yeast (contain large amount of tyramine and other indirectly acting
amines) → due to irreversible block of MAO. These escape degradation in intestinal wall and liver
→ reach to circulation and displace large amount of noradrenalin from loaded nerves →
Hypertensive crises (CVA, encephalopathy)Treatment: IV phentolamine, prazosin
In contrast, illusions are misperceptions of real external stimuli (e.g.
mistaking a shrub for a person in poor light).
PSYCHO PHARMACOLOGY
Antidepressants

Q. Write short note on:
Antidepressants/newer antidepressants
Tricyclic antidepressants
Selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors (SSRIs).
Various types of antidepressants and their side effect in Table 18.1.
Serotonin syndrome and cheese reaction are described in Boxes 18.2 and 18.3
respectively
Table 18.1: Various types of antidepressants and their side effects.
Group and drug Side effects
TRICYCLIC ANTIDEPRSSANTS (TCAs)
NA + 5 HT reuptake inhibitor
Imipramine, amitriptyline, trimipramine,
doxepin, dothiepin, clomipramine, dosulepin
Predominantly NA reuptake inhibitor
Desipramine, nortriptyline, amoxapine,
reboxetineAnticholinergic—dry mouth, bad taste,
constipation, epigastric fullness, urinary
retention (more common in elderly male),
blurred vision, palpitationSedation, mental confusion, weakness
Increased appetite and weight, sweating, fine
tremors, precipitation of seizures, postural
hypotension, cardiac arrhythmias, rashes and
jaundice
SELECTIVE SEROTONIN REUPTAKE
INHIBITORS (SSRIs)Fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, paroxetine,
sertraline, citalopram, escitalopramGastric upset, nausea, interfere with
ejaculation, nervousness, restlessness,
insomnia, anorexia, headache, diarrhea,
epistaxis, ecchymosis, serotonin syndrome
REVERSIBLE INHIBITOR OF MAO-A
(RIMAs)Moclobemide, clorgyline (isocarboxazid,
phenelzine, tranylcypromine)↑ appetite (phenelzine)
↓ appetite (tranylcypromine)
Hepatotoxicity, SLE, drug and food
interactions (Cheese reaction)
ATYPICAL ANTIDEPRESSANTS
Trazodone, mianserine, mirtazapine,
venlafaxine, duloxetine, tianeptine,
amineptine, bupropionPriapism (trazodone), bone marrow
suppression, hepatotoxicity
Mood-stabilizing Agents
Q. Write short note on lithium and its side effects.
If antidepressants are given, they should be combined with a mood-
stabilizing drug (mentioned below) to avoid ‘switching’ the patients into

(hypo)mania. The main drugs consist of lithium, sodium valproate,
divalproex, carbamazepine. Others include lamotrigine, gabapentin,
topiramate, olanzapine, quetiapine and risperidone.
Lithium (Lithium Carbonate)
Q. Write short note on lithium and its side effects.
Indications:
It is the drug of choice (first-line medication) and is also used for the
treatment of acute mania, and in combination with a tricyclic as an
adjuvant treatment for resistant depression. It is used for both treatment
and prophylaxis of mood episodes.Bipolar and schizoaffective disorders.
Adjunctive treatment of major depressive disorder.
Mechanism of action:
Lithium partly replaces sodium and is nearly equally distributed in and
outside the cell—this affects ionic fluxes across the brain cells. Decrease the
release of NA and DA without affecting 5 HT release or inhibits hydrolysis
of inositol-1-phosphate.
It has a narrow therapeutic range. Hence, a regular blood monitoring is
needed to maintain a plasma level of 0.5–1.0 mmol/L .
Side effects:Dose-related: Tremor, convulsions, gastrointestinal distress (nausea,
vomiting) and headache.
Acne and weight gain: Long-term use may result in weight gain, interfere
with patient compliance, exacerbate psoriasis.
Cardiac conduction: Prolonged QRS, heart blocks, T wave inversions,
ECG changes usually benign.
Hypothyroidism, nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, increased calcium and
parathormone, and renal failure.
Teratogenicity: Associated with Ebstein’s anomaly, and should not be
given during the first trimester of pregnancy.
Leukocytosis: Usually occurs and seems to be benign.

Divalproex
Treatment of choice for rapid-cycling bipolar disorder, or when lithium
cannot be used.
Time course of treatment response is similar to lithium.
Side effects: Sedation, cognitive impairment, tremor, GI distress and
hepatotoxicity.
Teratogenicity: Associated with spina bifida.
Carbamazepine
Second-line choice for treatment of bipolar disorder when Lithium and
Divalproex are ineffective or contraindicated.
Side effects: Agranulocytosis hematologic toxicity, hyponatremia and
hepatotoxicity.
Sodium Valproate (An Anticonvulsant) and Olanzapine (An
Antipsychotic)
They can be used both as prophylaxis in bipolar disorder, and as second-
line alternative to lithium.
Side effects: Valproate can cause birth defects and, hence, should not be
given to women of child-bearing age. Olanzapine can produce weight
gain.
Gabapentin
Q. Write short note on gabapentin.
This lipophilic GABA derivative crosses to the blood brain barrier and
enhances GABA release but does not act as agonist at GABA receptor. It is
used primarily to treat focal seizures and neuropathic pain, can also be used
for bipolar disorders.
Antipsychotic Medications (APMs, Fig. 18.1)
Q. Write short notes on antipsychotic medications.
Classification of antipsychotic drugs is mentioned in Box 18.4.
Differences between Differences between typical and atypical neuroleptic
drugs is mentioned in Table 18.2.

Indications
Psychomotor agitation:  High-potency APMs (Haloperidol) parenteral.
Schizophrenia:  Treatment of choice for acute psychotic episodes and for prophylaxis
Other psychotic disorders:  Treatment of psychoses and cognitive disorders due to general
medical conditions and substances, delusional disorder, brief psychotic disorder, schizophreniform
disorder and other rarer psychotic disorders.
Mood disorders:  Treatment of agitation and psychosis during mood episodes.
Sedation:  Useful when Benzodiazepines are contraindicated (especially in older patients) or as an
adjunct during anesthesia.
Movement disorders:  Treatment of choice for Huntington disease and Tourette disorder.
General Adverse Effects
Sedation:  Due to the blockade of antihistaminic activity.
Hypotension:  Effect is due to alpha-adrenergic blockade and is most common with low potency
antipsychotic medications.
Anticholinergic symptoms:  Dry mouth, blurred vision, urinary hesitancy, constipation,
bradycardia, confusion and delirium.
Endocrine effects:  Gynecomastia, galactorrhea and amenorrhea.
Dermal and ocular syndromes:  Photosensitivity, abnormal pigmentation, cataracts. Thioridazine
can cause retinitis pigmentosa.
Cardiac conduction abnormalities:  Ziprasidone prolongs QT interval.
Agranulocytosis:  Clozapine
Movement syndromes:  Tardive dyskinesia.
Extrapyramidal syndromes (EPS):  Newer APMs cause minimal or no EPS. Low-potency APMs
(e.g. chlorpromazine, thioridazine) cause less EPS than higher-potency APMs, but has more
sedative effects.
–  Metabolic syndrome-Weight gain, diabetes, and dyslipidemia
–  Cholestatic jaundice
–  Neuroleptic malignant syndrom
Fig. 18.1:  Antipsychotic drugs and their action.

Table 18.2: Differences between typical and atypical neuroleptic drugs.
Typical neuroleptic Atypical neuroleptic
Mode of action D2 antagonist 5-HT2A antagonist
D2 antagonist
Rapid D2 dissociate
Other effect Antagonism of H1, M1,
alpha-1 receptor, among
otherAntagonism of H1, M1, 5-HT2c, alpha
1 receptor, among other
EPS and tardive dyskinesia Pronounced Less
Effect on schizophrenia
symptomsGood effect with positive
symptomsBetter effect on negative symptoms
Withdrawal symptoms Few More
Metabolic side effects Few Marked (glycemic, lipid)
Box 18.4: Classification of antipsychotic drugs.
Typical antipsychotics/First GenerationPhenothiazines (chlorpromazine, perphenazine, fluphenazine, thioridazine)
Thioxanthenes (flupenthixol, clopenthixol)
Butyrophenones (haloperidol, droperidol)
Atypical antipsychotics/Second Generation
Aripiprazole, asenapine, brexpiprazole, cariprazine, clozapine, iloperidone, lurasidone, olanzapine,
paliperidone, pimavanserin, quetiapine, risperidone, ziprasidone
Mechanism of action  of most first and second-generation antipsychotics: It appears to be post-
synaptic blockade of brain dopamine D2 receptors. Exceptions
Aripiprazole and brexpiprazole are D2 receptor partial agonists
Cariprazine is a D3-preferring D3/D2 receptor partial agonist
Pimavanserin, is a serotonin 5HT2A inverse agonist and antagonist with no dopamine D2 affinity
Anxiolytic (Antianxiety) Medications
Table 18.3: Antianxiety drugs.
Benzodiazepine Azapirones Others
Diazepam
Chlordiazepoxide
Oxazepam
Lorazepam
AlprazolamBuspirone
Gepirone
IpsapironeBeta blocker: Propranolol
Antihistaminics:
Hydroxyzine
SSRIs and other
antidepressant drugs
Q. Write short notes on anxiolytic (antianxiety) medications.

Various antianxiety drugs are listed in Table 18.3. Indications are mentioned
in Box 18.5.
Features of benzodiazepines and buspirone are mentioned in Boxes 18.6 and
Box 18.7 respectively.
Zolpidem: Used in initial insomnia-t ½ 2–3 hours. Side effects include
headache, nausea, dry mouth, etc.
Zopiclone: Also acts on GABA receptors, and has short duration of action.
Suredone, bretazenil, imidazenil, alpidem, abecarnil: Anxiolytic as well as
anticonvulsant.
ELECTROCONVULSIVE THERAPY (ECT)
Q. Write short note on electroconvulsive therapy (ECT).
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is a psychiatric treatment in which a brief
electrical stimulus (of high voltage) is given to the brain via electrodes placed
on the temporal fossa. The electrical charge lasts from 1 to 4 seconds, and
causes an epileptic-like seizure. Types of electroconvulsive therapy is
indicated in Box 18.8.
Box 18.5: Indications for anxiolytic (antianxiety) medications.
Adjustment disorder with anxious mood: Benzodiazepines with supportive psychotherapy
Panic disorder: Alprazolam, SSRIs, imipramine and clonazepam decrease frequency and intensity.
Generalized Anxiety Disorder: Venlafaxine, other SSRIs and buspirone decrease overall anxiety.
Obsessive compulsive disorder: SSRIs and clomipramine decrease obsession thinking.
Social phobia: SSRIs and buspirone decrease fear associated with social situations.
Box 18.6: Features of benzodiazepines.
Mechanism: Bind to specific CNS receptors that modulate GABA transmission.
Commonly used for the treatment of anxiety, insomnia and for the treatment of elderly patients.
Used for prevention of alcohol withdrawal .
Chlordiazepoxide is used for prevention of alcohol withdrawal .
First choice for emergency treatment of acute anxiety and severe mania.
Alprazolam  is the first choice for panic attack .
Benzodiazepines that don’t interact with P450: lorazepam , oxazepam  and temazepam .
Adverse Effects
Sedation, disinhibition and abuse.
Impairment of cognitive and motor performance.

Tolerance and withdrawal.
Possible teratogenicity.
Box 18.7: Features of buspirone.
Used for the treatment of generalized anxiety disorder and social phobia
Lag time of about 1 week  before clinical response
No additive effect  with alcohol  or sedative-hypnotics
No withdrawal syndrome
No sedation or cognitive impairment
Headache may occur.
Box 18.8: Types of electroconvulsive therapy (ECT).
Direct:  Not practiced in present day
Modified:  Use general anesthesia and muscle relaxants
Unilateral ECT:  Right unilateral (RUL) has less cognitive effect, may be less clinically effective
Bilateral ECT:  Most common, most effective, most cognitive dysfunction.
Procedure for Modern ECT
Electrode placement: Electrodes are placed on the side of a patient’s
head just above the temporal fossa. Each electrode is placed 2.5–4 cm (1–
1.5 inches) at the midpoint on a line joining the tragus of the ear and the
lateral canthus of the eye.The patient is given anesthetic injections and a muscle relaxant to stop
muscle contractions that can lead to trauma to muscles and bones.
A small electric current is passed through the brain. Most patients remit
with 6 to 12 treatments.
Indications
Q. Write short note on indications for electroconvulsive therapy (ECT).
Severe depression:  Severe episodes/symptoms, when a rapid antidepressant response is needed
(e.g. due to failure to eat or drink in depressive stupor; high suicide risk), previous history of good
response to ECT, patient preference and suicidal ideas.
Failure to response to drug treatments or patient not able to tolerate side effects of drugs (e.g.
puerperal depressive disorder or postpartum psychosis).
Severe catatonia
Schizophrenia psychosis when medications are insufficient or symptoms are severe.
Confusional state (to complete seizure activity)
Depressive stupor.

Neuroleptic malignant syndrome.
Contraindications
Absolute: Increased intracranial pressure (ICP), aortic aneurysm.
Relative
–  Cardiovascular diseases: Coronary artery disease, hypertension,
aneurysms, arrhythmias.
–  Cerebrovascular disease: Recent strokes, space-occupying lesions,
aneurysms.
–  Severe pulmonary diseases: Tuberculosis, pneumonia, asthma.
–  Deep vein thrombosis (DVT).
Risks and side effects: ECT is safe with few side effects.
Impairment of cognition: Period of confusion immediately after ECT and
generally lasts for few minutes to several hours.
Memory loss: May forget weeks/months before treatment, during
treatment, or after treatment has stopped. Usually improves within couple
of months. Permanent loss of memory is rare.Myalgia, dislocation and fractures.
Medical complications: Nausea, vomiting, headache, aspiration, and jaw
pain.
MOOD DISORDERS
Q. Write short essay on:
Mood/affective disorders and its classification.
Bipolar affective disorders.
Mood or affective disorders are among the most common diagnoses in
psychiatry. Mood refers to a pervasive and sustained emotion. (as
differentiated from affect, which is the immediately expressed and
observed emotion).Mood disorders are characterized by a disturbance of behavior, mood and
may be either depression or mania.
Categories/Classification of Mood Disorder (Table 18.4 and

Fig. 18.2)
Unipolar disorder: Only one end of the emotion spectrum and
characterized by one or more episodes of low mood and associated
symptoms (depression form).
Dysthymic disorder: Characterized by chronic low-grade depressed
mood without sufficient other symptoms to count as ‘clinically significant’
or ‘major’ depression.
Fig. 18.2:  Spectrum of mood disorder.
Bipolar disorder: cycling between both ends of the emotion spectrum and
characterized by episodes of elevated mood interspersed with episodes of
depression (both manic and depression).
Mood (affective) disorders can be classified into primary and secondary.In primary affective disorder, the affective episodes (mania or
depression) are not secondary to any other psychiatric or physical
illness.
In secondary affective disorder, the affective episodes are secondary to
another psychiatric or physical illness.
Table 18.4: Classification of mood disorder.
Unipolar Bipolar Mood disorders with known etiology
Major depressive disorder Bipolar I disorder Substance-induced mood disorder
Dysthymic disorder Bipolar II disorder Mood disorder due to general medical

condition
Cyclothymic disorder Depression, mania, bipolar disorders,
depression-affect, mood, syndrome
Unipolar Disorder
Major Depressive Disorder
Q. Write short essay/note on depression and discuss treatment of
depressive illness.
Q. Write short essay/note on clinical features and management of severe
depression.
Depressive disorders are characterized by persistent low mood, loss of
interest and enjoyment, and reduced energy that usually impairs day-to-
day functioning.
Major depressive disorder is characterized by one or more major
episodes of depression (i.e. at least 2 weeks of mood depression or loss of
interest + at least four additional symptoms of depression).Age and gender: Onset is early 20s. Highest rates between 15 and 24
years, women have 2 times the rates as men.
Number of episodes:
–  Single episode: Of major depression.
–  Recurrent: Two or more episodes of major depression.
–  Persistent depressive disorder (dysthymia): Low mood persisting for
more than 2 years could be either minor dysthymic disorder or chronic
major depression.
Diagnostic criteria for major depressive episode are presented in Box 18.9.
Box 18.9: Diagnostic criteria for major depressive episode.
Mood:  Depressed mood most of the day, nearly everyday (dysphoria)
Sleep:  Insomnia or hypersomnia
Interest:  Marked decrease in interest and pleasure in most activities (anhedonia)
Guilt:  Feelings of worthlessness or inappropriate guilt
Energy:  Fatigue or low energy nearly everyday
Concentration:  Decreased concentration or increased indecisiveness
Appetite:  Increased or decreased appetite or weight gain or loss
Psychomotor:  Psychomotor agitation or retardation
Suicidality:  Recurrent thoughts of death, suicidal ideation, suicidal plan, suicide attempt

General criteria for a major depressive episode require five or more of the above symptoms to be
present for at least 2 weeks; one symptom must be depressed mood or loss of interest or pleasure.
The symptoms must also cause distress or impairment.
Q. Write short note on reactive depression.
Reactive depression  is a type of clinical depression characterized by an
inappropriate state of depression. It is precipitated by events in the
individuals life (to be differentiated from normal grief) arising as a
consequence of severe traumatic events in life (e.g. the loss of home in a
fire). Reactive depression becomes a clinical concern if the depression lasts
too long without signs of recovery or if the depression becomes too deep (e.g.
leading to suicidal feelings). Most of the time, reactive depressions resolves
itself.
Treatment of depression
Both drug and psychotherapy (e.g. cognitive behavioral therapy, interpersonal therapy) are effective
in the treatment of depression either alone or in combination. Medication alone also can relieve
symptoms. However, the combined approach generally provides the patient with the quickest and
most sustained response.
Drug treatment (pharmacotherapy)
All antidepressants are potentially effective in patients whose depression is secondary to medical
illness, as well as those in whom it is the primary problem. They are effective in moderate and severe
depression. Usually, 2–6 weeks at a therapeutic dose level are needed to observe a clinical response.
Commonly used antidepressants are listed in Table 18.1.
Psychological treatmentsMild-to-moderate depression: Both cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) and interpersonal therapy
(IPT) are as effective.
Severe depression: Antidepressant drugs are preferred.
Risk of suicide in an individual with a depressive disorder is 10 times more than that in the general
population.
Nonpharmacologic treatments
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT): Highly effective for depression and may have a more rapid
onset of action than drug treatments. ECT may be indicated if patient is suicidal or worried about
side effects from medications.
Acute Mania
Q. Write short essay/note on clinical features of mania.
Mania is an abnormally elevated mood state. Clinical features are presented
in Table 18.5.
Table 18.5: Clinical features of acute mania.

Changes in Mood
Irritability, excitability,
exhilaration, hostility,
anxious, hyper, wound-
upChanges in
Perceptions
Inflated self esteem,
feeling superior,
hallucinations,
paranoia, increased
appetiteChanges in Speech
Rapid, pressured
speech, incoherent
speech, clang
associationsIncreased Social
Behavior
Unnecessary phone
calls, increased sexual
activity, talkative and
sociable
Increased Energy
Little fatigue, despite decreased sleep; insomnia,
increased productivity, doing several things at
once, making lots of plans, taking on too many
responsibilities, others seem slow, restlessness,
difficulty staying stillImpaired Judgment
Lack of insight,
inappropriate humor
and behaviors,
impulsive or thrill-
seeking behaviors:
increased alcohol
consumption; financial
extravagance;
dangerous driving;
sexual promiscuityChanges in Thought
Patterns
Distractibility, inability
to concentrate, creative
thinking, flight of
ideas, racing thoughts,
disorientation,
disjointed thinking,
grandiose thinking
Diagnostic criteria for manic episode (Table 18.6).
Table 18.6: Diagnostic criteria for manic episode.
Three to four  of the following criteria are required during the elevated mood period
Self-esteem: highly inflated, grandiosity Attention: easy distractibility
Sleep: decreased need for sleep, rested after only
a few hoursActivity: increased goal-directed activity
Speech: pressured Hedonism: high excess involvement in
pleasurable activities (sex, spending, travel)
Thoughts: racing thoughts and flight of ideas
Elevated mood: It has 4 stages depending on severity of manic episodes
(Table 18.7).
Table 18.7: Stages of elevated mood.
Stage Features
Euphoria (stage-I) hypomania Increased sense of psychological well being and
happiness not in keeping with ongoing events
Elation (stage-II) Moderate elevation of mood with increased
psychomotor activity
Exaltation (stage-III) Intense elation of mood with delusions of
Grandeur.

Ecstasy (stage-IV) Severe elevation of mood, intense sense of
rapture or blissfulness seen in delirious or
stuporous mania
Treatment of Mania
Mood stabilising agents (discussed earlier)
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) (discussed earlier)
Bipolar Disorder
Q. Write short essay on bipolar affective disorders.
Bipolar disorder is characterized by episodes of elevated mood interspersed
with episodes of depression (both manic and depressive).
Elevated mood when mild or shortlived is known as hypomania, or when
severe or chronic, is called mania.
The lifetime risk of developing bipolar disorder is about 1–2%. The
lifetime risk of suicide is about 5–10%.
Types: As per DSM-5, bipolar disorders are divided into: bipolar I
disorder, bipolar II disorder, cyclothymic disorder, substance/medication
induced bipolar disorder and bipolar disorder due to another medical
condition
–  Bipolar I disorder: It is characterized by the occurrence of one or
more manic or mixed episodes (usually), and usually one or more
major depressive episodes.
–  Bipolar II disorder: It is characterized by the occurrence of one or
more major depressive episodes, at least one hypomanic  episode and
without any manic or mixed episode.
Cyclothymic DisorderQ. Write short note on features of cyclothymia.
Characterized by:
Chronically fluctuating mood states—numerous periods of hypomania and depression
Duration of at least 2 years in adults and 1 year in adolescents and children
Individual is not without symptoms for more than 2 months at a time
There are no major depressive, manic, or mixed episodes during the initial 2 years. After the initial
2 years, there may be superimposed manic, mixed, or depressive episodes.
Substance/medication induced bipolar disorder
Bipolar disorder due to another medical condition.

Management and Prognosis of Bipolar Disorders
Antidepressants:  Depression should be treated as described in the treatment of depressive disorder
(refer Table 18.1).
PSYCHOTIC DISORDERS
Q. Write short essay on distinction between an organic and functional
psychosis.
Psychosis
It is a symptom or feature of mental illness characterized by radical
changes in personality, impaired functioning, and thoughts that are
distorted or nonexistent.
It is an abnormal condition of the mind described as involving a ‘loss o f
contact with reality’.
Psychosis is not pathognomonic of psychiatric disorder. It is a nonspecific
cluster of signs and symptoms that may occur in medical, neurologic and
surgical disorders or as a consequence of pharmacologic treatment,
substance abuse or the withdrawal of drugs and alcohol.Classification of psychoses: Organic or functional mental disorders.
–  Organic disorders with psychosis are caused by structural defects or
physiologic dysfunction of the brain, e.g. brain tumor.
–  Functional disorders have no identifiable cause, e.g. schizophrenia or
bipolar disorder.
Lack of insight is a failure to accept that one is ill and/or in need of
treatment, and is characteristic of acute psychosis.
Specific psychotic symptoms include delusions, hallucinations, ideas of
reference, and disorders of thought.
Relationship of various psychological disorders is shown in Figure 18.3.

Fig. 18.3:  Relationship of various psychological disorders.
Neurosis
Q. Write short essay on differences between psychosis and neurosis.
Differences between psychosis and neurosis is presented in Table 18.8.
Table 18.8: Differences between psychosis and neurosis.
Feature Psychosis Neurosis
Contact with reality Lost Preserved
Interpersonal behavior Marked disturbance in reality and
behaviorPreserved
Empathy Absent Present
Insight Absence of understanding current
symptomsPresent symptoms are
recognized as undesirable
Organic causative factor Present Absent
Symptoms Delusions, illusions and hallucinations Usually physical or psychic
symptoms
Dealing with reality Capacity is grossly reduced Preserved
Examples Schizophrenia Anxiety, phobia, depression
SCHIZOPHRENIA
Q. Write short essay/note on schizophrenia.

Definition: Schizophrenia is a heterogeneous group of disorders
characterized by perturbations of language, perception, thinking, social
activity, affect, and volition. It has no pathognomonic features.
Schizophrenia occurs with regular frequency nearly everywhere in the
world in 1% of population  and begins mainly in young age (mostly
around 16 to 25 years).
Schizophrenia has a 10% suicide rate (approximately one-third attempt
suicide).
Etiology
Many factors may predispose to, or precipitate, or sustain schizophrenia.
These include:
Genetic factors: Schizophrenia has a strong genetic contribution,
probably involving many susceptibility genes, each of small effect, e.g.
disrupted in schizophrenia-1 (DISC1) and neuregulin-1 (NRG1).Environmental risk factors include obstetric complications and urban
birth. Winter born children more chances to develop schizophrenia.
Family environment can influence the course of schizophrenia, e.g. a
highly emotional family environment can produce relapses.
Psychological stresses: Episodes of acute schizophrenia may be
precipitated by social stress, adverse life events and cannabis (which
increase dopamine turnover and sensitivity).Others: Viral vector or early developmental abnormalities.
Brain imagings have found enlargement of lateral ventricle and
accompanied by decrease in brain size (atrophy).
Schizophrenia syndrome: It is characterized by temporal lobe epilepsy,
Huntington’s chorea, cerebral tumors and demyelinating diseases. This is
known as symptomatic schizophrenia.Schizophrenia may be accompanied by functional overactivity in the
dopaminergic neuronal systems in the mesolimbic and mesocortical
regions (responsible for positive symptoms).
Physical and Psychiatric Symptoms
Q. Write short essay/note on symptoms of schizophrenia.
Typical stages of schizophrenia: Prodromal phase, active phase and residual

phase.
Diagnostic criteria for schizophrenia: Patient must have at least two of
positive or negative, symptoms mentioned in Table 18.9 for a 1-month
period and continuous signs for at least 6 months.
Bleuler’s criteria for the diagnosis of schizophrenia (Box 18.10)
Box 18.10: Bleuler’s criteria (4 As) for the diagnosis of schizophrenia.
Autism —totally engorged in thinking not at all affected by external stimuli
Association loosening
Ambivalence—simultaneous opposite action/thought, do/do not ( Ambitendency—Inability to
choose between 2 opposite action)
Affective blunting/(Snap prop) inappropriate facial expressions of mood
Q. Write short note on Eugen Bleuler’s criteria for the diagnosis of
schizophrenia.
Schneider’s first rank symptoms of schizophrenia (Table 18.10)
Q. Write short note on Schneider’s first rank symptoms of
schizophrenia.
Types of Schizophrenia
Q. Write short essay/note on paranoid schizophrenia and catatonia.
Major types of schizophrenic disorders (Table 18.11): (1) paranoid, (2)
disorganized, (3) catatonic and undifferentiated.
Table 18.9: Negative and positive symptoms of schizophrenia.
Negative symptoms Positive symptoms
Alogia:  ‘lack of words,’ including poverty of
speech and of speech content in response to a
questionHallucinations
Affective flattening
Decreased expression of emotion, such as lack of
expressive gesturesDelusions
Avolition-apathy
Loss of function
Impaired concentration
Diminished social engagementBizarre behavior
Conceptual disorganization
Aggressive/agitated, odd clothing or appearance,
odd social behavior, repetitive stereotyped
behavior

Anhedonia-asociality
Few friends, activities, interests; impaired
intimacy, little sexual interestFormal thought disorder- Loosening of
association
Attention impairment
Table 18.10: Schneider’s 11 first rank symptoms of schizophrenia.
3 Thought phenomenon
Thought insertion
Thought withdrawal
Thought broadcasting
3 Made phenomenon
Made volition
Made affect
Made impulse
3 Disorders of thought perception
Auditory hallucinations:
1st person ( Thought Echo),
2nd person (Command Hallucination)
3rd person (Running commentary)
2 Special phenomenon
Somatic passivity phenomenon
Primary delusions: of persecution, of reference, of infidelity, of control, somatic hypochondriac
delusions
Table 18.11: Major types of schizophrenic disorders.
1. Paranoid schizophrenia
Most common type of schizophrenia with best prognosis.
Additional features include: (1) Delusions of persecution, reference, grandeur, control,
infidelity, (2) Hallucinations have a persecutory or grandiose content, and (3) Disturbance of
affect, volition, speech and motor behaviors.
2. Disorganized (Hebephrenic) schizophreniaAdditional features include: (1) Marked thought disorder, incoherence, loosening of
associations, and (2) Emotional disturbances-blunted effect, and senseless giggling.
3. Catatonic schizophrenia
In addition has marked disturbance of motor behaviors.
Clinical forms:
–  Excited catatonia: Increase in psychomotor activity (restlessness, agitation, excitement
aggressiveness) and increase in speech production.
–  Stuporous (retarded) catatonia: Extreme retardation of psychomotor function.
–  Catatonia alternating between excitement and stupor: Features of both the above forms.

4. Schizophrenia undifferentiated type
Meets criteria for schizophrenia. Do not meet criteria for other schizophrenia types. Mainly has
negative symptoms.
Course of Schizophrenia are indicated in Box 18.11.
Schizophrenic patients may also be classified as in Box 18.12:
Investigation of schizophrenia are presented in Box 18.13.
Other functional psychosesDelusional disorders
Psychotic depression
Schizoaffective disorder
Manic episode
Puerperal psychosisOrganic disorders
Drug-induced psychosis/side effects of drugs
Temporal lobe epilepsy
Delirium
Dementia
Huntington’s disease
Box 18.11: Course of schizophrenia.
Continuous without temporary improvement
Episodic with progressive or stable deficit
Episodic with complete or incomplete remission.
Box 18.12: Two types of schizophrenia.
Type I (reactive or acute schizophrenia) patients
They have ‘positive’ symptoms, normal ventricular size and a good response to antipsychotic
drugs.
It is usually sudden and seems to be a reaction to some life crisis.
It is a more treatable form of the illness than process or chronic.
Type II (process schizophrenia) patients
They have ‘negative’ symptoms, increased ventricular size and a poor response to antipsychotic
drugs.
Also referred to as poor premorbid schizophrenia
It is characterized by lengthy periods of its development with a gradual deterioration and
exclusively negative symptoms.
It does not seem to be related to any major life change or negative event.
Usually this type of schizophrenia is associated with “loners” who are rejected by society, tend not
to develop social skills and do not excel out of high school.
Box 18.13: Investigation of schizophrenia.
Full neurological examination: Gait and motor
Cognitive examination: MMSE
Blood: Complete blood count, liver function tests, renal function tests, thyroid functions tests,

glucose
Urine drug screen
EEG if suspicion of temporal lobe epilepsy
Brain imaging findings
–  CT: Lateral and third ventricular enlargement, reduction in cortical volume
–  MRI: Increased cerebral ventricles
–  PET: Hypoactivity of the frontal lobes.
Q. Write short essay/note on management/treatment of
schizophrenia/psychosis.
Q. Write short note on antipsychotic drugs.
Management of Schizophrenia
Hospital admission is necessary for a first episode to permit a full physical and psychiatric
assessment.
Indications for hospital admission:  Include suicide/violent, severe psychosis, severe depression,
catatonic schizophrenia, non compliance and failure of outpatient treatment.
Drug Treatment:  Antipsychotic drugs are discussed on page 1074.
Psychological Treatment
It is an essential component of management.Psychoeducation can prevent relapse by enhancing insight.
Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) to challenge delusions.
Social skill training: Improve relationship.
Behavioral: Positive reinforcement of desirable behavior.
Family therapy: To reduce expressed emotion (EE). (High EE include hostility, overinvolvement,
critical comments from family; hence reduce relapse rate).
Social Treatment
After the control of an acute episode of schizophrenia, social rehabilitation may be needed.
Patients with chronic schizophrenia may need long-term, supervised accommodation.
Other TreatmentsRehabilitation to enhance self-care, compliance and insight.
ECT (electroconvulsive therapy) is for catatonic schizophrenia.
Prognosis: Rules of quarters: Complete remission (25%), good recovery
(25%), partial recovery (25%) and downhill course (25%).
Other Psychotic Disorders
Schizophreniform Disorder (>1 month but <6 months)
Presenting symptoms: Same as in schizophrenia (hallucinations,
delusions, disorganized speech, grossly disorganized or catatonic
behavior, negative symptoms, social and/or occupational dysfunction).

Difference from schizophrenia: Symptoms are present > 1 month but < 6
months and most of the patients return to their baseline level of
functioning.
Treatment
Must assess whether the patient needs hospitalization, to assure safety of patient and/or others.
Antipsychotic medication is indicated for a 3–6 month course.
Individual psychotherapy.
Schizoaffective Disorder
Presenting symptoms: Mood disorders (major depressive episode, manic
episode, or mixed episode) + psychosis (schizophrenia).
Delusions or hallucinations for at least 2 weeks in the absence of mood
symptoms
Prognosis: Better prognosis than patients with schizophrenia. Worse
prognosis than patients with affective (mood) disorders.
Treatment
Antidepressant medications and/or anticonvulsants to control the mood/symptoms. If these are not
effective, consider the use of antipsychotic medications to help control the ongoing symptoms.
ANXIETY DISORDERS
Q. Write short notes on anxiety/anxiety neurosis diagnosis and
treatment.
Definition: Anxiety disorders, as the term suggests, are characterized by
unrealistic, irrational fear or anxiety of disabling intensity, worrisome
thoughts, avoidance behavior and the somatic symptoms of autonomic
arousal.Anxiety is a syndrome with psychologic and physiologic components.
Patients with anxiety may also have depression.
Types of Anxiety Disorder
Q. Write short notes on classification of anxiety disorders.
Q. Write short note on panic disorder.
There are four main types:

1. Panic (paroxysmal) disorder
Definition: Panic disorder is defined as the occurrence of recurrent
unexpected attacks of intense anxiety that include marked physical
symptoms, such as tachycardia, chest pain, hyperventilation, dizziness,
trembling, numbness and sweating.Panic disorder may occur with or without agoraphobia (avoidance of
situations where a person may feel trapped and unable to escape). A
discrete period of intense fear or discomfort which develops abruptly
and reaches a peak within 10 minutes. In between the attacks, patient is
free from anxiety.Age of onset for panic disorder varies but lies between late adolescence
and mid-30s.
Patients have persistent concern of having attack and they worry about
the implications of attack.
Q. Write short notes on phobic disorders and its classification.
2. Phobic anxiety disorder (Box 18.14): Specific phobias and social phobias
Box 18.14: List of phobias.
Claustrophobia: Fear of being in constricted, confined spaces
Aerophobia: Fear of flying
Arachnophobia: Fear of spiders
Zoophobia: Fear of animals
Aquaphobia: Fear of water
Acrophobia: Fear of heightsA phobia is an abnormal or excessive, persistent and disproportionate
fear of an object or situation that presents little or no actual danger to the
person. It causes avoidance of it (e.g. excessive fear of dying in an air
crash leading to avoidance of flying). Phobic responses can develop to
general medical procedures, such as venipuncture.Specific phobias: It is characterized by clinically significant anxiety
provoked by exposure of specific feared object or situation, often leading
to avoidance.Social phobia: It is characterized by clinically significant anxiety
provoked by exposure to certain types of social or performance situation,
which people are exposed to unfamiliar people or to scrutiny by others.

Agoraphobia: It is generalized phobia (marked fear) of going out alone or
being in crowded places. Thus, avoid being alone or being in a public
place (e.g. bridges, tunnels, crowds, etc).
Q. Write short notes on generalized anxiety disorder (GAD).
3. Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD)
It is a chronic anxiety state associated with uncontrollable excessive
anxiety and worry.
Symptoms: It is associated with somatic symptoms of muscle tension and
bowel disturbance, sleep disturbance and difficulty concentrating or mind
going blank.
Post-traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)
Q. Write short notes on post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
It is characterized by the re-experiencing (recurrent bouts) of an extremely
traumatic event accompanied by the symptoms of increased arousal and by
avoidance of stimuli associated with trauma.The traumatic event (e.g. a military experience, a physical or sexual
assault, a motor vehicle accident, a natural disaster) involved may have
caused death or near death experience,or serious injury to self or others.Typically, patients re-experience the traumatic event (e.g. nightmares,
flashbacks intrusive recollections), engage in avoidance of trauma or
talk of trauma or recollections of stimuli associated with the sentinel
trauma. Patients experience increased autonomic reactivity, such as
hypervigilance, irritability, insomnia startle responses, etc.Classification of PTSD:
–  Acute PTSD: Symptoms begins within 3 months of trauma or the
duration of symptoms is less than 3 months.
–  Chronic (or delayed) PTSD: Symptoms start more than 3 months
after trauma (delayed) or persist for 3 months or longer.
–  With delayed onset: Six months have passed between the traumatic
event and the onset of symptoms.
Differences between anxiety disorders are presented in Table 18.12.
Table 18.12: Differences between anxiety disorders.

Characteristics Panic disorder Phobic anxiety
disorderGeneralized anxiety
disorder
Occurrence Paroxysmal Situational Persistent
Symptoms Episodic On exposure Persistent
Cognitions Fear of symptoms Fear of situation Worry
Behavior Escape Avoidance Agitation
Differential Diagnosis
Q. Write short notes on treatment of anxiety disorders.
Physical illness which mimic anxiety disorder: Hyperthyroidism,
pheochromocytoma, hypoglycemia, paroxysmal atrial arrhythmias, alcohol
withdrawal, temporal lobe epilepsy.
Management of Anxiety Disorders
Psychological treatment
Explanation and reassurance.
Specific treatment may be necessary. Treatments include relaxation training, graded exposure
(desensitization) to feared situations for phobic disorders, flooding and implosive therapy and
CBT (Cognitive behavioral therapy).
Drug treatment:  Discussed on page 1072.
Drugs of choice are antidepressants. Benzodiazepines are useful in the short-term but long-term
use can result in dependence. When somatic symptoms are prominent, β-blocker (e.g. propranolol)
may be used.
OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER
Q. Write short essay on obsessive-compulsive disorder.
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is characterized by obsessive,
recurrent, unwanted thoughts (which cause marked anxiety) and by
compulsions (which serve to neutralize or relieve anxiety).
Obsessions: These are persistent thoughts, ideas, impulses, or images that
seem to invade a person’s consciousness.
Compulsions: Repetitive behaviors (eg, hand washing, ordering,
checking) or mental acts (e.g. praying, counting, repeating words silently)
that the individual feels driven to perform in response to an obsession.
Types
People have symptoms like:

Cleaning: Fears of contamination
Symmetry: Arranging items symmetrically and repeating, ordering, and
counting compulsions
Forbidden or taboo thoughts: Aggressive, sexual, and religious obsessions.
Harm (e.g. thoughts about harm on oneself or others).
Management
It usually responds to some degree to antidepressant drugs (SSRIs- paroxetine, citalopram, or
escitalopram & SNRI -Clomipramine and to CBT (Cognitive Behavioural therapy). However,
relapses are common and it often becomes chronic.
Dissociative Disorder
Q. Write short note on dissociative disorder.
It was formerly called hysteria (dissociative disorder) and this old term
was replaced in DSM IV and ICD-10 by new term dissociative disorder.
More common in women and children.
Definition: Dissociative disorder is a syndrome characterized by a loss or
distortion of neurological function which cannot be fully explained by
organic disease.Psychological functions commonly affected include conscious awareness
and memory. Physical functions affected (conversion) include changes in
sensory or motor function. These changes may resemble lesions in the
motor or sensory nervous system.Etiology.
–  Unconscious psychological process: Patient lacks insight into nature of
symptoms. It is maladaptive way of coping with an unresolved
psychological conflict by becoming ill.
–  An association of this disorder with adverse childhood experiences,
including physical and sexual abuse is being observed.
Clinical Features (Box 18.15)
Primary gain: Keeps internal conflicts outside patient’s awareness.
Secondary gain: Benefits received from being ‘sick’.
La belle indifference: Patient seems unconcerned about impairment.
Management/Treatment of dissociative disorder

Physical and psychiatric examination to exclude organic disease.
Explanation and reassurance.
Resistant cases: Abreaction under hypnosis or small IV dose of penthanol.
Box 18.15: Common clinical features of dissociative disorder.
Gait disturbance
Loss of function in limbs
Aphonia
Pseudoseizures (non-epileptic seizures)
Sensory loss
Blindness
SOMATOFORM DISORDERS
These disorders have somatic symptoms which are not explained by a
medical condition (medically unexplained symptoms), nor better diagnosed
as part of a depressive or anxiety disorder.
PSYCHOSOMATIC DISORDER
Q. Write a short note on psychosomatic disorder.
Psychosomatic disorder is characterized by presence of organic pathology,
but is altered by psychological influence. They include those disorders (Box
18.16) which are either initiated or exacerbated by the presence of
meaningful psychosocial environmental stressors.
Box 18.16: Classical psychosomatic illnesses.
Bronchial asthma
Ulcerative colitis
Peptic ulcer
Neurodermatitis
Thyrotoxicosis
Rheumatic arthritis
Essential hypertension
CONVERSION DISORDER

It is a type of somatoform disorder (functional neurological symptom
disorder under DSM 5).
Etiology: Unresolved psychological conflict is converted  acutely and
unconsciously into sensorimotor neurological symptoms → maladaptive
coping mechanism.
Treatment: Psychodynamic therapy—resolution of psychological conflict.
Symptom Production
If unconscious—comes under somatoform disorders
If conscious with motive to obtain benefit is called as malingering
If conscious but done without motive—factitious disorder/Munchausen
syndrome.
FACTITIOUS DISORDER
It is an uncommon disorder characterized by the repeated and deliberate
production of the signs or symptoms of disease to gain medical care, e.g.
dipping of thermometers into hot drinks to fake a fever.
Munchausen’s Syndrome
Q. Write short note on Munchausen’s syndrome.
It is a rare, severe, chronic form of factitious disorder named after the
German Baron von Munchausen, who was legendary for his inventive
lying.
They travel widely, sometimes visiting several hospitals in one day.
Patient frequently changes his name, with history of ‘doctor shopping’.
These patients are memorable because they present so dramatically. They
usually seek medical attention at night when junior doctors or residents are
on duty. They fabricate a convincing history and present to the doctor with
dramatic symptoms of a medical emergency. They persuade an
inexperienced doctor to undertake investigations or initiate treatment
including exploratory surgery.Abdomen may show several scar marks (‘surgical battlefield’) due to
previous operations.
Management
Gentle and firm confrontation with clear evidence of the fabrication of illness.

Psychological support.
Recognition of the condition to avoid further iatrogenic harm.
IMPULSE DISORDERS
Q. Write short essay/note on impulse disorders.
Impulsive disorder is defined as a sudden and irresistible force which
compels a person to do some action without motive or forethought. A
normal person always tries to analyze his actions whether they are
consistent with law or not. Once he realizes that his action may be
contrary to law he stops it.But in impulsive disorder, a person is not able to control himself.
Examples:
–  Kleptomania: An irresistible desire to steal things usually of low value.
–  Pyromania: An irresistible desire to set things on fire.
–  Mutilomania: An irresistible impulse to maim animals.
–  Dipsomania: An irresistible impulse to drink at periodic intervals.
–  Sexual impulses: All sexual perversions.
–  Homicidal impulses: To kill some persons.
–  Suicidal impulses: To commit suicide. Impulses are quite commonly
seen in various mental disorders like depression, schizophrenia, mania,
etc.
–  Trichotillomania: It is an irresistible desire to pull out one’s own hair.
–  Oniomania: Compulsive desire to shop (shopping addiction).
DELIRIUMQ. Write short essay/notes on definition, causes, clinical features
(clinical recognition) and initial management of delirium.
Definition
It is an acute organic mental disorder characterized by confusion,
restlessness, incoherence, inattention, anxiety or hallucinations which may be
reversible with treatment.

Cardinal Features
Acute course: Sudden onset, short episode.
Global impairment of cognitive functions (memory, attention, orientation,
thinking, etc.).
Fluctuating course.
Cardinal feature:
–  Clouding of consciousness, impaired alertness, awareness, attention.
–  Variability in state of arousal.
–  Reduced responsiveness is interspersed with periods of excited
outbursts.
–  Sleep/wake cycle disrupted.
Impaired perception: Misperceives surrounding and attendants,
hallucinations.
Disturbance of emotion: Agitation, fear, depression, anxiety.
Psychomotor changes: Hyperactivity, restlessness, repetitive (plucking,
tossing).
Table 18.13: Predisposing and precipitating factors of delirium.
Predisposing Precipitating
Diseases of brain: Dementia, stroke, past
severe head injury
Drugs: Sedatives, anticholinergics
Impairments of special senses: Sight, hearing
Multiple severe illnesses
MalnutritionIatrogenic: Unpleasant environmental
change, invasive procedures, new
medications, trauma, dehydration, ongoing
malnutrition, elimination malfunctionIllnesses:  Infections, intracranial pathologies,
impaired organ function, abnormal metabolite
function, pain, drug withdrawal
Predisposing and precipitation factors of delirium (Table 18.13).
Causes of Delirium (Table 18.14)
Investigations
If cause is not obvious: Complete blood count, urine analysis, blood
glucose, blood urea, serum electrolytes, liver and renal function tests, arterial
blood gases, thyroid function test, X-ray chest, ECG, CSF, VDRL, HIV-
testing, EEG, and Cranial CT scan or MRI scan.
Management

Identify the cause and treat it accordingly.
Drugs:
Chlorpromazine (50–100 mg 8th hourly) or Haloperidol (5–10 mg 8th hourly) are drugs of choices
except in delirium tremens, where benzodiazepines (BZDs) or diazepam 10–20 mg 6th hourly is
preferred.
Also give supportive medical and nursing care.
Table 18.14: Causes of delirium.
Metabolic causes
–  Hypoxia, CO 2 narcosis
–  Hypoglycemia
–  Hepatic encephalopathy
–  H2O and electrolyte imbalanceEndocrine causes
–  Hypo- and hyperpituitarism
–  Hypo- and hyperthyroidism
–  Hypo- and hyperparathyroidism
–  Hypo- and hyperadrenalism
Drugs and poisons
–  Digitalis
–  Alcohol
–  Tricycle antidepressants
–  Salicylates, penicillin, etc.Intracranial causes
–  Epilepsy
–  Head injury
–  Meningitis
–  MigraineNutritional deficiencies
–  Thiamin, niacin
–  ProteinsMiscellaneous
–  Postoperative states
–  Sleep deprivation
–  Acute and chronic systemic infections
–  Febrile delirium in children
Differences between delirium, dementia and psychosis are presented in Table
18.15.
Table 18.15: Differences between delirium, dementia and psychosis.
Condition Onset Pattern Orientation Attention Memory Duration
Delirium Acute Fluctuating Usually
impairedImpaired/
fluctuatingImpaired Hours or
days
Dementia Insidious Progressive Normal or
impaired~Normal Impaired Months or
years
Psychosis Variable Variable ~Normal Normal or
impairedNormal or
impairedVariable
Differences between delirium and dementia are presented in Table 18.16.
Table 18.16: Differences between delirium and dementia.

Features Delirium Dementia
Onset Rapid (hours to days) Gradual (years)
Course Wide fluctuations; may
continue for weeks if cause
is not foundSlow but continuous decline
LOC (loss of consciousness) Hyper-alert to difficult to
arouseNormal
Orientation Disoriented, confused Disoriented, confused
Attention Always impaired May be intact; may focus on one thing
for long periods
Sleep Always disturbed Usually normal
Behavior Agitated, restless May be agitated or apathetic; may
wonder
Memory Especially recent memory
impairmentEspecially recent memory impairment
Cognition Disordered reasoning
Thought content:
Incoherent, confused,
delusionalDisordered reasoning and calculation
Perception Illusions, hallucinations No change
Judgment Poor Poor, socially inappropriate
ALCOHOL MISUSE AND DEPENDENCE
Consumption of alcohol when associated with social, psychological and
physical problems constitutes alcohol misuse.
Etiology
Alcohol is a central nervous system depressant. It influences several
neurotransmitter systems, mainly GABA (inhibition of behavior) but also
glutamate system and serotonin system.
Consequences of Chronic Alcohol Misuse (Table 18.17)Q. Write short notes on consequences of chronic alcohol misuse.
Table 18.17: Consequences of chronic alcohol misuse.
Acute alcohol intoxication Features of alcohol withdrawal syndrome
Disturbances in emotional and behavioral state
Medical symptoms: Due to hypoglycemia,Psychological: Restlessness, anxiety, panic
attacks

aspiration of vomit, respiratory depression
Complication of other medical problems
Accidents, injuries developed in fightsAutonomic: Tachycardia, sweating, pupil
dilatation, nausea, vomiting
Delirium tremens: Agitation, hallucinations,
illusions, delusions
Seizures
Consequences of harmful alcohol use
Medical
Neurological: Peripheral neuropathy,
dementia, cerebral hemorrhage, cerebellar
degeneration, Marchiafava-Bignami
syndrome, subacute combined degeneration of
the cord myopathy, ventricular enlargement
and cognitive impairment.Hepatic: Fatty change and cirrhosis,
hepatocellular carcinoma
Gastrointestinal: Esophagitis, esophageal
varices, Mallory-Weiss syndrome, esophageal
carcinoma, gastritis, malabsorption,
pancreatitis, parotid enlargementSkin: Palmar erythema, spider naevi,
Dupuytren’s contractures, telangiectasias
Cardiac: Cardiomyopathy, hypertension
Respiratory: Pneumonia, tuberculosis
Musculoskeletal: Myopathy, fractures
Endocrine and metabolic: Pseudo-Cushing’s
syndrome, hypoglycemia, gout
Reproductive: Hypogonadism, infertility, fetal
alcohol syndromePsychiatric and cerebral
Depression
Alcoholic hallucinosis
Alcoholic ‘blackouts’
Wernicke’s encephalopathy
–  Nystagmus
–  Ophthalmoplegia
–  Ataxia
–  ConfusionKorsakoff’s syndrome
–  Short-term memory deficits
–  Confabulation
Complications of Chronic Alcohol Misuse
Social problems: Absenteeism from work, unemployment, marital
tensions, child abuse, financial difficulties, violence and traffic offences.
Depression: It is common. Alcohol has a direct CNS depressant and
suicidal attempts may be observed with alcohol misuse.
Anxiety: Alcohol relieves anxiety in the short term. Anxious individuals
may use alcohol and may develop dependence. On the contrary, alcohol
withdrawal increases anxiety.Alcoholic hallucinosis: It is a rare condition in which alcoholics
experience auditory hallucination.
Alcohol withdrawal  (discussed below): Maximum symptoms usually
develop 2–3 days after the last drink and can produce seizures (‘rum fits’).
Delirium tremens: It is a form of delirium found with severe alcohol

withdrawal (refer below).
Effects on the Brain
Q. Write short notes on acute and chronic neurological complications of
alcohol abuse.
Features observed in chronic alcoholics include ataxia, slurred speech,
emotional incontinence and aggression.
Alcoholic blackouts: It is amnesia for events that occurred during bouts
of intoxication in very heavy alcoholic drinkers.
Alcoholic dementia: It is a global cognitive impairment which may
resemble Alzheimer’s disease. It does not progress and may improve if the
patient abstains from alcohol.Indirect effects on brain: It may be due to head injury subdural
hematoma, hypoglycemia and encephalopathy.
Wernicke–Korsakoff syndrome: (discussed on page 4)
Acute Alcoholic Intoxication
It is characterized by hypotension, gastritis, hypoglycemia, collapse,
respiratory depression, coma and death.
Q. Write short note on treatment of acute alcoholic intoxication.
Treatment of acute alcoholic intoxication
Maintain patent airway and prevent aspiration of vomitus. Tracheal intubation and positive
pressure respiration may be needed. Do not use analeptics because they may precipitate
convulsions.
Maintain fluid and electrolyte balance.
Hypoglycemia is corrected by glucose infusion.
Thiamine 100 mg in 500 mL glucose solution infused intravenously.
Note: Gastric lavage is helpful only when the patient is brought immediately after alcohol ingestion.
Alcohol Dependence (Alcohol Use Disorder)
Alcohol use disorder, is characterized by a problematic pattern of alcohol use
leading to clinically significant impairment or distress, as manifested by
multiple psychosocial, behavioral, or physiologic features.
Features of Alcohol Dependence
Loss of control: Engaging in risky behaviors while under the influence.

Compulsive preoccupation: Worrying compulsively about getting a ‘fix’
and spending a lot of their time thinking about the drug.
Continued use of alcohol despite negative consequences: Losing control of
the ability to monitor how much and how often the user takes their drug.
Loss of motivation: Losing interest in activities that the user enjoyed prior
to addiction.
Desire to stop drinking, but inability to do so.
Excessive time spent getting or using alcohol, or recovering from its
effects.
Craving, or preoccupation with drinking.
Problems stemming from alcohol use; ignoring those problems; drinking
despite obvious hazards, including physical danger.
Retreating from important work, family or social activities and roles.
Tolerance: The need to drink more and more alcohol to feel the same
effects, or the ability to drink more than other people without getting
drunk.Withdrawal symptoms: After stopping or cutting back on drinking,
symptoms are anxiety, sweating, trembling, trouble sleeping, nausea or
vomiting, and, in severe cases, physical seizures and hallucinations. The
person may drink to relieve or avoid such symptoms.
Investigations and Diagnosis
Diagnosis may be apparent from the history or may be made when the patient
presents with a complication.
CAGE questionnaire:  Affirmative answers to any two of the following questions (or to the last
question alone) are suggestive of alcohol abuse.
Have you ever felt that you should Cut down your drinking?
Have you ever felt Annoyed  by others criticizing your drinking?
Have you ever felt Guilty about your drinking?
Have you ever had a morning drink ( Eye-opener) after hangover
Laboratory detection of alcohol abuse
Breath, blood and urine examination: Screen for alcohol.
Gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT): It is most sensitive for alcohol
abuse and is raised in patients with alcohol abuse.
MCV (mean corpuscular volume): Raised, but is less sensitive than

GGT.
Carbohydrate-deficient transferrin level: Elevated and is highly
specific in the absence of liver disease.
Phosphatidylethanol(PEth)-concentration greater than 20 ng/dL is
evidence of intoxication; it can detect excessive alcohol intake within a
two-week period.Others: Alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase
(AST) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH).
Treatment
Alcohol dependence can be treated (Box 18.17) in two phases: (A) Detoxification and (B)
Rehabilitation.
(A) Detoxification
Box 18.17:  Drugs used for alcohol dependence.
First line medications:  Naltrexone and acamprosate
Second-line medications:  Disulfiram, topiramate, gabapentin, baclofen, nalmefene
Disulfiram
–  Disulfiram is inhibitor of enzyme aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH)  and blocks the
conversion of acetaldehyde (derived from alcohol) to acetic acid, thus increasing the levels of
toxic substance, acetaldehyde in the body.
–  When alcohol is consumed while on disulfiram, acetaldehyde accumulates in tissues and blood
and produces distressing symptoms (aldehyde syndrome). These unpleasant symptoms include
flushing, burning sensation, throbbing headache, perspiration, uneasiness, palpitations, nausea,
postural faintness, and, in some cases, circulatory collapse. Duration of symptoms (1–4 hours)
depends on the amount of alcohol consumed.
–  Side effects:  Infrequent and include rashes, metallic taste, nervous ness and malaise. Very
rarely myocardial infarction, congestive heart failure, respiratory depression, convulsions and
death may develop.
–  Dosage: Oral 250 mg–500 mg/daily.Naltrexone
–  It is an opioid-receptor antagonist. It reduces alcohol craving, number of drinking days, chances
of resumed heavy drinking.
–  Dose: Oral 50 mg/day in a single dose.
–  Side effects:  Nausea decreased appetite, fatigue and headache.
Acamprosate
–  It is a weak N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist with modest GABA A receptor
antagonist. It normalizes the dysregulated NMDA-mediated glutamatergic excitation that
occurs in alcohol withdrawal and early abstinence. It reduces relapse of the drinking behavior.
–  Dose: Oral 666 mg given thrice a day. It is available in 333 mg enteric-coated tablet.
–  Side effects:  Diarrhea, dizziness and headache.
(B) Rehabilitation

To prevent relapse.
Needs psychotherapeutic interventions.
Alcohol Withdrawal
Q. Write short note on clinical features of alcohol withdrawal syndrome.
Alcohol withdrawal in chronic alcoholics is characterized by sudden
exhibition of central nervous system excitation.
Clinical Features
They occur 6 to 8 hours after the reduction of ethanol intake and may last for
2–7 days.
Minor withdrawal symptoms
–  These include insomnia, tremors (the shakes), hyper-reflexia,
restlessness, mild anxiety, gastrointestinal upset, headache,
tachycardia, palpitations, sweating/diaphoresis, hypertension, anorexia,
nausea, and vomiting.
–  They resolve within 24–28 hours.Alcoholic hallucinosis
–  These are hallucinations appear within 8–12 hours of abstinence and
disappear within 48–72 hours.
–  Usually these hallucinations are visual. In contrast to delirium tremens,
it is not associated with clouding of the sensorium.
Q. Write short note on causes and management of convulsions in
alcoholics.
Withdrawal seizures
–  These seizures (‘rum fits’) are generalized tonic-clonic convulsions. It
develops usually 12–24 hours after the last drink, but may develop
after only 2 hours of abstinence.
–  About 3% of chronic alcoholics develop withdrawal-associated seizures
and, about 3% of them may develop status epilepticus.
–  About 30% of patients, who develop delirium tremors, give a history of
preceding alcohol withdrawal seizures.
Delirium tremens

Q. Write short note on delirium tremens.
–  It usually develops between 24–72 hours after the last drink and last for
about 1–5 days. If early alcohol withdrawal is not treated, about 5% will
progress to delirium tremens.
–  Clinical features
◆  These include agitation, visual hallucinations
(Lilliputian/macroscopic), illusions, delusions, tachycardia,
hypertension, diaphoresis and dilated pupils.
◆  Dehydration may occur as a result of diaphoresis, hyperthermia,
vomiting and tachypnea.
◆  Other features: Hypokalemia, hypomagnesemia and
hypophosphatemia.
–  Death occurs in about 5% of patients, usually due to arrhythmias,
pneumonia or electrolyte imbalance.
Management of alcohol withdrawal syndrome
Maintain patent airway and breathing.
Thiamine 100 mg in 500 mL glucose solution infused intravenously after withdrawing appropriate
blood samples since in alcoholics, the thiamine will be depleted and the TPP would not be present
as a result, in patients with altered sensorium for prevention of progress to Wernicke Korsakoff”s
psychosis.Maintain fluid and electrolyte balance.
Mild cases of withdrawal:  Provide supportive care, such as reassurance and nursing care
(monitoring of vital sings).
Benzodiazepines (nitrazepam, diazepam and lorazepam):  For patients with moderate to severe
withdrawal. They also control seizures.
β-blockers:  It may reduce anxiety and tremors.
Anticonvulsants:  Such as phenytoin, valproic acid, carbamazepine and levetiracetam are of little
value in treating or preventing alcohol withdrawal seizures.
Management of associated conditions: Such as pneumonia, electrolyte imbalances, GI bleed,
liver failure, pancreatitis, neurological injury and trauma.
SUBSTANCE-RELATED DISORDERS
Q. Write short notes on drug abuse, its effects and treatment.
Substance Misuse Disorder
Substance Abuse

Definition: Substance abuse is defined as psychological dependence and
heavy consumption of a substance. Substance dependence is similar
impairment with increased tolerance or presence of physical signs on
withdrawal of substance.Intoxication and withdrawal are disturbances that are a direct physiologic
result of a substance abuse.
Substance Intoxication
Reversible, substance-specific syndrome caused by the recent ingestion of
or exposure to a substance.
Tolerance: It is defined by either of the following:
A need for markedly increased amounts of the substance to achieve
intoxication or desired effect.
A markedly diminished effect with continued use of the same amount of
the substance.
Substance Withdrawal
It is manifested by the following:
The characteristic substance-specific, maladaptive behavioral change, with
physiologic and cognitive concomitants, caused by the cessation of or
reduction in heavy and prolonged substance use.
Risk Factors/Etiology
Family history: Parental drug/alcohol use, marital conflict, disturbed
family environment.
Physiology: Individuals who are innately more tolerant to alcohol.
Developmental history: Poor parenting, childhood physical and sexual
abuse.
Environmental: Peer pressure, economic disadvantage and social
isolation. Availability and access to drugs.
Psychiatric disturbances: Conduct disorder, depression and bipolar
disorder.
Age group: Highest prevalence of substance abuse is between 18 and 22
years of age. Experimentation with gateway drugs may start as early as
preadolescence.

Common Symptoms and Signs of Substance Abuse (Table
18.18)
Table 18.18: Common symptoms and signs of substance abuse.
Symptoms Signs
Frequent absences from school or workplace
Depression/anxiety
Epigastric distress, diarrhea
Sleep disorders
Sexual dysfunction
Frequent trauma/injuryTremors
Tachycardia
Labile hypertension
Conjunctival injection
Odor of alcohol on breath in alcohol addiction
Tender hepatomegaly
Investigations and Diagnosis
Diagnosis may be apparent from the history or may be made when the patient
presents with a complication.
Laboratory Toxicology
Breath, blood and urine examination: Screen for types of substances of
abuse and its concentrations.
Intravenous drug abuse workup:
–  HIV, hepatitis B, hepatitis C and tuberculosis.
–  Drug screening of samples of urine or blood will help in confirming the
diagnosis.
Other laboratory studies for evidence of systemic damage from substance
use.
Treatment of Substance-related Disorders
Biological Treatment: Pharmacologic intervention to ameliorate
psychological or physical symptoms.
Agonist substitution: Safe drug with a similar chemical composition as
the abused drug, e.g. methadone for heroin addiction.
Antagonistic treatment: Drugs that block or counteract the positive
effects of substances, e.g. naltrexone for opiate and alcohol problems.
Aversive treatment: Drugs that make the injection of abused substances
extremely unpleasant, e.g. disulfiram for alcoholism and silver nitrate for
nicotine addiction.

Psychosocial Treatment
Community support programs: These are strongly encouraged.
Emotional reassurance and providing a structured and secure environment.
Components of comprehensive treatment and prevention programs:
Individual and group therapy, aversion therapy and convert sensitization,
contingency management, community reinforcement, relapse prevention,
preventative efforts via education.
Specific Drug-dependence DisordersMain Categories of Substances
Depressants: Result in behavioral sedation (e.g. alcohol, sedative,
anxiolytic drugs).
Stimulants: Increase alertness and elevate mood (e.g. cocaine, nicotine,
caffeine).
Opiates: Primarily produce analgesia and euphoria (e.g. heroin, morphine,
codeine).
Hallucinogens: Alter sensory perception (e.g. marijuana, LSD).
Other drugs of abuse: Include inhalants, anabolic steroids, and
medications.
Nicotine
Nicotine withdrawal: Symptoms in chronic users appear about 30 minutes
after every dose. These include confusion, anxiety, restlessness, insomnia,
depression, frustration and anger, nightmares and headache.
Treatment of Tobacco Use DisorderSmoking cessation
Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT).
Nicotine gum or lozenge, transdermal patch, nasal spray inhalers.
Medication:
–  Bupropion: It is an antidepressant which is chemically unrelated to
tricyclic antidepressants or SSRIs. Dose 150 mg po twice a day.
–  Varenicline and cytisine: It is an alpha-4 beta-2 nicotinic receptor
partial agonist more effective than nicotine and bupropion. Dose 1 mg
po bid.

SLEEP DISORDERS
Q. Write short notes on common sleep disorders.
Disturbed sleep is one of the most frequent health complaints. Various sleep
disorders are listed in (Box 18.18).
Box 18.18: Sleep disorders.
Insomnia
Circadian rhythm disorders
Narcolepsy
Parasomnias
Obstructive sleep apnea
Restless leg syndrome
Upper airway resistance syndrome
DSM-IV recognizes three major categories of sleep disorders (Box 18.19).
Insomnia
Insomnia is the complaint of inability to sleep long enough or maintain sleep
despite the patient having adequate amount of time to devote to sleep. It is
associated with impairment of daytime functioning or mood symptoms.
Insomnia can be classified according to the nature of sleep disruption and
the duration of the complaint. Most insomnia patients present with two or
more of these symptoms.
Box 18.19: Major categories of sleep disorders.Dyssomnias: Sleeping disorder that make it difficult to get to sleep, or to stay sleeping.
Parasomnias:  It consists of various uncommon disruptive sleep-related disorders. They are
intense, infrequent physical acts that occur during sleep. Some common parasomnias include
sleepwalking, sleep talking, sleep terrors, nightmares, and teeth grinding
Neurological/psychiatric disorders
Box 18.20: Common causes of insomnia.
Primary sleep disorders
Idiopathic insomnia
Periodic leg movements
Restless legs syndrome
Secondary sleep disorders
Psychiatric or psychological problems:  Mood disorders (e.g. mania, depressive and anxiety

disorders); delirium and dementia
Use or misuse of drug/substance abuse: Consumption or discontinuation of drugs/substances.
Withdrawal of addictive drug (e.g. alcohol, benzodiazepines); stimulant drugs (e.g. caffeine, nicotine,
amphetamines); prescribed drugs (corticosteroids, dopamine agonists)
Physical/medical disorders: Chronic pain (e.g. Carpal tunnel syndrome); nocturia (e.g.
prostatism); malnutrition, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, asthma, menopause, and
neurologic disorders.
Sleep onset insomnia: Difficulty falling asleep.
Sleep maintenance insomnia: Frequent or sustained awakenings
Sleep offset insomnia: Early morning awakenings or frequent nocturnal
awakenings.
Causes of Insomnia (Box 18.20)
Consequences
Depression may cause insomnia, and insomnia may cause depression.
Can heighten the perception of pain.
May be associated with:
–  Development of endocrine disturbances.
–  Increased risk for hypertension or cardiovascular disease.
–  Increased risk for motor vehicle accidents and occupational errors.
Q. Write short notes on behavioral therapy.
Treatment
Behavioral therapy effective but may be time-consuming. These include: Relaxation techniques,
cognitive behavior therapy. Other measures include: Decreasing alcohol intake, to have early
supper, daily exercise, and hot bath prior to going to bed and routine going to bed at the same
time.Pharmacologic treatment
–  Benzodiazepines (e.g. temazepam, triazolam, estazolam and eszopiclone) for sleep-maintenance
insomnia.
–  Nonbenzodiazepines (e.g. zolpidem, zolpidem controlled release zaleplon, zopiclone or
eszopiclone) for both sleep-onset and sleep-maintenance insomnia.
–  Melatonin agonist (e.g. ramelteon) for sleep onset insomnia.
–  Antihistamines (e.g. diphenhydramine and promethazine) and antidepressants (e.g.
amitriptyline, trimipramine, trazodone, mirtazapine).
Narcolepsy

Definition
Excessive daytime sleepiness and REM abnormalities for >3 months.
REM sleep occurs for less than 10 minutes.
Patients feel refreshed upon awakening.
Etiology
Loss of orexin (hypocretin) signaling is believed to be the cause.
Strong genetic/HLA association: HLADQB1*0602 haplotype is present in
95% of patients with cataplexy and in 96% of those with orexin
deficiency.
Clinical Features
The classic ‘narcolepsy tetrad’ consists of four main clinical features. These
consist of:
1. Excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS) occurring almost daily for at least 3
months that interferes with functioning plus three specific symptoms
related to an intrusion of REM sleep characteristics. Sleep attack is the
most common symptom.2. Cataplexy (pathognomonic sign): Sudden weakness or loss of muscle tone
without loss of consciousness, usually precipitated by loud noise, laughter
or other intense emotions.3. Hypnagogic/hypnopompic hallucinations: Hypnagogic hallucinations
(hallucinations occur as the patient is going to sleep) or hypnopompic
hallucinations (hallucinations upon awakening).
4. Sleep paralysis: Muscle paralysis upon awakening. It consists of episodes
up to several minutes in duration of inability to move and occasionally
feeling unable to breathe despite being awake. Fragmented sleep is
classically seen in patients.Diagnosis
Electrographic evidence
–  Multiple sleep latency test: Demonstration of rapid transition from
wakefulness to sleep and short time to onset of REM sleep
confirmatory for the diagnosis. A mean sleep latency of ≤ 8 minutes
and two or more sleep onset REM periods (SOREMPs) on a multiple

sleep latency test (MSLT) performed using standard techniques.
HLA testing may also be useful.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) hypocretin-1 concentration is low.
Treatment
The treatment is symptomatic.
Forced naps at a regular time of day is usually the treatment of choice.
Psychostimulants
–  Wake-promoting therapeutics: Modafinil  is the drug of choice, principally because it has few
side effects and has low addiction potential. Older drugs such as methylphenidate or
methamphetamine or dextroamphetamine are used as alternatives, particularly in refractory
patients.
–  Tricyclic antidepressants  (TCAs) to help suppress the REM sleep [e.g. protriptyline,
imipramine and clomipramine or the selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) [e.g.
fluoxetine (10–20 mg/d)] or selective norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (e.g. venlafaxine) can
improve cataplexy.
–  Gamma hydroxybutyrate  (GHB) is effective in reducing daytime cataplectic episodes.
–  Sodium oxybate  (a sodium salt of γ-hydroxybutyrate alone or combined with modafinil, can
reduce sleep disruption significantly. It is administered at night to help consolidate REM sleep
and increase slow-wave sleep. It significantly reduces day time sleepiness and also improves
cataplexy.
–  Pitolisant , a histamine H3 receptor inverse agonist, is effective treatment for cataplexy and
daytime sleepiness.
–  Others: Selegiline, clomipramine, fluoxetine and venlafaxine.
Circadian Rhythm Sleep DisordersCircadian rhythm sleep disorders (CRSD) are mainly due to alterations of
the circadian time-keeping system or asynchrony between the endogenous
circadian rhythm and external factors that affect the timing or duration of
sleep.Wake-sleep schedule disorders fall into two categories:
–  Primary malfunction of the biologic clock per se
–  Secondary malfunction due to environmental effects on the underlying
clock.
–  Shift work type:
◆  Night shift or shift changes.
–  Jet Lag Disorder associated with excessive daytime sleepiness, sleep
onset insomnia, and frequent arousals from sleep, especially in the
latter half of the night. Transient symptoms of difficulty falling asleep
at the appropriate time and daytime sleepiness following rapid change

in time zones altering the timing of exogenous light stimuli.
Diagnosis
Made by history and a sleep diaries.
Actigraphy: Based on a wrist-mounted motion detector worn as an
outpatient for at least 7 days. It can help in quantify time spent asleep.
Treatment of the Primary Circadian Rhythm Disorders
Chronotherapy
–  Useful in delayed sleep phase type of ciracadian rhythm disorders.
–  Patient delays the onset of sleep by a few hours everyday and sleeps only the predetermined
number of hours until the onset of sleep occurs at the desired time.
Phototherapy: Bright light therapy
–  Patient sits at a prescribed distance from a bright light with an illuminance of greater than 2500
lux at that distance for 2–3 hours in the mornings.
Pharmacologic Therapy
–  Melatonin 3 mg given 4–5 hours before the desired time of sleep onset. Useful in patients with
delayed sleep phase.
For jet lag
–  Behavioral strategies (good sleep hygiene), shifting sleep and wake times gradually before
travel to conform to the destination’s time zone and avoiding bright light exposure before
bedtime).
–  Melatonin administered before bedtime in the new time zone.
Parasomnias
Definition: Abnormal unpleasant or undesirable behaviors or experiences
that occur during sleep, entry to sleep, or arousal from sleep.
Table 18.19: Types and features of parasomnias.
Type of parasomnias Features
Non-REM sleep parasomnias
Confusional arousals Sudden arousals, associated with confusion and disorientation
Sleep terrors Sudden arousal with fearful agitated behavior, often with screaming
or crying; patients may be disoriented, unresponsive to the
environment and typically do not remember the event afterward.
Sleepwalking Arousal with complex motor behavior, walking, running, talking, and
eating.
REM sleep-associated parasomnias
Nightmare disorder Recurrent, disturbing dreams not associated with autonomic activity
or amnesia.

REM sleep behavior
disorder (RBD)Abnormal persistence of muscle tone during REM sleep, permitting
vigorous movements while dreaming. Also includes screaming,
punching and kicking for up to several minutes, sometimes resulting
in injury to the patient or bed partner.
Types and Features of Parasomnias (Table 18.19)
TreatmentAvoid: Caffeine or alcohol and drugs, such as serotonin reuptake inhibitors and MAO inhibitors.
Remove dangerous objects from the environment of sleep.
Pharmacologic therapy:  These include clonazepam, tricyclic antidepressants, dopamine agonists
or levodopa, melatonin and carbamazepine.
Sleep-related Movement Disorders
These include restless leg syndrome and periodic limb movement disorder.
Restless Leg Syndrome (Willis-Ekbom Disease)
It is a common sleep-related movement disorder.
Clinical manifestation
It is characterized by urge to move legs and patient usually complains of a
variety of uncomfortable sensations in the legs (e.g. pins and needles,
creeping or crawling sensations, aching, itching, stabbing, heaviness,
tension, burning, or coldness).Symptoms are usually experienced during periods of prolonged rest or
inactivity.
Symptoms are typically relieved only by movement or stimulation of the
legs.
The discomfort appears more prominent during evening and between
midnight and 4 AM.
May disrupt sleep initiation.
Types
Primary or idiopathic: Inherited as an autosomal dominant disorder.
Secondary: To other causes, including iron deficiency, pregnancy,
varicose vein or venous reflux, uremia, or folate deficiency, peripheral
neuropathy, radiculopathy rheumatoid arthritis, etc. It often develops
suddenly and may be daily from the very beginning.
Treatment

Treatment of the underlying condition.
First-line drugs:  Dopamine agonists (e.g. pramipexole, carbidopa/levodopa or pergolide and
ropinirole) are the treatments of choice.
Other drugs  include quinine levodopa preparations, gabapentin, opiate agonists (e.g. oxycodone,
codeine, propoxyphene oxycodone, or methadone), benzodiazepines (e.g. clonazepam which often
assist in staying asleep and reducing awakenings from the movements) may also be effective.
Anticonvulsants, such as gabapentin, often helpful in patients with painful sensations
Periodic Limb Movement Disorder (PLMD)
It is a repetitive, stereotyped limb movement and consists of 0.5- to 5.0-s
extensions of the great toe and dorsiflexion of the foot.
It occurs/recurs every 20–40 seconds during NREM sleep and each
episode lasts from minutes to hours.
Movements often disrupt sleep and lead to daytime sleepiness.
Treatment: Dopaminergic medications or benzodiazepines.
EATING DISORDERS
Anorexia Nervosa (AN)
Q. Write short note on anorexia nervosa and its management.
Diagnostic Criteria
Marked weight loss: Refusal to maintain body weight at or above a
minimally normal weight for age and height.
Avoidance of high-calorie foods: Weight loss arising from food
avoidance because of intense fear of gaining weight or becoming fat, even
though underweight.Distortion of body image so that patients regard themselves as fat even
when they appear grossly underweight.
In postmenarcheal females, amenorrhea, i.e. the absence of at least 3
consecutive menstrual cycles (or 3 months).
Major Subtypes
Restricting type: Fasting, introverted, decreased risk of substance abuse,
family conflict is covert.
Bulimic type: Binge eating or purging, more volatile, family frequently

disengaged, prone to substance abuse.
Etiology
Unknown but probably includes genetic, environmental, psychologic and
cultural factors.
Clinical Features
Onset: Average age is 17 years. Very late-onset anorexia nervosa has a
poorer prognosis.
Onset is often associated with emotional stressors, particularly conflicts
with parents about independence and sexual conflicts.
Symptoms
Restricted food intake and maintaining diets of low-calorie foods and
exercises.
Purging: Self-induced vomiting or the use of laxatives, diuretics or
enemas.
Great concern with appearance.
Significant amount of time spent examining and denigrating self for
perceived signs of excess weight.
Denial of emaciated condition.
Excessive interest in food-related activities (other than eating).
Obsessive-compulsive symptoms and depressive symptoms.
Physical Examination
Signs of malnutrition: Emaciation, hypotension, bradycardia, lanugo (i.e.
fine hair on the trunk) and peripheral edema.
Signs of purging: Eroded dental enamel caused by emesis and scarred or
scratched hands from self-gagging to induce emesis. Parotid abscess and
dental caries-because of keeping food in mouth for long time.Evidence of medical conditions due to abnormal diets, starvation and
purging.
Course and Outcome
About 20–30% of restricting anorexics eventually develop binge eating

within the first 5 years of onset.
These illnesses have a chronicity of 5–10%.
Generally favorable outcome is achieved in 60–70% of patients at 5–7-
year outcome.
Long-term mortality rate of individuals hospitalized for anorexia nervosa
is 10%, due to the effects of starvation and purging or suicide.
Diagnostic Tests
Signs of malnutrition: Normochromic normocytic anemia, abnormal
electrolytes, elevated liver enzymes, low estrogen and testosterone levels.
Signs of purging: Metabolic alkalosis, hypochloremia and hypokalemia
due to emesis. Metabolic acidosis caused by laxative abuse.
Hormonal abnormalities:
–  Elevated growth hormone and plasma cortisol levels and reduced
gonadotropin levels (along with low FSH, LH, and estrogen).
–  T3 may be reduced, but T4 and TSH are often normal.
–  Increased corticotrophin CSF levels.
Treatment
Initial treatment should be correction of significant physiologic consequences of starvation with
hospitalization if necessary.
Behavioral therapy should be initiated, with rewards or punishments based on absolute weight, not
on eating behaviors.
Family therapy designed to reduce conflicts about control by parents.
Antidepressants when comorbid depression is present.
Bulimia Nervosa
Q. Write a short note on bulimia nervosa.
Diagnostic Criteria
Recurrent episodes of binge eating.
Absence of self-control over eating during binges.
Self-induced vomiting, purgation  or dieting after binges.
Weight maintained within normal range.
Major Subtypes

Purging type: Self-induced vomiting or use of laxatives, diuretics, or
enemas.
Nonpurging type: Use of other compensatory mechanisms, such as
fasting or excessive exercise.
Occurs at 1: 9 male-to-female ratio.
Etiology
Psychologic conflict regarding guilt, helplessness, self-control and body
image may be predisposing factor.
Onset: During late adolescence or early adulthood and often follows a
period of dieting.
Course: It may be chronic or intermittent.
Symptoms
Recurrent episodes of binge-eating.
Obsession with dieting but followed by binge-eating of high-calorie foods.
Binges are associated with emotional stress and followed by feelings of
guilt, self-recrimination and compensatory behaviors.
Recurrent, inappropriate compensatory behavior.
Self-castigation for mild weight gain or binges. Attempts to conceal binge-
eating or purging, or lies about behaviors.
Physical examination
Calluses on the dorsal surface of their hands (self-induced vomiting),
dental erosion and caries, esophageal erosion, lanugo hair, enlarged
parotid glands (chipmunk face secondary to increased amylase),
bradycardia, hypotension, and arrhythmias (secondary to hypokalemia).Associated problems: Depression, substance abuse and impulsivity
(Kleptomania).
Comorbid disorders: Borderline personality disorder is present in 50% of
patients.
Outcome
Prognosis of bulimia is better than anorexia.
Favorable prognostic indicators: Younger age at onset, higher social class,

and family history of alcohol abuse.
Diagnostic tests: Evidence of laxative or diuretic abuse.
Treatment
Antidepressants (SSRI).
Cognitive and behavioral therapy.
Psychodynamic psychotherapies are useful for borderline personality traits.
Differences between anorexia and bulimia are listed in Table 18.20.
Table 18.20: Differences between anorexia and bulimia.
Anorexia Bulimia
Denies abnormal eating behavior
Introverted
Turns away food in order to cope
Preoccupation with losing more and more
weightRecognizes abnormal eating behavior
Extroverted
Turns to food in order to cope
Preoccupation with attaining an ‘ideal’ but
often unrealistic weight
PUERPERAL DISORDERS
Q. Write a short note on puerperal psychosis.
Three common psychiatric disorders occur after childbirth.
1. Postpartum blues: These are characterized by irritability, labile mood and
tearfulness. Symptoms start soon after childbirth, and peak by about the
fourth day and then resolve.
2. Postpartum depression: It develops in 10–15% of women within a month
of delivery.
3. Puerperal psychosis: It is a rare disorder occurring in perhaps less than 1
or 2 per 1000 deliveries. It is more common in primiparous than
multiparous women. Symptoms generally appear abruptly within about 3
days to several weeks after delivery. Rarely serious complication, such as
a manic or depressive psychosis may develop. It may be associated with a
personal or familial history of bipolar disorder. Management depends on
the type of psychosis. Hospitalization is generally indicated. Most women
recover but have an increased (25%) risk of developing puerperal
psychosis in the next pregnancy, and a 50% lifetime risk.

EMERGING NEUROINFECTION
NIPAH VIRUS ENCEPHALITIS
Q. Write a short note on Nipah virus encephalitis.
Etiology
It is caused by a RNA virus of the family Paramyxoviridae, genus Henipavirus first identified
in 1999 outbreak, has caused annual outbreaks in Bangladesh, Malaysia and India. Recent Indian
outbreak has occurred in north Kerala in May 2018 has claimed lives.
Transmission
The Nipah virus is a zoonotic virus, which means it spreads to humans from either air or through
saliva. The fruit bats is the primary carriers of Nipah virus. The virus is usually transferred through
fluids from the bat. Close contacts with infected pigs and cattle can transmit the disease.
Clinical FeaturesThe incubation period ranges from 5 to 14 days. The illness presents with high grade fever and
headache, followed by drowsiness, disorientation and mental confusion. This can progress to
encephalitis with brain stem dysfunction and coma within 24-48 hours.Other neurological signs include seizures, myoclonus, meningismus, autonomic dysfunction and
cerebellar involvement. One third of patients develop pulmonary signs (ARDS), gastrointestinal
and renal involvement is seen in 5% of cases.
InvestigationsThrombocytopenia, leuckopenia and elevated transaminases is seen in majority of patients.
Diffuse bilateral lung infiltrates with basal atelectasis are seen in many cases.
CSF shows lymphocytic pleocytosis.
Serum/CSF immunoglobulin (Ig) M capture enzyme immunoassay (EIA) for detection of Nipaha
IgM antibodies and an indirect EIA for Nipah IgG antibodies are done for the specific diagnosis.
Treatment and Prognosis
Treatment is supportive only.
The disease has a fatality rate of around 40%.
Prevention
Stay away from pigs, bats or domestic animals in endemic areas.
Do not drink raw date, palm sap.
Avoid fruits that have fallen from trees on the ground.

Genetics

CHAPTER
19
COMMON GENETIC AND CHROMOSOMAL
DISORDERS
Q. Write short essay/note on various types (classification) of
chromosomal disorders/aberrations.
Classification of Chromosomal Disorders (Box 19.1)
Numerical Chromosomal Aberrations
Normal cells are diploid  containing 46 chromosomes, 22 pairs of autosomes
and 1 pair of sex chromosomes. The 23 chromosomes (22 autosomes and one
sex chromosome) constitute a haploid . Any exact multiple of the haploid
number is called euploid.
Types of numerical aberrations
Aneuploidy: It is defined as a chromosome number that is not a multiple
of 23 (the normal haploid number). It is caused by either loss or gain of one
or more chromosomes. Aneuploidy may result from nondisjunction or
anaphase lag.
Trisomy: Numerical abnormalities with the presence of one extra
chromosome are referred to as trisomy (2n + 1). It may involve either sex
chromosomes or autosomes. Examples: Down syndrome (patients have
three copies of chromosome 21, i.e. 47 XX, +21, hence Down syndrome is
often known as trisomy 21, Patau syndrome (trisomy 13; 47 XY, +13) and
Edward’s syndrome (trisomy 18; 47XY, +18).Monosomy: Numerical abnormalities with the absence or loss of one
chromosome (2n – 1) are referred to as monosomy. It may involve
autosomes or sex chromosomes. Monosomy of autosomes is almost

incompatible with survival. Example for monosomy of sex chromosomes
is Turner’s syndrome (45 XO) instead of normal XX (46 XX).
Polyploidy: It is chromosome number that is a multiple greater than two of
the haploid number (multiples of haploid number 23). Triploidy is three
times the haploid number (69), tetraploidy is four times the haploid number
(92). Polyploidy is incompatible with life and usually results in spontaneous
abortion.
Box 19.1: Types of chromosomal abnormality.
Numerical abnormalitiesAneuploidy
–   Monosomy
–   Trisomy
–   Tetrasomy
Polyploidy
–   Triploidy
–   Tetraploidy
Structural abnormalities
Translocations (exchange)
Deletions (loss)
Duplications
Insertions
Inversions
Nondisjunction
Ring chromosome
Isochromosomes
Mixoploidy
Mosaicism
Chimerism
Causes of numerical aberrations
Numerical aberrations can occur during meiosis and/or mitosis. These errors
are nondisjunction and anaphase lag.
Nondisjunction: It is failure of paired chromosomes to separate during
meiosis or mitosis. Meiotic nondisjunction is the most common cause.
Anaphase lag: Anaphase lag results in the loss of a chromosome during
meiosis or mitosis.
Structural Chromosomal Aberration (Box 19.1)

Q. Discuss chromosomal translocations with examples.
What is reciprocal translocation?
Write a note on Robertsonian translocation.
Structural chromosomal aberrations may occur either during mitosis or
meiosis.
Causes of structural alterations: It may occur spontaneously at a low rate
and is increased by exposure to environmental mutagens, such as chemicals
and ionizing radiation.
Types of Structural/Chromosomal Aberrations (Fig. 19.1)
Translocations: It is a structural alteration between two chromosomes in
which segment of one chromosome gets detached and is transferred to
another chromosome. There are two types of translocations.
1. Balanced reciprocal translocations: It is characterized by single breaks
in each of two chromosomes with exchange of genetic material distal to
the break. There is no loss of genetic material. A balanced reciprocal
translocation between the long arm of chromosome 5 and the short arm of
chromosome 10 would be written 46, XX, t (5; 10) (q31; p14).
–   Simple translocation: In this case, terminal segment of a chromosome
is integrated at one end of a non-homologous region. Simple
translocations are rather rare.
–   Shift: In shift, an intercalary segment of a chromosome is integrated
within a non-homologous chromosome.
2.  Robertsonian translocation/centric fusion:
–   This results from the breakage of two acrocentric chromosomes (i.e. chromosome 13, 14, 15,
21, 22) at or close to their centromeres and subsequent fusion of their long arms.
–   The short arms of each chromosome are lost, this being of no clinical importance as they
contain genes only for ribosomal RNA, for which there are multiple copies on various other
chromosomes.
–   The total chromosome number is reduced to 45.
–   The overall incidence of this translocation is 1 in 1000, the most common being 13q14q.
–   The major practical importance is that this can predispose to the birth of babies with Down
syndrome.Inversion: When a segment of chromosome is oriented in the reverse
direction, such segment said to be inverted and the phenomenon is termed as
inversion.

Isochromosome: They are formed due to faulty centromere division .
Normally, centromeres divide in a plane parallel to long axis of the
chromosome. If a centromere divides in a plane transverse to the long axis, it
results in pair of isochromosomes. One pair consists of two short arms and
the other of two long arms.Deletion: It is the loss of a part of a chromosome. It is of two types namely:
interstitial (middle) and terminal (rare).
Interstitial deletion: It occurs when there are two breaks within a
chromosome arm. This is followed by loss of the chromosomal material
between the breaks and fusion of the broken ends of the remaining portion
of the chromosome. It has to be specified in which region(s) and at what
bands the breaks have occurred. For example, 46, XY, del (16)
(p11.2p13.1) describes breakpoints in the short arm of chromosome 16 at
16p11.2 and 16p13.1 with loss of material between breaks.
Fig. 19.1:  Types of structural abnormalities of chromosome.
Terminal deletion: It results from a single break at the terminal part in a
chromosome arm, producing a shortened chromosome bearing a deletion
and a fragment with no centromere. The fragment is then lost at the next
cell division.
Ring chromosome: It is a special form of deletion . Ring chromosomes are
formed by a break at both the ends of a chromosome with fusion of the
damaged ends.

Insertion: It is a form of nonreciprocal translocation  in which a fragment
of chromosome is transferred and inserted into a nonhomologous
chromosome.
Mixoploidy
Mosaicism: Defined as the presence in an individual, or in a tissue, of two or
more cell lines that differ in their genetic constitution but are derived from a
single zygote, i.e. they have the same genetic origin. Seen Down (1–2%)
syndrome and Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
Chimerism: Defined as the presence in an individual, or in a tissue, of two or
more cell lines that are derived from more than one zygote, i.e. they have
different genetic origin.
DOWN SYNDROME (TRISOMY 21)
Q. Write short essay/note on Down syndrome and its clinical features.
The best known and most common chromosome related syndrome.
Formerly known as ‘Mongolism’.
It is the most common chromosomal disorder and is a leading cause of
mental retardation. The incidence of Down syndrome in newborns is
about 1 in 700 live births.
Etiology and Pathogenesis
Maternal age: It has a strong influence on the incidence of trisomy 21.
Children of older mothers have much greater risk of having Down
syndrome. The risk for mothers less than 25 years of age to have the
trisomy is about 1 in 1500 births. At 40 years of age, 1 in 100 births. At 45
years, 1 in 40 births.Other factors: Increased incidence may be associated with exposure of
mother to pesticides, electromagnetic fields, anesthetic drugs, alcohol and
caffeine.
Mechanism of trisomy 21: The three copies of chromosome 21 in somatic
cells cause Down syndrome. It may be due to:1. About 95% of these individuals have non-disjunction during the first
meiotic division of gametogenesis.
2. Robertsonian translocation of an extra-long arm of chromosome 21 to

another acrocentric chromosome causes about 5% of cases.
3. About 1% mosaicism having two different cell lines, one with normal
chromosomal constitution and the other with an extra chromosome 21.
Clinical Features (Fig. 19.2)
Craniofacial and Skeletal  Features:
Flat face and occiput, with a low-bridged nose, reduced interpupillary
distance and oblique palpebral fissures.
Epicanthal folds of the eyes impart an almond shape to the eyes and an
oriental appearance (obsolete term mongolism).
A speckled appearance of the iris (Brushfield spots), enlarged and
malformed ears.
A protruding furrowed tongue (macroglossia), which typically lacks a
central fissure and protrudes through an open mouth (scrotal tongue).
Broad, short neck, brachycephaly, simian crease-single palmar flexion
crease (50% cases), clinodactyly-incurved fifth finger with hypoplastic
mid phalanx (60%), short stature, hypotonia and space between the first
and second toes (sandal gap).
Brain: Mental retardation, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder, autism,
dementia, atlantoaxial dislocation.
Heart: Congenital cardiac anomalies are responsible for the majority of the
deaths in infancy and early childhood. The genetic band in 21q22 critical
region is considered responsible for the cardiac anomalies. Complete
atrioventricular septal defect (CAVSD)—37%, ventricular septal defect
(VSD)—31%, atrial septal defect (ASD)—15%, partial atrioventricular septal
defect (PAVSD)—6%, and patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)—4%.
Gastrointestinal tract: It may show esophageal/duodenal stenosis or atresia,
imperforate anus and Hirschsprung disease (megacolon).

Fig. 19.2:  Major clinical features of Down syndrome.
Reproductive system: Men are sterile because of spermatogenesis arrest.
Immune system: Affected children are susceptible to infections due to
defective immunity.
Endocrine system: Antithyroid antibodies may cause hypothyroidism Type
1 diabetes.
Hematologic disorders: They have increased risk of acute myeloid or
lymphoblastic leukemia. Polycythemia, macrocytosis, leukopenia, and
leukemia (acute megakaryoblastic, and acute lymphoblastic).
Other features: Refractive errors, strabismus, sensory neural hearing loss,
obesity, obstructive sleep apnea.
Down syndrome screens are mentioned in Box 19.2.
Box 19.2: Down syndrome screens.
Triple screen (75% sensitive):  Maternal serum alpha fetoprotein, estriol, and human chorionic
gonadotropin.
Quad screen (79% sensitive):  Maternal serum alpha-feto- protein, estriol, human chorionic
gonadotropin and high inhibin-alpha (INHA).
Nuchal translucency/free beta-hCG>/PAPPA screen (91% sensitive):  Ultrasound to measure
Nuchal Translucency in addition to the free Beta-hCG and PAPPA (pregnancy-associated plasma
protein A).

The full integrated test  (first-trimester nuchal translucency, and pregnancy-associated plasma
protein-A [PAPP-A] plus second-trimester quadruple markers) detects 85% of Down syndrome
fetuses.
KLINEFELTER’S SYNDROME
Q. Write short essay/note on Klinefelter’s syndrome.
It is an important genetic cause of male hypogonadism and is associated with
reduced spermatogenesis and male infertility.
Pathogenesis
Most patients with Klinefelter’s syndrome have one extra X-chromosome
(47, XXY karyotype). It is due to non-disjunction of X chromosome
during meiosis.
A minority is mosaic (e.g. 46, XY/47, XXY) or has more than two X-
chromosomes (e.g. 48, XXXY) and one or more Y- chromosomes.
Clinical Features (Fig. 19.3)
Klinefelter’s syndrome is usually diagnosed after puberty.
Most patients are tall and thin  with relatively long legs (eunuchoid body
habitus). Mental retardation is uncommon, although average IQ is
reduced.
At puberty, testes and penis remain small with lack of secondary male
characteristics.
–   Female characteristics develop which include a high-pitched/deep
voice, gynecomastia, and a female pattern of pubic hair. Sparse
facial, body and sexual hair.
–   Azoospermia results in infertility.
–   All of these changes are due to hypogonadism and reduced levels of
testosterone.
Diagnosis
Buccal smear for Barr body: Extra X-chromosome may be seen as a
Barr body on buccal smears.
Leukocytes-nuclear sexing: Neutrophils in the peripheral smear may
also be examined for nuclear sexing. In a normal female (XX), the
neutrophils in a peripheral smear show a drumstick which is counterpart of

Barr body in buccal smear. One extra drumstick is found in males with
Klinefelter’s syndrome (XXY).
Chromosomal analysis
Hormonal status:
–   Follicle-stimulating hormone and LH are remarkably high.
–   Testosterone: Low to low-normal level.
–   The ratio of estrogens and testosterone determines the degree of
feminization.
Complications of Klinefelter’s syndrome are listed in Box 19.3.
Fig. 19.3:  Features of Klinefelter’s syndrome.
Management

Testosterone:  It should be started at puberty (round age 12 years) and increasing its dosage
sufficient to maintain serum concentrations of testosterone, estradiol, FSH and LH appropriate to
the age. It promotes normal body proportions and development of normal secondary sex
characteristics. However, it does not affect infertility, gynecomastia and atrophy of testis. It
decreases the long-term complications such as breast cancer, autoimmune disease and
osteoporosis.Speech therapy.
Physiotherapy for hypotonia or delayed motor skills.
Box 19.3: Complications of Klinefelter’s syndrome.
Increased risk of breast carcinoma in 47, XXY (relative risk exceeding 200 times).
Endocrine complications:  Diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism and hypoparathyroidism.
Autoimmune diseases:  Systemic lupus erythematosus, Sjögren’s syndrome and rheumatoid
arthritis.
Development of varicose veins.
Decreased bone density.
TURNER’S SYNDROME
Q. Write short essay/note on Turner’s syndrome.
Turner’s syndrome is a sex chromosomal abnormality. Turner’s syndrome
is characterized by a spectrum of abnormalities due to complete or
partial monosomy of the X-chromosome in a phenotypic female.
It is characterized by hypogonadism and is the most common sex
chromosome abnormality in females.
Karyotypic Abnormalities
Missing of an entire X-chromosome: This resulting in a 45, X karyotype
Due to non-disjunction of X-chromosomes during meiosis. Genetic
constitution hence becomes 45 XO.
Structural abnormalities of the X-chromosomes: These includes
isochromosome of the long arm, translocations, ring chromosome, and
deletions.Mosaics: The mosaic patients have combination of a 45, X cell population
along with one or more karyotypically normal or abnormal cell types.
Examples: (1) 45, X/46, XX; (2) 45, X/46, XY. It is known as mosaic
Turner’s syndrome.
Clinical Features (Fig. 19.4)

Turner’s syndrome is usually not discovered before puberty. It presents with
failure to develop normal secondary sex characteristics. Important
diagnostic features are:
Fig. 19.4:  Features of Turner’s syndrome.
Adult women  with short stature (less than 5 feet tall) primary
amenorrhea and sterility. Raised follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH)
Other features are:
–   Webbed neck , and low posterior hairline, wide/increased carrying
angle at the elbows (cubitus valgus), Madelung deformity of the
forearm and wrist, broad chest (shield chest) with widely spaced
nipples and hyperconvex fingernails.
–   The genitalia remain infantile, breast development is inadequate,

and there is little pubic hair. The ovaries are converted to fibrous
streaks. Lack of secondary sexual characteristics.
–   Pigmented nevi become prominent as the age advances.
–   Cardiovascular anomalies such as congenital heart disease
particularly coarctation of the aorta or bicuspid aortic valve may be
present. Aortic dissection or rupture is a common cause of death. The
severely affected may present during infancy with peripheral edema
(of the dorsum of the hand and foot) due to lymph stasis. Systemic
hypertension is seen in 30% of cases. No mental retardation.
Box 19.4: Causes of mental retardation.
Genetic and chromosomal disorders, e.g. Down syndrome and fragile X syndrome
CNS lesions:
–   Hydrocephalus
–   Microcephaly
–   Cerebral palsy
–   Post-traumatic, postmeningitic and postencephalitic states
–   Birth trauma, kernicterusEnvironmental causes:
–   Associated intrauterine infections:  Congenital infections, congenital rubella syndrome,
cytomegalovirus and other viruses
–   Intrauterine exposure to toxins and other insults:  Alcohol, hypoxia or malnutrition
–   Postnatal causes:  Exposure to toxins, infection and heavy metals
Metabolic disease, e.g. cretinism, phenylketonuria, mucopolysaccharides, inborn errors of
metabolism (e.g. Glycogen storage diseases)
MENTAL RETARDATION/INSUFFICIENCY
Q. Write short note on mental retardation and its causes.
Definition: Mental retardation is defined statistically as tested cognitive
performance that is two standard deviation below the mean of the general
population (roughly below the 3rd percentile).
Causes of Mental Retardation
See Box 19.4.
Assessment of Degree of Mental Retardation (Table 19.1)

Table 19.1: Mental retardation by IQ range.
Severity of mental retardation IQ Range
Mild 50–55 to 70
Moderate 35–40 to 50–55
Severe 20–25 to 35–40
Profound Below 20–25
It is assessed by IQ (Intelligence quotient) testing.
INHERITANCE
Q. Write short note on Mendelian disorders.
Single-Gene or Monogenic Disorders/Mendelian Disorders
Genetic disorders that result from mutations in single genes are called as
single gene or monogenic (Mendelian) disorders. This type of inheritance is
called Mendelian inheritance.
Q. Write short note on autosomal dominant inheritance and diseases
transmitted by autosomal dominant method.
Autosomal Dominant Pattern of Inheritance
It is determined by the presence of one abnormal gene on one of the
autosomes (chromosomes 1–22)
Disease is in heterozygotes (These disorders generally manifest when one
of the two homologous (paired) chromosomes carries a mutant gene).
The general characteristics of autosomal dominant inheritance:
Location of mutant gene: These are found on autosomes.
Required number of defective genes: Only one copy of the mutant
(abnormal) gene is required for effects.
The disorder is transmitted in a vertical (parent to child) pattern,
appearing in multiple generations
Sex affected: Males and females are equally affected.
Pattern of inheritance: Every affected individual has one affected

parent.
Unaffected individuals (family members who do not manifest the trait) do
not pass the disorder to their children.
Risks of transmission  (Figs. 19.5A to C) to children (offspring):
Affected males and females have an equal risk of passing on the disorder
to children.
Figs. 19.5A to C:  Pedigree illustrating autosomal dominant transmission. (A and B) One parent is
affected; (C) Both parents are affected. Note that both males and females are affected equally.
–   When only one parent is affected and other is normal: An affected
individual has a 50% (1 in 2) chance of passing on the deleterious
genes for each pregnancy, and therefore of having a child affected by
the disorder. This is called as the recurrence risk  for the disorder.
–   When both parents are affected: It has 75% chance of children being
affected and a 25% chance to be normal.
Finding of male-to-male transmission  essentially confirms autosomal
dominant inheritance.
Examples of autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive disorders are
listed in Table 19.2.
Additional properties:
–   Penetrance: Penetrance is the percentage of individuals with the
mutation who present with clinical symptoms.
◆   With complete penetrance, all individuals show clinical
symptoms.
◆   With incomplete penetrance or reduced penetrance, only some
individuals show disease and in nonpenetrance (gene is not

expressed at all) individuals may not show any symptoms.
◆   For example, retinoblastoma: AD malignant eye tumor is a good
example of reduced penetrance. About 10% of the obligate carriers
of the RB susceptibility gene (affected parent and affected child or
children) do not have the disease.
–   Variable expressivity: It refers to variations in expression
(qualitatively or quantitatively) of severity of the same disorder among
individuals (even within the same family), who have the abnormal
gene. In some, the disorder may be mild and in others it may show
significant symptoms. Penetrance may be complete, but severity of
disease can vary greatly. Well-studied example is neurofibromatosis
type 1, or von Recklinghausen disease. Q. Write short note on autosomal recessive inheritance and examples of
transmitted by autosomal recessive mode.
Autosomal Recessive Pattern of Inheritance
Autosomal recessive inheritance involves mutations in both copies of a
gene.
These disorders generally manifest when both the homologous
chromosomes carry mutant genes (homozygous state).
The general features of these disorders are:
Location of mutant gene: These genes are located on autosomes.
Required number of defective gene: Symptoms of the disease appear
only when an individual has two copies of the mutant gene. The
heterozygote state is called as a carrier. In the carrier state, the product of
the normal gene is able to compensate for the mutant allele and is hence
the patients are asymptomatic.Horizontal transmission: The observation of multiple affected members
of kindred in the same generation, but no affected family members in
other generations.Pattern of inheritance: For a child to be at risk, both parents must be
having at least one copy of the mutant gene. Almost all inborn errors of
metabolism are autosomal recessive disorders.
Sex affected: Males and females being equally affected, though some
traits exhibit different expression in males and females (ovarian cancer,

hypospadias).
Consanguineous marriage: It is common predisposing factor.
Recurrence risk of 25% for parents with a previous affected child.
Risks of transmission (Figs. 19.6A to E) to children (offspring):
Figs. 19.6A to E:  Pedigree illustrating mechanism of autosomal recessive transmission. (A) Both
parents are unaffected heterozygotes; (B and C) One parent is sufferer (homozygous) and other is
normal; (D) One parent is sufferer and other is unaffected heterozygote; (E) One parent is normal
and other is an unaffected heterozygote.
–   When both parents are heterozygous for the condition : Heterozygous
parents carry one mutated gene and normal gene. When two
heterozygotes mate, 25% of the children will be affected, 50% will be
unaffected heterozygotes and 25% will be normal.
–   When one parent is affected and the other is normal : All the children
will be unaffected heterozygote.
–   When one parent is affected and the other is heterozygote: The
chances are that 50% of children will be unaffected heterozygote and
50% homozygous affected.
–   When one parent is normal and the other is heterozygote: This may
result in 50% unaffected heterozygote carriers and 50% normal
children.If the frequency of an autosomal recessive disease is known, then
frequency of the heterozygote or carrier state can be calculated from the

Hardy-Weinberg formula: p2 + 2pq + q2 = 1, where p is the frequency of
one of a pair of alleles and q is the frequency of the other.
Examples of autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive disorders are listed
in Table 19.2.
Table 19.2: Examples of autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive
disorders.
System Autosomal dominant
disorderAutosomal recessive disorder
Nervous Huntington disease
Neurofibromatosis
Tuberous sclerosisNeurogenic muscular atrophies
Friedreich’s ataxia
Spinal muscular atrophy
Skeletal Marfan syndrome
Achondroplasia
Noonan syndromeAlkaptonuria
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
Metabolic Familial
hypercholesterolemia
Intermittent porphyriaCystic fibrosis, phenylketonuria,
lysosomal storage diseases,
galactosemia, hemochromatosis,
glycogen storage diseases
Hematopoietic Hereditary spherocytosis
von Willebrand diseaseSickle cell anemia, thalassemia
Renal Polycystic kidney disease Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
Gastrointestinal Familial polyposis coli Wilson’s disease
X-Linked Pattern of Inheritance
Q. Write short note on X-linked inheritance and examples of diseases
transmitted by X-linked method.
Almost all sex-linked Mendelian disorders are X-linked. Males with
mutations affecting the Y-linked genes are usually infertile.
Expression of an X-linked disorder is different in males and females.
Though X-linked disorders may be inherited either as dominant or recessive,
almost all X-linked disorders have recessive pattern of inheritance.
Characteristics of X-linked inheritance:
–   Males are more commonly and more severely affected than females.
–   Female carriers are generally unaffected, or if affected, they are
affected more mildly than males.
–   Affected males will have only carrier daughters.

Figs. 19.7A to D: Mode of X-linked recessive transmission. Note the absence of male-to-male
transmission. (A) Male is normal and female is a carrier; (B) Male is sufferer and female is
normal; (C) Male is a sufferer and female is a carrier; (D) Male is normal and female is a
sufferer.
–   Carrier women have a 25% risk for having an affected son, a 25% risk
for a carrier daughter, and a 50% chance for a child that does not
inherit the mutated X-linked gene.
X-linked Recessive Traits
Location of mutant gene: Mutant gene is on the X chromosome and there
is no male-to-male transmission.
Required number of defective gene: One copy of mutant gene is
required for the manifestation of disease in males, but two copies of the
mutant gene are needed in females.Sex affected: Males are more frequently affected and manifest disease
than females; daughters of affected male are all asymptomatic carriers. In
many diseases, males do not survive.Pattern of inheritance (Figs. 19.7A to D): Transmission is through
female carrier (heterozygous). Mothers are always carriers and all their
sons are affected. The disease is never passed from father to son.Very rarely, a female can develop the disease due to:
–   Female having Turner’s syndrome (XO) with only one X-
chromosome.
–   Presence of testicular feminization syndrome.

–   Father with mutation in X-chromosome and a carrier female.
–   Affected father and carrier mother.
–   Inactivation of normal X-chromosome in most cells (Lyon hypothesis).
Examples of X-linked recessive disorders are shown in Table 19.3.
Table 19.3:  Examples of X-linked recessive disorders.
System Related X-linked recessive disease
Musculoskeletal Duchenne muscular dystrophy
Blood Hemophilia A and B
Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency
Immune Agammaglobulinemia
Metabolic Diabetes insipidus
Nervous Fragile-X syndrome
X-linked Dominant Conditions
Disorders are relatively uncommon (very rare). For example, vitamin D
resistance rickets, Alport’s syndrome
Location of mutant gene: It is located on the X-chromosome and there is
no transmission from affected male to son. This is because the son’s
‘normal’ X-chromosome is from mother.Required number of defective gene: One copy of mutant gene is
required for its effect.
–   Often lethal in males and so may be transmitted only in the females
line.
–   Often lethal in affected males and they have affected mothers.
–   There is no carrier state as the disease will manifest, even if single
chromosome has abnormal gene.
–   These are more frequent in females than in males.
Risks of transmission to children (offspring) (Figs. 19.8A to C):

Figs. 19.8A to C: X-linked dominant transmission. Only females are affected. Usually males who
inherit the mutant allele die in utero . (A) Normal male and female affected (sufferer); (B) Affected
male and normal female; (C) Both male and female are affected.
–   When female is affected and the male is normal: They transmit the
disorder to 50% of their sons and 50% of their daughters.
–   When male is affected and the female is normal: They transmit to all
their daughters but none to their sons. All daughters of an affected
father develop disease because the daughter gets abnormal X from the
father.
–   When both male and female are affected: All the females will be
affected and half of males will be affected.
Y-linked diseases
Characterized by:
Only males are affected.
An affected male transmits the disorder to all his sons but not to his
daughters.
Most Y-linked genes are related to male sex determination and
reproduction, and are associated with infertility. Therefore, it is rare to see
familial transmission of a Y-linked disorder.For example, Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis, Langer mesomelic dwarfism.
Digenic inheritance
Digenic inheritance explains the occurrence of retinitis pigmentosa (RP)

in children of parents who each carry a different RP-associated gene.
Both parents have normal vision, but the offspring who were double
heterozygotes developed RP.
Digenic pedigrees exhibit characteristics of both autosomal dominant
(vertical transmission) and autosomal recessive inheritance (1 in 4
recurrence risk).
Mitochondrial inheritance
An individual’s mitochondrial genome is entirely derived from the mother.
Examples include MELAS (m yopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis,
and stroke-like episodes), MERRF  (myoclonic epilepsy associated with
ragged red fibers), and Kearns-Sayre syndrome (ophthalmoplegia,
pigmentary retinopathy, and cardiomyopathy).
Triplet Repeat Expansion Disorders
Caused by expansion in the number of three-base-pair repeats.
An error in replication can result in expansion of that number, referred to
as premutation .
There is a clinical correlation to the size of the expansion, with a greater
expansion causing more severe and/or earlier age of onset for the disease.
The observation of increasing severity of disease and early age of onset in
subsequent generations is termed genetic anticipation and is a defining
characteristic of triplet repeat expansion disorders.Examples of triplet repeat expansion disorders are listed in Table 19.4.
Table 19.4: Examples of triplet repeat expansion disorders.
Disease Triplet repeated Disease Triplet repeated
Huntington CAG Fragile X syndrome
(FRAXA)CGG
Myotonic dystrophy CTG FXTAS (Fragile X-
associated
tremor/ataxia
syndrome)CGG
X-linked spinal and
bulbar muscular
atrophyCAG Machado-Joseph
disease (MJD)CAG
Spinocerebellar ataxia
type ICAG Friedreich’s ataxia GAA

Simple Tandem Repeat Mutation
Variations in the length of simple tandem repeats of DNA are thought to
arise as the result of slippage of DNA during meiosis and are termed
microsatellite (small) or minisatellite (larger) repeats.
These repeats are unstable and can expand or contract in different
generations. This instability is related to the size of the original repeat, in
that longer repeats tend to be more unstable.For example, Huntington disease, sickle cell anemia, MJD, Fragile X,
myotonic dystrophy.
Genetic Imprinting
The two copies of most genes are functionally equivalent. In a small
number, only one of the pair is transcribed.
The active gene will be that inherited from a specific parent, and the other
copy is silenced associated with methylation of DNA (epigenetic
modification  of a gene not due to a DNA mutation).
Conditions Associated with Genetic ImprintingPrader-Willi syndrome with paternal chromosome deletion.
Angelman syndrome with maternal chromosome deletion.
Uniparental disomy (UPD): Rare occurrence of a child inheriting both
copies of a chromosome from the same parent is another genetic
mechanism that can cause Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes.Other conditions associated with imprinting are Beckwith-Wiedemann
syndrome and Russell-Silver syndrome, Duchenne muscular dystrophy
(DMD) in females and epigenetic silencing in oncogenesis, e.g. colon
cancer 3p21 MLH1.
PleiotropyGenes that exert effects on multiple aspects of physiology or anatomy are
pleiotropic.
For example: Marfan syndrome (affects eye, the skeleton and the
cardiovascular system), cystic fibrosis (affects sweat glands, lungs,
pancreas, and genitourinary system), osteogenesis imperfecta: Affects
bones, teeth and sclera, sickle cell anemia (affects RBCs, bone and
spleen).

Locus Heterogeneity
Disease that can be caused by mutations at different loci in different
families is said to exhibit locus heterogeneity.
Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI): Subunits of procollagen triple helix are
encoded by two genes, one on chromosome 17 and the other on
chromosome 7. Mutation in either of these genes can alter the structure of
the collagen molecules and lead to OI, disease states are often
indistinguishable.
PolymorphismsA polymorphism is defined as one that exists with a population frequency
of > 1%.
Most common polymorphisms are neutral but some cause subtle changes
in gene expression or in protein structure and function. For example,
cystic fibrosis, hemochromatosis, alpha 1 AT deficiency, spinomuscular
dystrophy.
GENE THERAPY
Q. Write short note on gene therapy.
Definition: Gene therapy is the insertion of genes into an
individual’s cells and tissues to treat a disease, such as a hereditary disease in
which a deleterious mutant allele is replaced with a functional one.
To be effective, the gene therapy requires methods that ensure the safe,
efficient and stable introduction of genes into human cells. Gene therapy uses
genes to treat or prevent disease. First done on September 14, 1990 for
Ashanthi DeSilva suffering from SCID where the missing gene introduced
through processed WBC.
Approaches for Correcting Faulty GenesA normal gene may be inserted into a nonspecific location to replace a
nonfunctional gene.
An abnormal gene could be swapped through homologous recombination.
Repair through selective reverse mutation.
The regulation of a particular gene could be altered.

Types of Gene Therapy
The cells in the body can be divided into two main categories somatic cells
and germ cells.
Somatic cell therapy: It involves delivering a correcting gene to somatic
cells in the affected tissues. Somatic cells are the non-reproductive cells
and its therapeutic effect ends with the individual receiving it and is not
passed on to the future generations. Hence, somatic cell therapy is
considered as a safer approach. This type of gene therapy is used for
disorders such as cystic fibrosis, muscular dystrophy, cancers and certain
infectious diseases.Germ cell therapy: In germ cell therapy, germ cells (egg or sperms) are
used and it results in permanent changes that are passed on to the future
generations. Thus it offers the possibility of permanently eliminating some
diseases from a particular family and ultimately from the population. It is
not accepted at present due to ethical reasons.
Arguments for Germline Gene TherapyMedical utility: The potential of a true ‘cure’
Medical necessity: May be only way to cure some diseases
Prophylactic efficacy: Better to prevent a disease rather than to treat
pathology
Parental autonomy: Parents can make choices about what is best for their
children
Easier, more effective than somatic gene therapy
Eradication of disease in future generations
Part of being human: Supporting human improvement.
Forms of Genetic Therapy
There are two basic forms of somatic gene therapy: (i) ex vivo and (ii) in vivo.
Ex vivo: Transfer of gene in cultured cells and finally these cultured cells
are reintroduced into patients.
In vivo: Delivery of genes into cells of particular tissues. The gene may be
transferred by a viral vector or by a nonviral method. This is most often
used technique.
Vectors in Gene Therapy

The most common form of gene therapy involves insertion of normal gene
into the genome with the help of certain carriers called vectors. These vectors
can be divided into two main types, viral and nonviral vectors.
Viral vectors: The various viruses include retroviruses, adenoviruses,
adenoassociated viruses and herpes simplex viruses.
Nonviral methods: Gene delivery can also be carried by nonviral methods.
These have some advantages. They do not elicit an immune response, safer
and simpler to use and allow large-scale production. The nonviral methods
include: direct inoculation/naked DNA, liposomal-mediated DNA transfer,
gene gun method and dendrimers.
Problems/Limitations of Gene TherapyShort-lived nature of gene therapy. Hence, patients will have to undergo
multiple rounds of gene therapy.
Immune response: Gene therapy may stimulate the immune response
against introduced gene and reduce the effectiveness of gene therapy.
Problems with viral vectors: Viral vectors may sometimes cause
potential problems to the patient like: toxicity and inflammatory
responses. In addition, the viral vector, once inside the patient, may
recover its ability to cause disease.Multifactorial disorders: Genetic disorders due to single gene mutations
are usually show best response to gene therapy. Unfortunately, some the
most commonly occurring disorders (e.g. atherosclerosis, hypertension,
diabetes, Alzheimer’s disease and rheumatoid arthritis) are multifactorial
and are difficult to treat effectively using gene therapy.Risk of inducing a tumor (insertional mutagenesis): If the gene is
integrated in the wrong place in the genome (e.g. in a tumor suppressor
gene), it could induce a tumor.Risk of death: Deaths have occurred due to gene therapy.
Therapeutic Applications (Table 19.5)
Not been approved for clinical use.
Trials are being conducted on using gene therapy in the treatment of
various genetic disorders, cancers, infectious diseases and other diseases
such as Alzheimer’s disease and atherosclerosis.

Table 19.5: Gene therapy in medicine.
Cancers Parkinson disease
Vascular diseases Metastatic melanoma
Thalassemia Hemophilia
Cystic fibrosis Infectious diseases
SCID Muscular dystrophy
Sickle-cell anemia Leber’s congenital amaurosis
HUMAN GENOME PROJECT
Q. Write short note on human genome and human genome project.
Introduction
Genome: A genome  is the entire DNA in an organism, including its genes.
The human genome is estimated to contain 30,000–40,000 genes that are
divided among the 23 chromosomes. The 23 different chromosomes 22 are
autosomes (numbered 1–22) and 1 pair sex chromosomes (X and Y). The
functions of over 50% of discovered gene is not known.
Gene mapping: It is the process of identifying and sequencing each and
every human gene of the human genome. The map of the human genome
provides a picture of locations, and structures of genes.Genetic mapping (linkage analysis):  A genetic map describes the order of
genes and defines the position of a gene relative to other loci on the same
chromosome.
Physical Mapping: Physical mapping indicates the position of genes in a
chromosome, which is determined by physical distances (measured in base
pairs) between genes.
Organism and their genomic size are presented in Table 19.6.
Table 19.6: Organism and their genomic size.
Organism Genomic size in base pairs
Epstein–Barr virus0.172 × 106
Bacteria (E. coli)4.6 × 106
Yeast12.1 × 106
Nematode worm (C. elegans)95.5 × 106

Fruit fly180 × 106
Human3200 × 106
The human genome project (HGP)  is an international scientific research
project to understand the genomes of humans and other organisms. It was
started in 1990 under Dr James D Watson  at the United States National
Institute of Health. In addition to the United States, the international
consortium comprised geneticists in the United Kingdom, France, Germany,
Japan, China and India.
Goals of Human Genome ProjectUnderstand and identify all genes of the human genome.
Determine the human DNA sequence: The primary focus of the HGP
was to obtain DNA sequence for the entire human genome. HGP goal was
to map all genes of the human genome and also to map human inherited
diseases. Thus, it includes creation of genetic maps, development of
physical maps, and determination of the complete human DNA sequence.Develop software for large-scale DNA analysis, store all found
information in databases and improve tools for data analysis.
Transfer-related technologies to the private sector
Collect and distribute data
Study the ethical, legal, and social issues (ELSI) of genetic research
that may arise from the project.
Components involved in human genome are diagrammatically shown in
Figure 19.9.

Fig. 19.9:  Components of human genome.
All humans have unique gene sequences. Therefore, the data published by
the HGP does not represent the exact sequence of each and every individual’s
genome. It is the combined genome of a small number of anonymous donors.
The HGP genome is a scaffold for future work in identifying differences
among individuals.
Uses of Human Genome Project
Human genome project will shed light on a wide range of basic questions, to
identify the number of genes in humans, how cells work, how living things
evolved, how single cells develop into complex creatures, and what exactly
happens when we become ill. The understanding of the genome provides
clues for1. Etiology of cancers, Alzheimer’s disease, etc.
2. Defining the pathogenesis of a disease and to study the disease processes
at molecular level.
3. Susceptibility of an individual to a variety of illnesses, e.g. carcinoma
breast, disorders of hemostasis, liver diseases, cystic fibrosis, etc.
4. Precise new ways to prevent a number of diseases that affects the human
beings.
5. To diagnose and treat disease. Target genes for treatment and
management of diseases.

6. Human development and anthropology: Analysis of similarities between
DNA sequences from different organisms helps to study evolution .
7. Researcher: By visiting the human genome database on the Worldwide
Web, researcher can examine what other scientists have written about the
gene.
Ethical Issues (Box 19.5)
HGP helps to identify disease-causing genes, thereby can lead to
improvements in diagnosis, treatment, and prevention. It is estimated that
most individuals harbor several serious recessive genes. However,
completion of the human genome sequence and determination of the
association of genetic defects with disease has raised many new issues with
implications for the individual and mankind.
Box 19.5: Ethical issues in human genome project (HGP).Fairness in the use of genetic information
Privacy and confidentiality
Psychological impact and stigmatization
Genetic testing
Reproductive issues
Education, standards, and quality control
Commercialization
Conceptual and philosophical implications.
MISCELLANEOUS
Q. Write short note on proteomics/proteome.
Proteome
The term proteome is derived from proteins expressed by a genome. It
refers to all the proteins produced by an organism and proteins are the
functional units. Thus, proteome represents full sets of proteins produced
by the body and is similar to the term genome for the entire set of genes.
Human body contains more than 2 million different proteins, each having
different functions.Proteomics is the study of the proteome (full set/entire library of proteins
in a cell type or tissue) and its variation/relationship to disease.

Amino acids are the basic units of proteins and are very small. Each amino
acid consists of atoms ranging from 7 to 24 and cannot be identified under
even the powerful microscopes.
Uses: Proteomic technologies play an important role in drug discovery,
diagnostics and molecular medicine. When a defective protein causing
particular diseases are founded, new drugs can be developed to either alter
the shape of a defective protein or mimic a missing one.
Epigenetics
Q. Write a short note on epigenetics.
Definition: Epigenetics is a reversible, heritable change/alteration in gene
expression which occurs without mutation and is unrelated to gene nucleotide
sequence. Epigenomics is the study of epigenetics. Epigenetic alterations are
associated with cancers and other diseases. Unlike genetic changes in cancer,
epigenetic changes are reversible.In normal cells, the majority of the genome is not expressed. Some
portions of the genome are silenced by DNA methylation and histone
modifications.In some tumors, epigenetic changes may directly contribute to tumor
development. Epigenetic changes involve post-translational modifications
of histones and DNA methylation, both of which affect gene expression.In cancer cells, there is global DNA hypomethylation and selective
promoter-localized hypermethylation.
Examples
1. Silencing genes by hypermethylation  (epigenetic mechanism)
a. Tumor suppressor genes: Examples: p53 can be indirectly inactivated
through silencing ARF by hypermethylation. This hypermethylated
ARF prevents inhibition of the MDM2 oncogenic protein and the
enhancement of p53 degradation; BRCA1 in breast cancer and VHL in
renal cell carcinomas.
b. DNA repair genes: Mismatch-repair gene MLH1 in colorectal cancer.2. Hypomethylation: The genome of cancer cells may also undergo global
DNA hypomethylation. Gene hypomethylation can cause chromosomal
instability, derepression of growth regulatory genes, and overexpression of
antiapoptotic genes, which may induce tumors.

Clinical Applications
Use of epigenetic tumor markers
Use of epigenetic therapeutic agents (e.g. azacitidine, decitabine,
vorinostat) in the treatment of myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and
lymphoma.
Pharmacogenomics
Q. Write short note on pharmacogenomics and pharmacogenetics.
Pharmacogenetics or pharmacogenomics is the study of interaction
between genetics and therapeutic drugs.
Pharmacogenetics is the study of unexpected drug response result and to
look for a genetic cause.
Pharmacogenomics is the study of identifying genetic differences within a
population that explain certain observed responses to a drug or
susceptibility to a health problem.
Applications
To develop a drug that has maximum therapeutic effect and produces least
damage to adjacent healthy cells.
To prescribe drugs depending on the patient’s genetic profile so as to
reduce the adverse reactions.
To determine the accurate dosage.
To determine drug responses in the treatment of cardiac, respiratory and
psychiatric conditions.
To develop targeted therapy (e.g. psychiatry, dementia, cardiac conditions)
and in the treatment of breast cancer (testing for HER2 receptor for
response to trastuzumab) and other cancers (e.g. testing for BCR-ABL for
response to imatinib in CML; testing for epidermal growth factor receptor
response to gefitinib and erlotinib in lung cancer).
Prevention of Genetic Disease
Q. Write short note on prevention of genetic disease.
Preimplantation diagnosis: Before conception (i.e. when one or two of
the parents are carriers of a certain trait). The human embryos can be
produced using assisted reproductive techniques such as in-vitro

fertilization (IVF). In vitro fertilization involves removing egg cells from a
woman’s ovaries and fertilizing them with sperms outside the body and
culture to blastomere stage. One cell is then studied by PCR or gene probe
technique to detect genetic markers of diseases.
Prenatal testing: These tests are performed on fetus or embryo before it is
born to detect changes in a fetus’s genes or chromosomes. These include:
amniocentesis, biochemical, cytogenetic and DNA studies and
transcervical chorionic villous biopsy (chorionic villous sampling, CVS).Newborn or neonatal, childhood screening
Screening test in adolescence and adulthood
Genetic counseling.
List of chromosomal disorders are presented in Table 19.7.
Table 19.7: List of chromosomal disorders.
Chromosome Abnormality Disease Association
X XO Turner’s Syndrome
Y XXY Klinefelter syndrome
Y XYY Double Y syndrome
Y XXX Trisomy X syndrome
Y Xp21 deletion Duchenne’s/Becker syndrome congenital
adrenal hypoplasia, chronic granulomatus
disease
1 1p (somatic) monosomy trisomy Neuroblastoma
2 Monosomy trisomy 2q Growth rerdation, developmental and mental
delay, and minor physical abnormalities
3 Monosomy trisomy (somatic) Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma
4 Monosomy trisomy (somatic) Acute nonlymphocytic leukemia (ANLL)
5 5p deletion Cri du chat; Lejeune syndrome
5 5q (somatic) monosomy trisomy Myelodysplastic syndrome
6 Monosomy trisomy (somatic) Clear-cell sarcoma
7 7q 11.23 deletion William’s syndrome
8 Monosomy trisomy Myelodysplastic syndrome; Warkany
syndrome; chronic myelogenous leukemia
9 Trisomy Complete trisomy 9 syndrome: mosaic trisomy
9 syndrome
10 Monosomy trisomy (somatic) ALL or ANLL
11 11p- Aniridia: Wilms tumor

11 Monosomy (somatic) trisomy Myeloid lineages affected (ANLL, MDS)
12 Monosomy trisomy (somatic) CLL, Juvenile granulosa cell tumor (JGCT)
13 13q14 deletion Retinoblastoma
13 Monosomy trisomy Patau’s syndrome
14 Monosomy trisomy (somatic) Myeloid disorders (MDS, ANLL, atypical
CML)
15 15q11-q13 deletion monosomy Prader-Wili, Angelman’s syndrome
15 Trisomy (somatic) Myeloid and lymphoid lineages affected, e.g.
MDS, ANLL, ALL, CLL
16 16q13.3 deletion monosomy trisomy
(somatic)Rubinstein-Taybi, papillary renal cell
carcinomas (malignant)
17 17p-(somatic) 17p syndrome in myeloid malignancies
17 Monosomy trisomy (somatic) Renal cortical adenomas
18 Monosomy trisomy Edwards syndrome
19 Trisomy, deletion
20 20p- Trisomy 20p syndrome
20 20q- MDS, ANLL, polycythemia vera, chronic
neutrophilic leukemia
20 Monosomy trisomy (somatic) Papillary renal cell carcinomas (malignant)
21 Monosomy trisomy Down’s syndrome
22 22q11.2 deletion DiGeorge’s syndrome, velocardiofacial
syndrome, conotruncal anomaly face
syndrome, CML-reciprocal translocation 9:22
Opitz G/BBB syndrome, Caylor cardiofacial
syndrome
22 Monosomy trisomy Complete trisomy 22 syndrome
POLYMERASE CHAIN REACTION AND ITS
APPLICATIONSQ. Write short essay/note on polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
Kary Mullis in 1983 discovered polymerase chain reaction (PCR). PCR is a
method employed to amplify minute amount of DNA within a few hours.
This technique consists of selective amplification of specific target nucleic
acid sequences from total DNA by using primers specific for the target region
to be amplified.
Basic StepsDenaturation: In this step, the double-stranded template DNA is

denatured by heat (temperature of around 92–96 °C) into single-stranded
DNA.
Annealing: DNA primers of interest are added along with the four basic
deoxynucleotides and the solution is cooled. It causes binding of DNA
probes to their specific target regions of the single-stranded DNA at a
temperature of around 50–65°C.Extension: The primers are extended at a temperature of around 68–78°C
in the presence of DNA polymerase, dNTPs and Mg2+ ions. The newly
synthesized DNA strand acts as a template for the next cycle. This cycle is
repeated several times (around 25 to 30 times) and produces millions of
copies of the original specific target DNA. To retain the activity of DNA
polymerase enzyme at such high denaturation temperature, Taq DNA
polymerase, extracted from a microorganism (Thermus aquaticus) is used
in the PCR reaction.
Applications of PCR
PCR is the starting test used in most of the molecular genetic tests.Diagnosis of hereditary/genetic diseases: In genetic disorders, genetic
mutations can be detected by PCR alone (e.g. Huntington disease), PCR
followed by digestion with restriction endonucleases (e.g. diagnosis of
spinal muscular atrophy), PCR followed by dot-blot hybridization (e.g.
thalassemia mutation detection), PCR followed by capillary
electrophoresis for genotyping (e.g. detection of triplet repeat disorders).Sequencing: It is used as first step for DNA amplification for all methods
of DNA sequencing.
Detection of pathogens: To detect small quantities of pathogen DNA (e.g.
PCR for Mycobacterium tuberculosis), to detect viruses, (including use of
reverse transcriptase enzyme for RNA viruses), and real-time PCR (RT-
PCR) for quantification of viral load, e.g. hepatitis B and C, human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
Forensic genetics: To identify DNA sequences that are unique to each
individual.
Reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR): Initial step is to convert RNA to
complementary DNA and rest of the process is same as PCR. It is used to
quantify the amount/number of copies of input DNA/RNA.
Real-time PCR: This technique, quantifies the PCR product in ‘real-time’. It

is used to quantify the amount/number of copies of input DNA/RNA.
Immunoblot (Western Blot)
It is a test to detect antibodies. According to molecular weight, the microbial
proteins are separated by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE). They
are transferred (blotted) on to a nitrocellulose membrane, which is incubated
with serum of patient. Binding of specific antibody is detected with an
enzyme–anti-immunoglobulin conjugate (similar to in ELISA), and
specificity is confirmed by its location on the membrane. The test is a highly
specific and can be used to confirm the results of less specific tests such as
ELISA.
INBORN ERRORS OF METABOLISM
Lysosomal Storage Disorders
Classification of Lysosomal Storage Disorders (Table 19.8)
Table 19.8: Classification of lysosomal storage disorders.
Disorder Underlying defect
Mucopolysaccharidoses Defective metabolism of glycosaminoglycans
Sphingolipidoses and sulfatidoses Defective degradation of sphingolipids and their
components
Glycogen storage diseases Defective degradation of glycogen
Oligosaccharidoses Defective degradation of the glycan portion of
glycoproteins
Mucolipidoses Defective degradation of acid
mucopolysaccharides, sphingolipids and/or
glycolipidsMucopolysaccharidoses (Table 19.9)
Table 19.9: Various types of mucopolysaccharidoses.
Type of disorder Enzyme deficiency
MPS I Hurler syndrome, Hurler-Scheie
syndrome, Scheie syndrome α-L-iduronidase
MPS II Hunter syndrome Iduronate 2 sulfatase
MPS III Sanfilippo disease Heparan N-sulfatase 

Type A
Type B
Type Cα-N-acetylglucosaminidase 
α-glucosaminide N-acetyltransferase
MPS IV Morquio disease
Type A
Type BAcetylgalactosamine- ٦-sulphatase 
b-galactosidase
MPS VI Maroteaux–Lamy disease Arylsulfatase B
MPS VII Sly disease b-Glucuronidase
MPS I Hurler Syndrome
Head/face: Prominence of the forehead, broad nose with a flattened nasal
bridge enlargement and protrusion of the tongue, chronic hearing loss,
corneal clouding, retinal degeneration or glaucoma; tonsillar/adenoidal
hypertrophy predispose the child to URI, sleep apnea.Heart: Cardiomyopathy with asymmetric hypertrophy of the ventricular
septum, thickening of the aortic and mitral valves, which progress to
valvular insufficiency.Abdomen: Hepatosplenomegaly results in a protuberant abdomen
Neurological: Mental retardation
MPS II Hunter Syndrome
Initial symptoms starts at two to four years of age with progressive growth
delays, resulting in short stature.
Head/face: Macrocephaly, delayed tooth eruption, progressive hearing
loss, thickening of the lips, tongue, and nostrils.
Heart: Thickening of the heart valves leading to a decline in cardiac
function
Lungs: Obstructive airway disease
Abdomen: Hepatosplenomegaly
Skeletal: Short neck and broad chest, joint stiffness, with restriction of
movements
Neurological: Hydrocephalus, mental retardation and seizures.
MPS IV Morquio Syndrome
Widely spaced teeth, corneal clouding (Fig. 19.10A), hearing loss,
enlarged heart

Abnormal skeletal development: Scoliosis, hypermobile joints, large
fingers, knock-knees (Fig. 19.10B), short trunk with pectus carinatum,
bell-shaped chest (ribs flared), severe growth retardation (82–115 cm),
odontoid hypoplasia, compression of spinal cord (cervical myelopathy)
and dwarfism.
Phenylketonuria (PKU)Autosomal recessive disease, due to deficiency of enzyme phenylalanine
hydroxylase with failure to convert phenylalanine to tyrosine.
Development delay, mental retardation, seizures, eczema, blue eyes,
hyperactivity, aggressive behavior, blond hair and musty/mousy odor.
Figs. 19.10A and B:  (A) Corneal clouding seen in Hurler and Morquio syndrome; (B) Knock knees in
Morquio syndrome.
Galactosemia
Autosomal recessive disease due to deficiency of the enzyme Galactose 1-
phosphate uridyl-transferase. It is due to ingestion of galactose (lactose).
Liver failure (hypoglycemia, bilirubinemia), hepatosplenomegaly
Renal tubular disorder (acidosis, glycosuria, albuminuria)
Lethargy, feeding intolerance, failure to thrive, cataracts
Learning disorders in older children—mental retardation
About 25% will develop sepsis ( E. coli ) in first 1–2 weeks, if untreated →
death

Immunology

CHAPTER
20
INTRODUCTION
Immune system is defined as the body’s defense system that protects against
pathogenic microorganisms and noninfectious foreign substances.
Immune system is the third line of defense against infection (Fig. 20.1).
Innate and adaptive are the two types of immune response.
Duality of Immune System
Humoral (antibody-mediated) Immunity
–  It involves production of antibodies against foreign antigens, by a
subset of lymphocytes called B-cells. These B cells are stimulated to
form plasma cells and they secrete antibodies.
–  Humoral immunity is involved in defense against bacteria, bacterial
toxins, and viruses that circulate freely in body fluids, before they enter
cells. They are also responsible for certain reactions against
transplanted tissue.Cell-mediated Immunity
Q. Write short note on cell-mediated immunity.
–  Involves specialized set of lymphocytes called T-cells that recognize
foreign antigens on the surface of cells, organisms, or tissues: Helper T-
cells and cytotoxic T-cells
–  Defense against:
♦  Bacteria and viruses which lie inside the host cells and are not
accessible to antibodies.
♦  Fungi, protozoa, and helminthes, cancer cells, transplanted tissue.
Antigens

Most of the antigens are proteins or large polysaccharides from a foreign
microbes or nonmicrobes.
Microbes: The antigens may be capsules, cell walls, toxins, viral capsids,
flagella, etc.
Nonmicrobes: These antigens include pollen, egg white, serum proteins,
and surface molecules of red blood cell and transplanted tissue.
–  Lipids and nucleic acids become antigen only when combined with
proteins or polysaccharides.
Hapten
These are small foreign molecule which are not antigenic by themselves.
They become antigenic when coupled to a carrier molecule. Once antibodies
are formed they will recognize hapten.
Epitope
Epitope represents a small part of an antigen that interacts with an antibody.
Each antigen may have one to several epitopes. Each epitope is recognized by
a different antibody.
Fig. 20.1:  Nonspecific and specific defense mechanisms.
Antibodies
Q. Briefly discuss immunoglobulins and its functions.
Antibodies (immunoglobulins) are proteins which recognize and bind to a
particular antigen with very high specificity.
These are produced in response to exposure to the antigen.
One virus or microbe may have several antigenic determinant sites. Each
site may bind to different antibodies.

Each antibody possess at least two identical sites which bind antigen.
These sites are called as antigen binding sites.
Valence of an antibody: It is the number of antigen binding sites in
antibody and most antibodies are bivalent.
Antibody structure
Monomer: It is an antibody molecule having a flexible Y-shape with four
protein chains, i.e. 2 identical light chains and 2 identical heavy chains.
Variable regions: These are two sections at the end of Y’s arms. They
contain the antigen binding sites (Fab). They are identical on the same
antibody, but vary from one antibody to another.Constant regions: They represent the stem of monomer and lower parts of
Y arms.
–  Fc region: They are regions on the stem of monomer and are important
because they can bind to complement or cells.
–  Fab region: For antigen binding.
Immunoglobulin classes (Table 20.1)
Functions of immunoglobulins/antibodies
Acts as opsonins: Immunoglobulins coat bacterial surface and act as
opsonins. This facilitates phagocytosis by cells possessing Fc receptor
(e.g. neutrophils).Antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC): In this,
antibodies bind to microbes via their Fab region. Cytotoxic NK cells
attach via Fc receptors and kill these organisms by release of toxic
substances called perforins.Activation of complement system: Binding of antibodies to antigen can
trigger activation of the classical complement pathway. Complement
components can function as opsonins (C3b component and aid in
phagocytosis), chemotaxis (recruitment of leukocytes by C3a and C5a)
and cause death of microbes (by MAC-membrane attack complex C5-9).Neutralization: Some antibodies may directly neutralize the biological
activity of their antigen target or toxins released by bacteria. This is an
important feature of IgA antibodies at mucosal surfaces.Processing of antigen: Antibodies present on B lymphocytes helps in

internalization of antigen and further processing it for presentation to other
cells.
Agglutination: Antibodies (e.g. IgM) help in agglutination of particulate
matter including bacteria and viruses.
Immobilization of microbes: Antibodies against bacterial cilia or
flagellae may immobilize their movement and ability to escape the
phagocytosis.Protection of mucosal surface: This is observed with IgA type o f
antibodies.
Immune-complex formation: Antibodies combine with antigen to form
immune complexes. The size of immune complexes vary depending upon
the ratio between antigen and antibody. Larger immune complexes can be
removed by the phagocytic cells in the reticuloendothelial (RE) system.Transplacental passage: Maternal antibodies can pass through placenta
from mother to fetus conferring immunity to the fetus.
Table 20.1: Features of immunoglobulin classes.
Features IgG IgM IgA IgD IgE
Structure Monomer Pentamer, hexamer Dimer Monomer Monomer
Subtypes G1, G2, G3, G4 Other chains : J chain A1, A2
Percentage
serum
antibodies75—85%
(IgG1=45–53%,
IgG2=11-15%)5–10% 7–15%,
(IgA1=11–
14%
IgA2 =1–
4%)0.04 % 0.003%
Location Blood, lymph,
intestineBlood, lymph, B cell
surface (monomer)Secretions
(tears,
saliva,
intestine,
milk), blood
and lymphB-cell
surface,
blood, and
lymphBound to
mast cells
and
basophils
throughout
body
Half-life in
serum23 days 5 days 6 days 3 days 2.5 days
Complement
fixationYes (classical,
alternate)Yes (classical ) No Alternate
pathwayNo
Placental
transferYes No No No No
Known
functionsEnhances
phagocytosis,First antibodies
produced during anLocalized
protectionIn serum
function isAllergic
reactions

neutralizes
toxins and
viruses, protects
fetus and
newborninfection. Effective
against microbes and
agglutinating
antigensof mucosal
surfaces.
Provides
immunity to
infant
digestive
tractunknown.
On B-cell
surface,
initiate
immune
response.
Marker of
mature B-
celland
antiparasitic
action
CYTOKINESQ. Write a short note on cytokines.
The immune response involves multiple interactions among many cells.
These cells are lymphocytes, dendritic cells, macrophages, other
inflammatory cells (e.g. neutrophils), and endothelial cells. Few of these
interactions are cell-to-cell contact. However, many interactions and effector
functions of leukocytes are mediated by short-acting soluble proteins,
multipurpose chemical messengers called cytokines. Cytokines which
mediate communications between leukocytes are called interleukins.Mode of action: Cytokines exert their effect by binding to specific
receptors on target cells. They may act by three ways.
–  Autocrine when the cytokines act on the same cells which secretes
them.
–  Paracrine when cytokines are produced by one cell type which acts on
adjacent/nearby target cells.
–  Endocrine when the cytokine secreted into the circulation act on target
cells at a site distant from their site of synthesis.
Interleukins:
They are produced by and signal between white cells which mediate
endocrine communication at a site distant from their site of synthesis.
Source: Activated macrophages.
Effects: Fever, bone marrow release of neutrophils into circulation
(leukocytosis), B-cell proliferation, antibody production, and production
of IL-2 by T-cells. Interleukin-2 (IL-2) stimulates the proliferation of
activated B-cells, T-cells and NK cells.
Tumor necrosis factor-α :

Source: TNF-α is produced by activated macrophages in response to
infection by bacteria and other microbes.
Effects: Fever, cachexia (pathologic state characterized by weight loss and
anorexia seen in neoplastic diseases and some chronic infections)
anorexia, shock, enhanced leukocyte cytotoxicity, enhanced NK-cell
function, acute phase protein synthesis, proinflammatory cytokine
induction, increases apoptosis and expression of cytokines and adhesion
molecules.
InterferonsQ. Write short note on interferons.
They are critical cytokines that play a key role in defense against viral
infections and other intracellular microbes (e.g. Toxoplasma gondii ). This
group includes interferon-α (IFN-α), interferon-β (IFN-β) and interferon-ϒ
(IFN-γ).Source:
–  Produced by a wide range of cells when attacked by viruses and other
non-self-pathogenic antigens.
–  IFN-γ is mostly released by T cells and NK cells.
Erythrocyte Sedimentation Rate (ESR)
Q. Write a short note an erythrocyte sedimentation rate.
It is the rate at which RBCs settle down when anticoagulated whole blood
is allowed to stand.
RBCs have net negative charge on their surface and do not aggregate but
tend to repel each other. Plasma proteins have positive charge and
neutralize the surface negative charge called Zeta potential of red cells.
Factors Affecting ESR
Plasma factors: Increase in plasma proteins (especially fibrinogen), reduces
the repulsive forces of red blood cells and cause them to stack together like
tyres, or rouleaux. Rouleaux have more mass/surface area ratio than single
red cells, and therefore sediment faster and increase the ESR.An accelerated ESR is favored by elevated levels of fibrinogen, globulins
and cholesterol (which increase the positive charge of plasma) whereas

albumin and lecithin retard ESR.
Elevated fibrinogen and raised ESR is also observed in pregnancy, old
age, end-stage renal disease.
In acute inflammation ESR and acute phase reactants are raised.
ESR is increased in conditions associated with monoclonal (multiple
myeloma) or polyclonal (chronic infections like tuberculosis) increase in
immunoglobulins. In systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) ESR is raised
but CRP may be normal.
Red cell factors: The sedimentation rate is directly proportional to the
weight of the cell aggregates and inversely proportional to the surface area.
ESR may be low if plasma proteins are low or red cell morphology is
abnormal making rouleaux formation impossible.Anemia increases the ESR and polycythemia decreases.
Microcytes sediment slower than macrocytes.
Red cells with an abnormal or irregular shape, such as sickle cells or
spherocytes, do not exhibit rouleaux formation and have low ESR.
Normal range: For men 1–10 mm 1st hour and for women 5–20 mm 1st
hour.

Fig. 20.2:  Various acute phase reactants and their levels in inflammation.
Acute Phase Reactants (Fig. 20.2)
Q. Write short notes on acute phase reactants.
Acute phase proteins are produced by liver in response to inflammatory
stimuli. They have a wide range of activities.
C-reactive protein: C-reactive protein (CRP) plays an important role in
host defense and stimulates repair and regeneration. C-reactive protein is
an acute phase reactant produced in the liver.
–  It opsonizes invading pathogens.
–  CRP increase (may be up to 1000-fold) within 6 hours of acute
inflammation. Levels fall within a few days after the inflammation
subsides. Sequential measurement of CRP is useful in monitoring
disease activity.
–  In some inflammatory diseases there may be normal or slight elevations
of CRP concentration despite unequivocal evidence of active

inflammation. These include SLE, systemic sclerosis, ulcerative colitis
and leukemia. However, existing infection in these conditions is
associated with significantly raised levels of CRP.
–  It is to be noted that intercurrent infection does not cause a significant
CRP response in these conditions.
Serum amyloid A plays a role in host defense and stimulates repair and
regeneration. In chronic inflammation, it may contribute to the
development of amyloidosis.Fibrinogen  plays an essential role in wound healing.
α1-antitrypsin and  α 1-antichymotrypsin: They control inflammation by
neutralizing the enzymes produced by activated neutrophils and prevent
tissue destruction.
Antioxidants such as haptoglobin and manganese superoxide dismutase
scavenge for oxygen free radicals.
COMPLEMENT SYSTEM
Q. Write a short note on the complement system.
The complement system is a group of plasma proteins (β globulins) major
source being the liver. C1q produced mainly by bone marrow derived cells
like macrophages and dendritic cells.They are proteases and are important in both inflammation and immunity.
Pathways of Complement System Activation (Fig. 20.3)
The decisive step in complement activation is the proteolysis of the third
component, C3. Cleavage of C3 can occur by any one of three pathways:
Classical pathway: It is activated by antigen-antibody (Ag-Ab)
complexes in which C1 binds to antibody (IgM or IgG), acute phase
proteins, charged molecules, and apoptotic or necrotic cell debris.
Alternative pathway: This pathway is antibody-independent.
–  It is activated by binding of C3 directly to microbial surface molecules
[e.g. endotoxin, or lipopolysaccharides (LPS)], complex
polysaccharides, cobra venom, and ‘altered self’ such as tumor cells, in
the absence of antibody. They cleave C3 to C3b.
–  C3b in the presence of factors B and D generates C3bBb  (alternative

pathway C3 convertase).
–  C3bBb is labile and degraded by factors I and H, but stabilized by
properdin  and can subsequently activate C3.
–  This results in persistent and prolonged C3 activation and
hypocomplementemia. In addition, decreased synthesis of C3 by the
liver, is also responsible for hypocomplementemia.
Lectin pathway: It directly activates C1 when plasma mannose-binding
lectin (MBL) binds to mannose on microbes.
Fig. 20.3:  Different pathways of activation and functions of the complement system. All pathways of
activation lead to cleavage of C3.
Complement System and Disease (Table 20.2)
Table 20.2: Genetic deficiencies of plasma complement components and
associated clinical findings.
Deficiency Infection Autoimmune disease
Classical Pathway   
C1q Pneumococcal B/M, Other pyogenic SLE, GN, DV/DLE

C1rs Other pyogenic Pneumococcal B/M,
DGISLE GN
C4 Other pyogenic SLE, GN, Other AD
C2 Other pyogenic, pneumococcal B/M,
meningococcal MSLE, GN, DV/DLE, Other
AD
C3 Other pyogenic Pneumococcal B/M,
meningococcal MGN, DV/DLE, SLE, Other
AD
C5, C6, C7, C8, C9 Meningococcal M, DGI, Other
pyogenicSLE, GN Other AD
Lectin Pathway   
MBL Other pyogenic, fungal, HIV SLE
MASP-2 Pneumococcal pneumonia SLE
Alternative Pathway   
Factor D DGI, meningococcal M, Other
pyogenic 
Control Proteins   
C1 INH Hereditary angioedema SLE
Factor I Other pyogenic, Meningococcal M
Pneumococcal B/M
Factor H Meningococcal B/M, Other pyogenic GN, HUS, SLE
Properdin Meningococcal M, Pneumococcal
B/M, Other pyogenicDV/DLE
C4-binding protein Other AD
(B/M: bacteremia or meningitis; DGI: disseminated gonococcal infection;
DV/DLE: dermal vasculitis or typical discoid lupus erythematosus; GN:
glomerulonephritis in various forms, often membranoproliferative; HIV:
human immunodeficiency virus; HUS: hemolytic-uremic syndrome; M:
meningitis; MASP: MBL-associated serine protease; MBL: mannose-binding
lectin; other AD: autoimmune disease (almost all possible diagnoses have
been reported); other pyogenic: serious deep or systemic infection due to, or
typically caused by, a pyogenic bacterium (abscess, osteomyelitis,
pneumonia, bacteremia other than pneumococcal, meningitis other than
meningococcal or pneumococcal, cellulitis, myopericarditis, and peritonitis);
SLE: typical systemic lupus erythematosus or an SLE-like syndrome without
characteristic serologic findings).
Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC)Q. Write short note on HLA system/major histocompatibility complex

(MHC).
All human cells express a series of molecules on their surfaces that are
recognized by other individuals as foreign antigens. It was found that major
histocompatibility antigens are the important antigens involved in the
rejection of transplanted organs. These antigens are encoded by a segment of
chromosome 6 (6p21.3) known as the major histocompatibility complex.
Significance of MHC/HLA System
Q. Write short note on HLA associated diseases. List diseases associated
with HLA-B27.
In transplantation: HLA typing is prerequisite in selecting appropriate
donor and recipient combinations for transplantation.
Regulations of cell-to-cell interaction: During immune response
(immune response genes).
Defense against viral infections.
HLA and disease association (Table 20.3): HLA alleles confer a state of
susceptibility, or risk, for disease. Many diseases are known to be
associated with certain HLA alleles. The diseases associated with the HLA
locus can be broadly categorized as mentioned in Table 20.3.
Table 20.3: Diseases showing positive HLA antigen association.
System Disease HLA antigen Relative risk
RheumatologicAnkylosing
spondylitis
Reiter syndrome
Acute anterior
uveitis
Reactive arthritis
Psoriatic arthritis
Juvenile rheumatoid
arthritis
Juvenile rheumatoid
arthritis (pauci
articular)Rheumatoid arthritis
Sjögren syndrome
Systemic lupusB27
B27
B27
B27
B27
B38
B27
DR5
DR4/Dw4
Dw3
DR390.0
37.0
8.2
18.0
10.7
9.1
3.9
3.3
6.0
10.0
2.6

erythematosus
Gastrointestinal Gluten-sensitive
enteropathy
Chronic active
hepatitis
Ulcerative colitis
IgA deficiencyDR3
DR3
B5
DR312.0
6.8
3.8
13.0
Hematologic Idiopathic
hemochromatosis
Pernicious anemia
Hodgkin diseaseA3
B14
A3, B14
DR5
DP36.7
2.7
90.0
5.0
2.0
Dermatologic Dermatitis
herpetiformis
Psoriasis vulgaris
Psoriasis vulgaris
(Japanese)
Pemphigus vulgaris
(Jewish)
Behçet disease
(white)
Behçet disease
(Japanese)DR3
Cw3
Cw6
DR4
A26
B5
B5117.3
7.5
8.5
24.0
4.8
3.8
12.4
Dermatologic Dermatitis
herpetiformis
Psoriasis vulgaris
Psoriasis vulgaris
(Japanese)
Pemphigus vulgaris
(Jewish)
Behçet disease
(white)
Behçet disease
(Japanese)DR3
Cw3
Cw6
DR4
A26
B5
B5117.3
7.5
8.5
24.0
4.8
3.8
12.4
Endocrine Diabetes mellitus,
type 1
Graves’ disease
Graves’ disease
(Japanese)
Addison disease
Subacute thyroiditis
Hashimoto
thyroiditis
Congenital adrenalDR4
DR3
DR2
BfF1+
B8
DR3
B35
DR3
Dw3
B356/7
5.0
0.25
15.0
2.5
3.7
4.4
3.7
10.5
13.7

hyperplasia DR5
B473.0
15.4
Neurologic Myasthenia gravis
Multiple sclerosis
NarcolepsyB8
DR2/Dw2
DR2, DQ63.0
6.0
130.0
Psychiatric Bipolar disorder
SchizophreniaB16
A282.3
2.3
Renal Idiopathic
membranous
nephropathy
Goodpasture
syndrome
Minimal change
disease
IgA nephropathy
(French, Japanese)
Gold/penicillamine
nephropathy
Polycystic kidney
diseaseDR3
DR2
DR7
DR4
DR3
B55.7
16.0
4.2
3.1
14.0
2.6
InfectiousTuberculoid leprosy
(Asians)
Paralytic polio
Low versus high
response vaccinia
Falciparum malaria,
severe
Progression to
AIDSB8
B16
Cw3
B53
B356.8
4.3
12.7
0.4/0.5
2-3
Others Birdshot
retinochoriodopathy
(BSRC)
Cervical cancerHLA-A29
DR11-DQ380-98
2–3
IMMUNODEFICIENCY
Immunodeficiency may be primary or secondary.
Primary Immunodeficiency Diseases (Box 20.1)
Classification of Primary Immunodeficiency Diseases
Q. Classify primary immunodeficiency disorders.

Primary immunodeficiency diseases (PIDs) are classified into eight major
categories according to the component of the immune system primarily
involved (Box 20.1). Common components, their frequency, and their
susceptibility in primary immunodeficiency are presented in Table 20.4.
Box 20.1: Classification of primary immunodeficiency diseases.
Combined T-cell and B-cell immunodeficiencies
Predominantly antibody deficiencies
Other well defined immunodeficiency syndromes
Diseases of immune dysregulation
Congenital defects of phagocyte number and function
Defects in innate immunity
Autoinflammatory disorders
Complement deficiencies
Table 20.4: Common components, their frequency, and their susceptibility
in primary immunodeficiency.
Class (Deficiency) Relative
frequencySusceptibility Treatment
B lymphocytes 50% Bacterial infections Immunoglobulin injection
Combined B and
T T lymphocytes20% 10% Viral, bacterial, fungal and
protozoalBone marrow transplant
Phagocytes 18% Bacterial infections Antibiotics and cytokines
Complement 2% Bacterial infections and
autoimmunityInfusion of complement
components
Warning Signs for Suspicion of Primary ImmunodeficiencyDisorders (Table 20.5)
Table 20.5: Warning signs for suspicion of primary immunodeficiency
disorders (PID).
Four or more new ear infections within 1 year
Two or more serious sinus infections within 1
year
Two or more months on antibiotics with little
effect
Two or more pneumonias within 1 year
Failure of an infant to gain weight or grow
normallyRecurrent, deep skin or organ abscesses
Persistent thrush in mouth or fungal infection
on skin
Need for intravenous antibiotics to clear
infections
Two or more deep-seated infections including
septicemia
A family history of PID

Box 20.2: Main types of antibody deficiencies
X-linked and autosomal recessive agammaglobulinemia
Common variable immunodeficiency
IgA deficiency
IgG subclass deficiency
Transient hypogammaglobulinemia of infancy
Selective antibody deficiency
Associated to other immunodeficiencies (Job syndrome, hyper-IgM)
Antibody Deficiencies
Q. Write short note on B-cell (antibody) immunodeficiency disorders.
Constitute 70% of PIDs.
Recurrent pyogenic infections starting after 6–12 months. Main types of
antibody deficiencies are listed in Box 20.2
X-linked agammaglobulinemia (XLA) (Bruton agammaglobulinemia)
Q. Write short note on XLA (X-linked agammaglobulinemia).
Described as the ‘prototypical antibody deficiency’ and is the first
immunodeficiency described.
Bruton tyrosine kinase (Btk) is necessary for the growth and the
maturation of B-cell precursors.
Xq21.3-22 (> 300 mutations).
B-lymphocytes are decreased , <1% CD19 or CD20-positive
lymphocytes.
Tonsils are small, no palpable lymph node.
Autosomal recessive transmission  due to mutation in the genes of the
surface bound μ heavy chain, λ5 and Igα.
Clinical features: Little Boys With Big Infections!
Symptoms appear at 6–9 months of age (after loss of maternal Ig).
Sites of infection: Mucous membranes, ear (otitis media), lungs
(bronchitis/pneumonia), blood (sepsis), gut (giardia, or enterovirus), skin,
eyes, meningitis.Typical bacterial infections include Haemophilus influenzae and

Streptococcus pneumonia.
Also seen: Neutropenia, malignancy in older patients, renal and joint
involvements.
Prevention of infections in patients with PID involves avoidance measures, vaccination, prophylactic
antibiotics, immune globulin therapy.
Common Variable Immunodeficiency (CVID)
Q. Write short note on common variable immunodeficiency (CVID).
Diagnosis depends on the exclusion of other causes of antibody
deficiencies.
Incidence: 1/10 000-1/50 000 (second or third decade).
Decrease in IgG, A +/-M. B-Cells are normal or decreased.
Clinical features
CVID has a tendency to autoantibody formation.
Chronic pulmonary infections, chronic giardiasis, intestinal malabsorption, atrophic gastritis and
pernicious anemia.
T-cell immunity may be deficient
Increased risk of lymphoreticular and gastrointestinal malignancies.
IgA Deficiency
Incidence: 1/700 Caucasians but symptoms in < 33%.
Presents with recurrent respiratory infections and chronic diarrhea.
Associated conditions with IgA deficiency are listed in Box 20.3
IgG subclass deficiencies
Normal total serum IgG levels with subnormal levels of one or more IgG
subclasses.
Mutations in heavy chain genes on 14q32.3 (γ1, 2, 3, 4).
IgG1: Lead to a decrease in total serum IgG.
IgG2: Most common IgG subclass deficient in children. Frequently
associated with poor response to polysaccharide antigens and IgA
deficiency.IgG3: Most common IgG subclass deficient in adults.
IgG4: Levels vary widely in normal people.

Transient hypogammaglobulinemia of infancy
Decrease of the maternal IgG transferred to the fetus during pregnancy but
delayed Ig production (IgM, IgG, and IgA).
Normal range after 36 months.
Normal response to vaccination.
Selective antibody deficiencies
Normal total serum levels of IgG and IgM but failure to respond to certain
antigens (polysaccharide antigens).
Asymptomatic or recurrent sinopulmonary infections.
Found in sickle cell anemia, asplenia, Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome and
DiGeorge syndrome.
Hyper-IgM syndrome
Deficit in IgM: IgG switch. IgM ↑ but IgG and IgA ↓.
The most frequent deficit concerns CD154 on CD4+ T-cell (Xq26.3-27.1).
The hyper-IgE syndrome (Job syndrome)
Recurrent abscesses, eczema, dysmorphy, eosinophilia and high serum
levels of IgE.
Autosomal dominant and sporadic cases.
Box 20.3: ssociated conditions with IgA deficiency.
CVID (common variable immunodeficiency)
Deficit in IgG2 (IgG4, E) and poor response to polysaccharide antigens
Ataxia-telangiectasia
Risk of asthma and autoimmune diseases (RA, vitiligo, thyroiditis)
Auto and allo anti IgA antibodies (IVIG!).
Box 20.4: T-cell (cell mediated) immunodeficiency disorders.
DiGeorge syndrome
Defect in CD3/TCR
Defect in signaling
Defect in cytokine production as IL-2 and IFN gamma.
Defect in cytokine response
Box 20.5: Combined immunodeficiency disorders.
Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID)

Omenn syndrome
ADA (adenosine deaminase deficiency)
Ataxia-telangiectasia syndrome (AT)
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS)
EBV associated immunodeficiency (Duncan’s syndrome)
Cell Mediated (T-cell) Immunodeficiency (Box 20.4)
Q. Write short notes on T-cell (cell mediated) immunodeficiency
disorders.
Combined Immunodeficiencies (Box 20.5)
Severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID)
Q. Write short note on severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID).
Failure to thrive.
Onset of infections in the neonatal period.
Opportunistic infections, chronic or recurrent thrush, chronic rashes,
chronic or recurrent diarrhea.
Lack of lymphoid tissue including thymus, tonsils and lymph nodes.
Characteristic abnormality in ADA deficient SCID includes cupping at the
end of the ribs demonstrated on a chest radiograph and an absent thymic
shadow.Common Pneumocystis jirovecii infection, or persistent oral or diaper
candidiasis.
Treatment
Pneumocystis prophylaxis with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
Replacement IgG therapy. Enzyme replacement therapy (e.g. polyethylene glycol-adenosine
deaminase [PEG-ADA]).
Patients should only be transfused with irradiated blood products and should not receive any live
vaccines.
Features of DiGeorge syndrome (congenital thymic aplasia) are
mentioned in Box 20.6).
ADA (adenosine deaminase defciency) SCID: The most profound
lymphopenia (<500/mm3); skeletal abnormalities, including chondro-osseous
dysplasia (flared costochondral junctions and bone-in-bone anomalies in

vertebrae); and deficiency of all types of lymphocytes.
Box 20.6: DiGeorge syndrome (congenital thymic aplasia)
Defective development in thymus and parathyroid that develop from third and fourth pharyngeal
pouch.
Thymic hypoplasia leading to variable immunodeficiency.
Characteristic facies. Deletion in 22q11 in > 80%.
Acronym -- CATCH 22
–  Cardiac abnormality (commonly interrupted aortic arch, truncus arteriosus and tetralogy of
Fallot)
–  Abnormal facies
–  Thymic aplasia
–  Cleft palate
–  Hypocalcemia/hypoparathyroidism
Omenn syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disease usually presenting in
neonatal period, characterized by symptoms of SCID associated with other
findings like erythroderma, lymphadenopathy, hepatosplenomegaly and
eosinophilia.
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome (WAS)Q. Write short note on Wiskott Aldrich syndrome.
X-linked recessive disease.
Immunodeficiency, microplatelet thrombocytopenia, and eczema.
Mutations of the gene encoding WASP at X11p.
Low IgM, normal IgA and IgG and high IgE.
Ataxia-Telangiectasia
Q. Write short note on ataxia telangiectasia.
Autosomal recessive
Progressive cerebellar ataxia, abnormal eye movements, oculocutaneous
telangiectasias, and immune deficiency. Also characterized by recurrent
sinopulmonary infections, bronchiectasis and Interstitial lung disease.
Vascular malformations (telangiectasia), neurologic defects, tumors and
ID.
IgA and IgG2 deficiency
T-cell function is variably depressed

Gene responsible on chromosome 11q22.3
Increased serum alfa feto protein is diagnostic
Prone for various malignancies (lymphomas, breast cancer and acute
leukemias).
Diseases of Immune Dysregulation
Four groups of diseases are included in this category.
1. Familial hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (FHL) that includes perforin
deficiency. HLH secondary to autoimmune diseases is called Macrophage
Activation Syndrome.
2. UNC13D (Munc13-4) deficiency
3. Syntaxin 11 deficiency and STXBP2 (Munc18-2) deficiency
4. Autoimmune lymphoproliferative syndrome (ALPS)
Diagnostic Criteria for HLH Proposed by Histiocyte Society
(HLH-2004 trial)
Q. List the diagnostic criteria for hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis
(HLH).
Molecular identification of an HLH-associated gene mutation (e.g. PRF1, UNC13D, STX11,
STXBP2, Rab27A, SH2D1A, BIRC4, LYST, ITK, SLC7A7, XMEN, HPS). Children require
documentation of homozygosity or compound heterozygosity for HLH-associated gene mutations. By
comparison, heterozygosity may be sufficient for adults if they have clinical findings associated with
HLH.
OR
Five of the following eight findings:
1. Fever ≥38.5°C
2. Splenomegaly
3. Peripheral blood cytopenia, with at least two of the following: hemoglobin <9 g/dL (for infants <4
weeks, hemoglobin <10 g/dL); platelets <100,000/microL; absolute neutrophil count
<1000/microL.
4. Hypertriglyceridemia (fasting triglycerides >265 mg/dL) and/or hypofibrinogenemia (fibrinogen
<150 mg/dL)
5. Hemophagocytosis in bone marrow, spleen, lymph node, or liver.
6. Low or absent NK cell activity.
7. Ferritin >500 ng/mL (the author prefers to consider a ferritin y3000 ng/mL is more indicative of
HLH.
8. Elevated soluble CD25 (soluble IL-2 receptor alpha) two standard deviations above age-adjusted
laboratory-specific norms.

HYPERSENSITIVITY REACTIONS
Q. What are the different types of immune reactions?
Immunologically mediated reactions (hypersensitivity reactions) that may
produce in tissue damage are summarized in Figure 20.4 and Table 20.6.
Urticaria (‘Hives’)
Q. Write short essay/note on urticaria or hives or nettle rash.
Urticaria (also known as hives) is produced due to localized edema of
dermis secondary to a temporary increase in capillary permeability. The
term angioedema is used if edema involves subcutaneous or submucosal
layers. Classification (causes) of urticaria and/or angioedema is presented
in Table 20.7.
Etiology and Pathogenesis (Fig. 20.5)
Q. Write short answer on causes of urticaria.
Types: Acute urticaria is the presence of urticaria for less than 6 weeks and
chronic if it persists for more than 6 weeks.
Urticaria may be brought out by either immunologic or non-immunologic
mechanisms (Table 20.7). Urticaria is triggered by a wide variety of
antigens or by physical stimuli, including cold, pressure, and sunlight.
They produce local degranulation of mast cells by various mechanism
such as (1) type I hypersensitivity, (2) spontaneous mast cell degranulation
(chronic urticarial), (3) chemical mast cell degranulation, (4)
autoimmunity (chronic urticaria).

Fig. 20.4:  Features of hypersensitivity reactions (Gell and Coomb’s classification).
Table 20.6: Characteristic features of hypersensitivity reactions.
Type I (immediate) II (cytotoxic) III (immune com plex)
Antigens Pollens, moulds, mites,
food drugs and parasitesCell surface or tissue bound Exogenous (virus es, bacteria,
fungi, parasites)
Autoantigens
Mediators IgE and mast cells IgG, IgM and complement IgG, IgM, IgA an d complement
Time taken for
reaction to
develop5–10 minutes 6–36 hours 4–12 hours
Pathological
featureEdema, vasodilatation,
mast cell degranulation,
eosinophilsAntibody-mediated damage to
target cellsAcute inflammatory reaction
(neutrophils), vas culitis
Prototype
disorder/diseases
producedAsthma (extrinsic)
Anaphylaxis (systemic
and localized)
Urticaria, eczemaAutoimmune hemolytic
anemia, transfusion reactions,
hemolytic disease of newbornGoodpasture’s syndromeAutoimmune dise ases (e.g. SLE,
glomerulonephrit is rheumatoid
arthritis)
Serum sickness, Arthus reaction

Angioedema
Allergic rhinitis
Food allergiesPernicious anemia
Myasthenia gravis
Diagnostic tests Skin-prick tests
Specific IgE in serumCoombs’ test
Indirect immunofluorescenceImmune complex es, complement
levels
Treatment Antigen avoidance
Antihistamines,
corticosteroids (usually
topical)
Leukotriene receptor
antagonists
Sodium cromoglicate
Epinephrine(adrenaline)
for life-threatening
anaphylaxisExchange transfusion
Plasmapheresis
Immunosuppressives/cytotoxic
drugsCorticosteroid s
Immunosuppr essives/cytotoxic
drugs
Plasmapheresi s
Anti TNF anti body, anti B-cell
antibody, anti CTLA-4
antibody
Fig. 20.5: Pathogenesis of urticaria. Mast cell degranulation can occur by different mechanism. (1)
Type I hypersensitivity. (2) Spontaneous mast cell degranulation (chronic urticarial). (3) Chemical mast
cell degranulation. (4) Autoimmunity (chronic urticaria).
Table 20.7: Classification of urticaria and/or angioedema.
Immunologic Nonimmunologic reactions
Autoimmune
Immunoglobulin E [IgE]-dependent
Immune complex–mediatedDirect mast cell–releasing agents (opiates, antibiotics,
curare, D-tubocurarine, radio contrast media)
Vasoactive stimuli

Complement-kinin dependent Agents that alter arachidonic acid metabolism (aspirin
and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, azo dyes,
and benzoates)
Physical : Heat, cold, pressure, sun,
water.Infection
Viral hepatitis
Infectious mononucleosis
HIV seroconversion
Idiopathic Drugs : Salicylates, opiates, NSAIDs, antibiotics
Clinical Manifestation
Urticaria is common and can be seen in persons of all ages.
Urticarial eruptions may involve any area of the body from the scalp to the
soles of the feet.
Urticarial lesions represent local area of edema involving only the
superficial portions of the dermis. On certain body sites (e.g. the lips,
hands), the edema spreads deeper into subcutaneous tissue and is referred
to as angioedema.They are well-circumscribed wheals, pink to light red in color, with
erythematous raised serpiginous borders blanched center. Size of the
lesions vary from one millimeter to several centimeters.Almost always pruritic and individual wheals come and go within 24
hours and those lesions lasting up to 6 weeks are called as acute urticaria.
If the urticaria recurs over a period of 6 weeks or more it is known as
chronic urticaria.When individual lesions last more than 36 to 48 hours and leave post-
inflammatory hyperpigmentation or palpable purpura, it is called as
urticarial vasculitis.Urticaria may be associated with headache, dizziness, nausea, vomiting,
abdominal pain, diarrhea and arthralgias.
Management
Management of urticaria depends on its severity and the duration.
Mild urticaria limited to the skin: Antihistamines (diphenhydramine) or the newer nonsedating
agents (terfenadine, cetirizine, loratadine).
Severe urticaria: Short-term corticosteroids (up to 1 mg/kg).
Chronic urticaria: Finding the cause and remove the causative antigen. Antihistamines and
cyclosporine at doses of 3 mg/kg or higher for 8 to 16 weeks may be beneficial.

Allergy
Q. Define allergy. List atopic disorders.
Allergy is defined as a hypersensitivity reaction induced by exposure to an
otherwise harmless exogenous substance (known as an allergen), generally
environmental.
In an allergic reaction, initial exposure to allergen triggers the production
of specific IgE antibodies by activated B-cells. These IgE antibodies bind
to the surface of mast cells via high-affinity IgE receptors.The first dose of allergen (priming dose) which sensitizes the
immunologic system (B lymphocyte). On re-exposure, the allergen
(shocking dose) binds to membrane-bound IgE which activates the mast
cells, releasing vasoactive mediators (the early phase response) and
causing a type I hypersensitivity reaction and the symptoms of allergy.
This may be followed by late phase reaction and is mediated by basophils,
eosinophils and macrophages.Examples: Asthma, anaphylaxis, rhinitis, urticaria, angioedema, eczema,
and food hypersensitivity.
Angioedema
Q. Write short essay/note on the clinical features and treatment of
angioedema.
Angioedema is defined as a well-demarcated localized edema involving the
deeper layers of the skin, including the subcutaneous tissue and submucosal
tissues.
Etiology
It is an IgE-mediated reaction that causes direct release of histamine from the
mast cells. It follows a variety of allergens. It may develop due to insect
sting, drug reaction, food allergy and exposure to other biological products.
Rarely, angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors may produce
angioedema due to increased levels of bradykinin. Most of the cases are
idiopathic.
C1-esterase Inhibitor Deficiency
C1 esterase (C1INH) inhibitor is a complement protein that inhibits

spontaneous activation of classical complement pathway. C1 esterase
inhibitor also regulates kinin cascade, activation of which increases local
bradykinin levels and produces local pain and swelling. Both C1-esterase
inhibitor and C1 levels are low. C1INH deficiency produces bradykinin.
Deficiency of C1INH may be hereditary or acquired disorder.Hereditary angioedema: It is an autosomal dominant disorder, is due to
C1 esterase inhibitor (C1INH) deficiency. Angioedema develops either
spontaneously or following infection or injury (e.g. dental injury). Onset is
usually in early childhood. The attacks become worse at puberty and
usually its frequency and severity decreases after the age of 50 and may
even disappear totally. Diagnosis confirmed by low levels of C1-esterase
inhibitor (in 85% cases) or dysfunctional C1-esterase inhibitor (in 15%
cases).Mutations in chromosome 11; Autosomal dominant inheritance.
–  Type I C1ID: 85% patients no detectable protein.
–  Type II C1ID: 15% patients dysfunctional protein
Acquired C1INH deficiency: It presents in a manner similar to the
hereditary angioedema but the onset occurs in the fifth and sixth decades
of life. It is due to appearance of an autoantibody. It may occur with B-cell
lymphoma, multiple myeloma, Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia and
chronic lymphocytic leukemia.
Clinical FeaturesMay occur at any age but most common in young adults.
It presents with well-defined, non-pitting swelling, usually non-pruritic. It
may be associated with urticaria lesions.
Angioedema up to 6 weeks is called acute and if it lasts beyond 6 weeks is
called chronic.
May involve any area of the body but often affects periorbital, lips (Fig.
20.6) and genital areas.
Angioedema of the upper respiratory tract may cause laryngeal obstruction
which may be life-threatening.
Involvement of gastrointestinal system may produce abdominal colic, with
or without nausea and vomiting.
Angioedema does not produce residual discoloration unless there is

extravasation of RBCs.
Fig. 20.6:  Angioedema.
Treatment
Identification of the etiologic factor(s) and remove the offending agent if possible.
Antihistamines to control the lesions, e.g. diphenhydramine cetirizine, des- loratidine.
Observe for any evidence of airway obstruction and if present manage in a fashion similar to those
with anaphylaxis.
Acute attack should be controlled with epinephrine.
Chronic angioedema not responding to maximal dosages of antihistamines, glucocorticosteroids
and other immunomodulating agents (e.g. methotrexate, cyclosporine) may be considered.
During severe attacks of hereditary angioedema due to C1INH deficiency, fresh frozen plasma is
lifesaving as it provides C1-esterase inhibitor. Danazol is useful to prevent episodes of hereditary
angioedema.Newer therapy for hereditary angioedema: Purified C1 inhibitor concentrate, recombinant C1INH
—Conestat alfa, Bradykinin receptor antagonist— Icatibant  and kallikrein inhibitor
—Ecallantide.
Systemic Anaphylaxis
Q. Write a short note on anaphylactic reactions (anaphylaxis).
Q. Discuss the causes and treatment/management of anaphylactic
shock.
Definition: Systemic anaphylaxis is a life-threatening form of immediate
(appears within minutes after systemic exposure to specific antigen) type 1
hypersensitivity reaction mediated by IgE. It is a systemic response that
develops when mast cells (possibly basophils) are provoked to secrete

mediators with potent vasoactive and smooth muscle contractile activities.
Causes
It occurs in sensitized individuals and requires prior sensitization occurs to
inciting antigen, either alone or in combination with a hapten. It usually
occurs when allergen is administered parenterally and it is less likely after
oral ingestion, inhalation, or cutaneous or ocular topical contact. The causes
of systemic anaphylactic reactions are listed in Box 20.7
Anaphylaxis may be triggered by extremely small doses of antigen.
Example, the minute dose used in skin testing for various forms of allergies.
Mechanism (Fig. 20.7)
Initial exposure to antigen: The sensitizing antigen (allergen) from its
site of entry is presented to T-cells which differentiate into TH2 cells. IL-
13 secreted by TH2 cells enhances IgE production by B-cells. IgE gets
attached to mast cells and basophils.
During subsequent exposure to antigen, the antigen (allergen) binds to
the IgE antibodies previously bound to the mast cells and produces IgE
induced degranulation of mast cells and basophils. It results in the
liberation of a number of mediators (Table 20.8). Mediators released by
mast cells include preformed mediators (stored in secretory granules),
secondary mediators (newly synthesized products). They are responsible
for the pathogenesis of an anaphylactic reaction (Table 20.8).
Box 20.7: Causes of systemic anaphylactic reactions.
Anaphylaxis: IgE-Mediated Mast Cell Degranulation
1. ProteinsForeign proteins (e.g. antisera),
Foods (peanuts, fish and shellfish, egg, milk, soya products)
Food additives (aspartame, monosodium glutamate)
2. Drugs
Antibiotics (penicillins, cephalosporins tetracyclines, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole,
cancomycin, nitrofurantoin)
Chemotherapeutic agents
Hormones (e.g. insulin, vasopressin, parathormone),
Enzymes (chymotrypsin, penicillinase, streptokinase).
Intravenous anesthetic agents (suxamethonium, propofol)
Latex

3. Biological agents
Blood
Tetanus, rabies and diphtheria antitoxins
Antithymocyte globulin
Vaccines
4. Insect bites and stings
Honey bee (bee venom)
Wasps (wasp venom)
Table 20.8: Mast cell mediators in anaphylactic reactions.
Preformed mediators (primary mediators) Secondary (newly synthesized) mediators
1. Vasoactive amines: Histamine
2. Enzymes: Neutral proteases (chymase,
tryptase) and several acid hydrolases
3. Proteoglycans: These include heparin
(anticoagulant), and chondroitin sulfate
4. Eosinophil chemotactic factor
5. Neutrophil chemotactic factor1. Lipid Mediators:
Leukotrienes B 4, C4 and D 4.
Prostaglandin D 2
Platelet-activating factor (PAF)
2. Cytokines: TNF, IL-1, IL-4 and chemokines
Fig. 20.7: Mechanism of systemic anaphylaxis.
Anaphylactoid Reactions (Pseudo-allergic Reactions/non-IgE Mediated)

Q. Write a short note on anaphylactoid reaction.
They are indistinguishable from anaphylactic reactions.
Most non-IgE-dependent foreign agents do not require antigen processing
(sensitization) and can elicit a mast cell activation response on first
antigenic exposure itself. However, they may be associated with IgG and
IgM antibodies and not IgE. These antibodies activate the complement
system through classical pathway and produce activated complement
components and may cause direct release of preformed mediators from
mast cells and basophils.Short lived because involves only degranulation of mast cells and not
cytokine synthesis.
Causes: (Box 20.8).
Clinical Features (Tables 20.9 and 20.10)
The anaphylactic response appears within minutes after systemic exposure to
specific antigen.
Box 20.8: Anaphylactoid reactions (Pseudo-allergic reactions/non-IgE
mediated).
Anaphylactoid: Non-IgE-Mediated Mast Cell Degranulation
1. Drugs
Aspirin and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
Vancomycin
Narcotics (e,g, codeine, morphine, opiates)
Radiocontrast media/dye
2. Physical
Exercise
Exposure to cold
3. Autoimmune
4. Narcotics/vancomycin
5. Idiopathic
Table 20.9: Clinical features of systemic anaphylaxis.
Cutaneous Respiratory
Itching (pruritus)
Hives (urticaria)
Skin erythema with or without angioedemaIntense bronchospasm resulting in respiratory
distress
Dyspnea and wheeze

Flushing
Insect stingsLaryngeal edema resulting in hoarseness and
laryngeal obstruction
Pulmonary edema
Gastrointestinal Cardiovascular
Nausea
Vomiting
Abdominal cramps
DiarrheaTachycardia
Hypotension
Arrhythmias
Shock and collapse
Central nervous system
Confusion
Feeling of impending doom
Apprehensionx
Metallic taste
Altered levels of consciousnessBiphasic anaphylaxis is recurrence of
symptoms that develops following the
apparent resolution of the initial anaphylactic
episode with no additional exposure to the
causative agent.
Table 20.10: Clinical features of systemic anaphylaxis depending on
severity.
Severity Features
Mild Cutaneous features only: pruritus, erythema,
urticaria or mild angioedema
Moderate The above plus more severe angioedema and/or
vomiting, abdominal pain and/or mild dyspnea or
tightening of throat
Severe The above plus respiratory difficulty (laryngeal
edema or asthma) and/or hypotensionQ. Write short note on treatment of anaphylaxis. List life-saving drugs
used in anaphylactic shock.
Treatment
Anaphylaxis is an acute medical emergency and its early recognition is mandatory, since death occurs
within minutes to hours after the first symptoms.
Prevent further contact with allergen , e.g. removal of bee sting.
Ensure airway patency: Fatal outcomes in anaphylaxis are mainly due to either airway
constriction or hypotension.
Oxygen alone via a nasal catheter or with nebulized salbutamol/albuterol , oxygen 4–6
L/minute.
–  If progressive hypoxia develops, either endotracheal intubation or tracheostomy with
intermittent positive ventilation is mandatory for oxygen delivery.
Administer adrenaline (epinephrine) intramuscularly into the thigh and is the most critical
drug to administer. Earlier administration during the course of an anaphylactic event is better.
–  Adult dose: 0.3.1.0 mL 1:1000 solution and it acts within minutes [0.01 mg/kg (up to 0.3 mg)
for children].

–  Repeat at 5.10 minutes intervals, if the response is inadequate.
–  In severe cases, 1 mL of 1:100,000 of solution is given intravenously.
♦Patients on β-blocker may be resistant to epinephrine and glucagon (1 mg IV, or 1 to 5
mg/hour IV) or vasopressin (5 to 40 IU IV) may be used.
Administer antihistamines: They may prevent the progression of urticaria and pruritus, but does
not reverse hypotension or tissue edema by directly opposing effects of mast cell activation, e.g.
chlorphenamine 10 mg IM or slow IV injection, diphenhydramine, 50.100 mg IM or IV.
Administer corticosteroids:  Hydrocortisone 200 mg IV stat (not effective for the acute event as
takes 4 hours to act; but alleviate recurrence of bronchospasm, urticaria and hypotension).
Provide supportive treatments
–  Bronchodilators: They relieve bronchospasm, e.g. nebulized β2-agonists/salbutamol and
aminophylline, 0.25.0.5 g IV.
–  Hypotension: Immediately assume the Trendelenburg position (prevent progression to
anaphylactic shock). Shock is treated with intravenous fluids (if needed with dopamine) to
restore or maintain blood pressure. ECMO  has been tried.
Non-IgE mediated (Idiopathic) anaphylaxis: Usually presents slowly over
a few hours. Begins with pruritus of the palms and soles, then progresses to
general pruritus, erythema, and urticaria, with diarrhea, abdominal pain, and
hypotension. Respiratory symptoms are rare.
Allergen Immunotherapy or Desensitization
Subcutaneously incremental doses of allergen are given at 1 to 2 weekly
intervals until the top dose is reached.
Useful for prevention of atopy/anaphylaxis.
Acute Serum Sickness
Q. Write short note on serum sickness.
It is a systemic immune complex mediated disease (type III
hypersensitivity immune reaction).
It was a frequent sequelae to the administration of large amounts of
foreign serum (e.g. serum from immunized horses used for protection
against diphtheria). But nowadays it is infrequent.IgG is produced when a foreign antigen is injected in large quantities.
They form soluble immune (antigen-antibody) complexes.
Mechanism: Introduction of antigen → body’s immune system responds by
synthesizing antibodies after 4–10 days → antibody reacts with antigen,
forming soluble complexes that may diffuse into vascular walls and may
initiate activation of complement → complement-containing immune

complexes generate influx of leukocytes into vessel walls → proteolytic
enzymes that can mediate tissue damage are released → immune complex
deposition + inflammatory response are responsible for vasculitic lesions
seen.
Clinical Features
Fever, urticarial (at the site of injection), joint pains (arthralgias), lymph node
enlargement, and proteinuria appear during this phase. Wherever immune
complexes deposit the tissue damage is similar (Box 20.9).
Treatment (Box 20.10).
AUTOIMMUNITY
Q. Write short essay/note autoimmunity.
Definition: Autoimmunity is defined as immune reactions in which body
produces autoantibodies and immunologically competent T-lymphocytes
against self-antigens.
Box 20.9: Lesion produced in acute serum sickness.
Vasculitis-inflammatory lesion in blood vessels.
Glomerulonephritis-inflammatory lesion in renal glomeruli.
Arthritis-inflammatory lesion in the joints.
Box 20.10: Treatment of acute serum sickness.
Corticosteroid creams or ointments: Relieve discomfort from itching and rash.
Antihistamines: May reduce the length of illness and itching.
NSAIDS: May relieve joint pain.
Paracetamol: Helpful in relieving fever and muscle pain.
Medications causing problem should be stopped and future use should be avoided.
Mechanisms of Autoimmunity (Fig. 20.8)
Genetic Factors
Role of Susceptibility Genes: Most autoimmune diseases are complex
multigenic disorders and genetic factors have an important role.
Runs in families: The incidence is greater in monozygotic than in

dizygotic twins.
Association with HLA genes: Most significant.
Environmental Factors
Role of infections
A variety of microbes may trigger autoimmunity by several mechanisms.
Molecular mimicry: Few viruses and microbes may express antigens that
have the antigenic structure similar to self-antigens. Immune responses
against them may cross-react with self-tissue and this phenomenon is
known as molecular mimicry. Example: Rheumatic heart disease, in
which antibodies formed against streptococcal bacterial proteins cross-
react with myocardial proteins and cause myocarditis. Molecular mimicry
between microbial proteins and host tissues is also found in Klebsiella and
HLA-B27 in ankylosing spondylitis, Coxsackie and glutamic acid
decarboxylase in insulin-dependent (type 1) diabetes mellitus, rheumatoid
arthritis, and multiple sclerosis.Breakdown of anergy: Tissue necrosis and inflammation produced by
microbial infections can cause up-regulation of costimulatory molecules
on APCs. This may favor breakdown of anergy and activation of T-cells.
Immune dysregulation: Normally, T-cells regulate any autoreactive T
and B-cells that have survived clonal deletion. Dysregulation of T-cell
function can lead to loss of control and the development of autoimmune
disease. Examples: immunodeficiency diseases such as
hypogammaglobulinemia and HIV infection are commonly associated
with autoimmune phenomena.
Other environmental factorsUltraviolet radiation
Cigarette smoking
Local tissue injury/damage: Some autoantigens are hidden within the
cells or tissues in immunologically privileged sites (e.g. brain or the
anterior chamber of the eye). Therefore, the lymphoid cells remain in a
state of immunologic ignorance. In this state, lymphoid cells are neither
activated nor anergized to proteins expressed by these immunologically
privileged sites. If the tissue in the privileged site is damaged by trauma or
inflammation or tumor, the antigens may be and released. These antigens

can evoke an autoimmune response. Examples, Dressler’s syndrome is an
acute pericarditis developing in a patient with myocardial infarction
secondary to the production of anti-myocardial antibodies, development of
insulin-dependent diabetes in association of Coxsackie virus infection,
multiple sclerosis and sympathetic ophthalmia.Drugs: T-cell bypass is a mechanism by which T-cells help auto-
reactivation of B-cells instead of suppressing them. Examples include
drug-induced autoimmune responses such as quinine induced
thrombocytopenia.Hormones.
Classification of autoimmune disorders are presented in Table 20.11.
Fig. 20.8:  Pathogenesis of autoimmunity.
Table 20.11: Classification of autoimmune disorders.
Organ specific autoimmune diseases Systemic autoimmune diseases

Type I diabetes mellitus
Goodpasture syndrome
Multiple sclerosis
Grave’s disease
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
Autoimmune pernicious anemia
Autoimmune Addison’s disease
Vitiligo
Myasthenia gravisRheumatoid arthritis
Scleroderma
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Primary Sjögren syndrome
Polymyositis
Q. List autoimmune diseases.
Therapy of Autoimmune Disease
Control of symptoms (e.g. non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for joint pains, fever, etc. in
SLE; b-blockers in patients with thyrotoxic features).
Specific replacement therapy where the organ has been completely destroyed (e.g. thyroid
hormone replacement in hypothyroidism).
Immunosuppressive therapy including corticosteroids, cytotoxic drugs in different forms, different
regimens and different routes.
Newer and experimental forms of therapy including immunomodulation, e.g. plasmapheresis,
intravenous immunoglobulin therapy, cyclosporin.
TRANSPLANTATION IMMUNOLOGY
Transplantation
Q. Write short note on transplantation and its types.
Organ transplant is the moving of an organ from one body to another (or
from a donor site on the patient’s own body) for the purpose of replacing the
recipient’s damaged or failing organ with a working one from the donor site.
Graft Types
Autograft: Tissue transfer within the same individual (e.g. skin graft).
Isograft: Tissue transfer between genetically identical individuals (e.g.
identical twins).
Allograft: Tissue transfer between genetically non-identical members of
the same species (includes living-related donor and cadaver donor human
transplants). Immunosuppression is required.Xenograft: Tissue transfer between different species. Immunosuppression
is required for transplantation.

Donors
1. Cadaver donors are individuals with severe brain injury resulting in brain
death, which is defined as complete irreversible cessation of all brain
function, including the brainstem.
Table 20.12 lists criteria for cadaver donor selection and exclusion.
2. Living donors:
Living-unrelated donors on average share no more genes with a
recipient than a cadaver donor. An example is the patient’s spouse.
Living-related donors share a substantial portion of their genomes with
the recipient.
Requirements
–  Living donors must be in almost perfect health.
–  Normal function of the organ under consideration.
–  Be good candidates for anesthesia and the operative procedure.
Workup: (refer Factors Determining the Success on page 912).
Risk
–  Perioperative mortality for living kidney donors is 0.03%.
–  A living donor provides one kidney, and the remaining kidney
hypertrophies and achieves 80% of creatinine clearance before
donation.
Surgical Position
Orthotopic: The old organ is removed, and the new one is placed in the
same position.
Heterotopic: The new organ is placed in a different position.
Rejection
The three types of rejection are: (i) hyperacute, (ii) acute and (iii) chronic;
and details discussed on pages 913-4.
Table 20.12: Criteria for cadaver donor selection and exclusion.
Donor selection Exclusion
Donor must be normothermic Disseminated or uncured extracranial cancers
Donor must not on depressant drugs Sepsis

(especially barbiturates)
An apnea test result must be negative (i.e. no
respiratory effort despite a high arterial carbon
dioxide level)Poor organ function
Electroencephalogram (EEG) and cerebral
blood flow studies are optionalHepatitis C/B, CMV, HIV
IMMUNOMODULATORS
Definition: Immunomodulators are drugs which either suppress the immune
system, i.e. immunosuppressants or stimulate the immune system, called
immunostimulants.
Immunosuppressants (Box 20.11)
Glucocorticoids (refer page 68)
Calcineurin Inhibitors
Calcineurin (CN) is a protein phosphatase activates the T-cells of the immune
system and can be blocked by drugs.Cyclosporine
–  It binds to the cytosolic protein cyclophilin of immunocompetent
lymphocytes, especially T-lymphocytes.
–  This complex of ciclosporin and cyclophilin inhibits the phosphatase
calcineurin, which under normal circumstances induces the
transcription of interleukin-2.
–  The drug also inhibits lymphokine production and interleukin release,
leading to a reduced function.
–  Uses and toxicity of cyclosporine is presented in Table 20.13.
Tacrolimus
–  It binds to the immunophilin FKBP1A and the complex inhibits
calcineurin. This in turn inhibits its phosphatase activity and prevents
the progression of cell from the G0 into G1 phase of the cell cycle.
–  Tacrolimus is more potent and has less side-effect compared to
cyclosporine. Toxicity of tacrolimus are listed in Box 20.12.
–  Use
◆ Prophylaxis of solid-organ allograft rejection.

◆ Topical preparation available for use in atopic dermatitis and
psoriasis.
Sirolimus (rapamycin)
Q. Write short note on sirolimus.
–  They affect the first phase of T lymphocyte activation unlike
cyclosporine and tacrolimus.
–  Sirolimus affects the signal transduction and lymphocyte clonal
proliferation.
–  It binds to FKBP1A (similar to tacrolimus) and mTOR (mammalian
target of rapamycin). However, it does not inhibit calcineurin. Toxicity
of sirolimus are listed in Box 20.13.
–  It indirectly inhibits many T lymphocyte-specific kinases and
phosphatases. T cel prevents their progression from G1 to S phase of
the cell cycle.
–  Sirolimus inhibits B-cell differentiation into plasma cells and reduces
the production of IgM, IgG, and IgA antibodies.
–  Uses: Prophylaxis of organ transplant rejection with other drugs.
Table 20.13: Uses and toxicity of cyclosporine.
Uses Toxicity
Organ transplantation: Kidney, liver, heart
Rheumatoid arthritis, IBD (inflammatory
bowel disease), uveitis
Psoriasis
Aplastic anemia
Skin conditions: Atopic dermatitis, alopecia
areata, pemphigus vulgaris, lichen planus,
pyoderma gangrenosumRenal dysfunction
Tremor
Hirsutism (hypertrichosis)
Hypertension
Hyperlipidemia
Gum hyperplasia
Hyperuricemia – worsens gout
Calcineurin inhibitors + glucocorticoids =
Diabetogenic
Box 20.11: Various categories of immunosuppressants.
Glucocorticoids-Prednisolone
Calcineurin inhibitors
–  Cyclosporine
–  Tacrolimus
–  Sirolimus

–  Everolimus
Antiproliferative/antimetabolic agents
–  Azathioprine
–  Mycophenolate mofetil
Others: Methotrexate, cyclophosphamide, thalidomide and chlorambucil, Interferon
Antibodies
–  Antithymocyte globulin
–  Anti CD3 monoclonal antibody: Muromonab
–  Anti-IL-2 receptor antibody: Daclizumab, basiliximab
–  Anti TNF alpha: Infliximab, etanercept
Box 20.12: Toxicity of tacrolimus.
Nephrotoxicity
Neurotoxicity: Tremor, headache, motor disturbances, seizures
GI side effects
Hypertension
Hyperglycemia
Risk of tumors, infections
Box 20.13: Toxicity of sirolimus.
Increase in serum cholesterol, triglycerides
Anemia
Thrombocytopenia
Hypokalemia
Fever
Gastrointestinal effects
Risk of infection, tumors
Antiproliferative/Antimetabolic Agents
Q. Write short note on azathioprine.
Azathioprine
–  It is nonenzymatically converted to mercaptopurine which acts as a
purine analogue and inhibits DNA synthesis.
–  The clonal expansion of lymphocytes in the induction phase of the
immune response is prevented and thereby affects both the cell and the
humoral immunity. Toxicity of azathioprine are listed in Box 20.14.
–  Uses
◆  Prevention of organ transplant rejection

◆  Rheumatoid arthritis
Mycophenolate Mofetil
–  Prodrug: Mycophenolic acid.
–  Inhibits IMPDH: Enzyme in guanine synthesis (Inosine monophosphate
dehydrogenase (IMPDH).
–  Selectively inhibits lymphocyte proliferation, function, Antibody
formation, cellular adhesion, migration
–  Uses:
◆  Prophylaxis of transplant rejection
◆  Combination: Glucocorticoids, calcineurin inhibitors.
Antibodies (Box 20.15)
Anti-TNF agents
–  TNF is a cytokine released at the site of inflammation. Anti-TNF
agents and their uses is listed in Table 20.14.
LFA-1 inhibitor (lymphocyte function associated)
Efalizumab
–  Monoclonal Ab targeting lymphocyte function associated antigen.
Blocks T-cell adhesion, activation, trafficking
Uses
–  Organ transplantation
–  Psoriasis.
Glatiramer acetate
The only immunosuppressant agent used for the treatment of multiple
sclerosis (MS).
Used to reduce the frequency of MS relapses (exacerbations) in relapsing-
remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS).
Complications of Immunosuppression
Infections:
–  The immunosuppression impairs host defenses against a diverse group
of pathogens (e.g. opportunistic infections).
–  Wide range of bacterial, fungal, and protozoal organisms can cause

opportunistic infections. They can be lethal. Hence, they need prompt
diagnosis and treatment.
Neoplasia: The three major areas of increased risk are:
1. Skin cancer
2. Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders (PTLDs)
3. Oral squamous cell cancers or female genital tract cancers.
Box 20.14: Toxicity of azathioprine.
Bone marrow suppression: Leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, anemia
Increased susceptibility to infection
Hepatotoxicity
Alopecia
Diarrhea
Box 20.15: Antibodies used as immunosuppressants.
Antithymocyte Globulin
Monoclonal antibodies
Anti-CD3 Monoclonal antibody (Muromonab-CD3)
Anti-IL-2 Receptor antibody (Daclizumab, Basiliximab)
Campath-1H (Alemtuzumab)
Table 20.14: Anti-TNF agents and their uses.
Anti-TNF agents Uses Adverse reactions
Infliximab
Etanercept
Adalimumab
Infliximab
Certolizumab pegol,
golimumabRheumatoid arthritis
Crohn’s disease – fistulae
Psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis
Psoriatic arthritis
Ankylosing spondylosis
RA, SLE, vasculitis, inflammatory myopathy,
uveitisCytopenias
Infusion reactions
Demyelinating
disorders
Infections
Tuberculosis
Heart failure
Hepatotoxicity
Immunostimulants (Box 20.16)
Levamisole
Uses
Adjuvant therapy with 5FU in colon cancer

Thalidomide
Used in multiple myeloma, graft versus host disease, myelodysplastic
syndrome, colon and prostate cancer.
Contraindicated in women with childbearing potential: Phocomelia.
Bacillus Calmette-Guerin
Used as intravesical therapy for superficial bladder cancer.
Interferons (Box 20.17)
Interferon alfa-2b
Uses and adverse reactions of interferon alfa -2b is listed in Table 20.15.
Interleukin-2 (aldesleukin)
Uses: Metastatic renal cell carcinoma, melanoma.
Toxicity: Cardiovascular—capillary leak syndrome, hypotension.
Plasmapheresis
Q. Write short note on indications for plasmapheresis.
Plasmapheresis is a process that filters the blood and removes harmful
antibodies. Its indications are listed in Box 20.18.
ADULT IMMUNIZATION
Q. Write short note on adult immunization schedule.
Screening tools to be checked before vaccination is listed in Box 20.19.
Contraindications for Immunization
Previous anaphylaxis to a specific vaccine
History of anaphylaxis to egg protein, neomycin (MMR)
Live vaccines in pregnancy
Live vaccines in patients with impaired immunity.
Adverse Effects of Active Immunization
Mild fever
Infection (live vaccines)

Local reaction
Allergy/anaphylaxis
SSPE, demyelination, brachial neuritis.
Documentation
Provide copy of vaccine information statement (VIS) to patient/documents to be maintained
Date vaccination and next dose
Vaccine manufacturer
Lot number
Dose and site of vaccine
Vaccinator’s initials
ACIP adult immunization, age-based recommendations in India is presented
in Table 20.16.
Box 20.16: List of immunostimulants.
Levamisole
Thalidomide
BCG (Bacillus Calmette-Guerin)
Recombinant cytokines
Interferons
Interleukin-2
Other drugs
– Inosiplex, azimexon, imexon, thymosin, methylinosine monophosphate
Immunization
Vaccines, immunoglobulin, Rho (D) immunoglobulin
Box 20.17: Features of interferon.
Antiviral
Immunomodulatory activity
Bind to cell surface receptors: Initiate intracellular events
Enzyme induction
Inhibition of cell proliferation
Enhancement of immune activities
Increased phagocytosis
Table 20.15: Uses and adverse reactions of interferon alfa-2b.
Uses Adverse reactions
Hairy cell leukemia Flu-like symptoms: Fever, chills, headache

Malignant melanoma CVS: Hypotension, arrhythmia
Kaposi sarcoma CNS: Depression, confusion
Hepatitis B
Box 20.18: Indications for plasmapheresis.
Guillain-Barré syndrome
Myasthenia gravis
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, hemolytic uremic syndrome
Hyperviscosity syndromes (e.g. Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia)
Rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis. Wegeners granulomatosis, Goodpasteur syndrome
Fulminant hepatitis, chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy, Sydenhams
chorea
Box 20.19: Utilize screening tools; H-A-L-O.
Health condition
Age
Lifestyle
Occupation
Table 20.16: Shows Acip adult immunization, age-based recommendations in India.
Adult immunization based on medical and other indications in India is
presented in Table 20.17.

Table 20.17 Shows adult immunization based on medical and other indications in India.
Vaccination details are presented in Table 20.18.
Table 20.18: Vaccination details.
Vaccine Recommendation Booster Route Dose Special
population/efficacy
Diphtheria,
tetanus, pertussis18–64 years
Three dose series
at 0 and 4 weeks,
the third 6–12
months after
secondTdap
every 10
yearsIntramuscular 0.5
mL92% efficacy.
Pregnant women—1
dose in second or third
trimester
Measles, mumps
and rubella>18 years of age
should receive at
least one dose of
MMR if there is
no serologic proof
of immunityNo Subcutaneous Pregnancy to be avoided
for at least 4 weeks after
vaccination
Influenza Annual, single
doseAnnual Intramuscular
Nasal spray0.5
mL,
0.25People aged > 50
years
Chronic obstructive

mL
into
each
nostrilpulmonary disease
(COPD).Cardiac diseases
Diabetes mellitus,
cancer
immunodeficiency,
renal disease
Hemoglobinopathies
Pregnant women
Health care providers
Adult household
contacts
Travelers to endemic
area
Pneumococcal
polysaccharide
vaccine
(PPSV23) and
conjugate
vaccine (PCV13)Single dose
Aged above 65
yearsCan be
repeated
after 5
yearsIntramuscular 0.5
mLAnatomic asplenia
Sickle cell disease
Immunocompromised
persons
Pregnant women with
high-risk conditions
Hepatitis B For
immunocompetent
adults,
administered at 0,
1, and 6 monthsA
booster
if anti-
HBs
levels
decline
to less
than 10
mIU/mL
and
<100
mIU/mL
in
patients
on
dialysisIntramuscular 1mL
(20
μg)Protection (anti-HBs
antibody titer of 10
mIU/mL or higher) after
recombinant vaccine
After first dose—20–
30%
After second dose—75–
80%
After third doses—90–
95%
Hepatitis A Two doses of 1
mL at 6 month
intervalIntramuscular 1 mL Only recommended in:People who travel to
endemic area of Hep
APersons who work
with HAV-infected
primates or with
HAV in a laboratoryWho receive clotting
factor concentrates
Food handlers

Chronic liver disease/
CKD awaiting
transplant
Men who have sex
with men
Varicella < 13 years - 1
dose -
> 13 years - 2
doses
Interval between 2
doses should be
4–8 weeksSubcutaneous 0.5
mLHealth care workers
Family contacts of
immunocompromised
persons
High risk of exposure
(e.g. teachers, day care
employees, military
personnel, and
international travelers)
Human
papilloma virusGardasil vaccine,
3 doses- at 0, 2,
and 6 months.
Cervarix vaccine,
3 doses IM at 0, 1
and 6 monthsIntramuscular 0.5
mLWoman age 26 years or
younger or a man age 21
years or younger
The immunization must
precede the sexual
debut.
Age for initiation for
vaccination to be 10–12
years (females) and 9–
12 years (males)
Meningococcal
meningitisSingle dose Nil Intramuscular 0.5
mLDuring an outbreak
(HCW, Lab. worker,
close contacts)
During inter-epidemic
period
To travelers, pilgrims
(Quadrivalent) people
attending fairs and
festivals. (bivalent 10–
14 days prior)
Herpes zoster Single dose Nil Subcutaneous 0.65
mLRecommended for
persons >60 years.
High risk for
developing recurrent
herpes zoster, such asPatients with chronic
medical conditions
(CKD, diabetes
mellitus, rheumatoid
arthritis, and chronic
pulmonary disease)Persons who are
likely to have severe

immunosuppression
in near future.
Haemophilus
influenzae type b
(Hib)Intramuscular 0.5
mLNot recommended for
routine practice
TyphoidLive oral
Ty21a
vaccine,Injectable Vi
polysaccharide
vaccine, andVi-rEPA
vaccineEvery
five
yearsNot recommended for
routine practice
Cholera Two separate
doses, 1–6 weeks
apart for those
aged over 6 yearsNo Oral 85–90% protection
AMYLOIDOSIS
Definition: Amyloidosis is a group of acquired and hereditary disorders
characterized by extracellular deposition of insoluble polymeric proteins
fibrils in tissues and organs.
Classification of Amyloidosis (Table 20.19)
Table 20.19: Classification of amyloidosis.
Category Precursor
proteinFibril protein Associated
disease/(s)
A. Systemic (generalized) amyloidosis
1. Immunocyte dyscrasias with
amyloidosis (primary amyloidosis)Immunoglobulin
light chains
(mainly λ)AL Multiple
myeloma,
other plasma
cell
dyscrasias
2. Reactive systemic amyloidosis
(secondary amyloidosis)Serum amyloid
associated
(SAA)AA Chronic
inflammatory
process
3. Hemodialysis-associated
amyloidosisβ2-
microglobulinAβ2m Chronic renal
failure
B. Hereditary or familial amyloidosis
 SAA AA

1. Familial Mediterranean fever
2. Familial amyloidotic neuropathies Transthyretin ATTR
3. Systemic senile amyloidosis
C. Localized amyloidosis
1. Senile cerebral Amyloid
precursor protein
(APP)Aβ Alzheimer
disease
2. EndocrineThyroid Calcitonin A Cal Medullary’s
carcinoma
Islets of Langerhans Islet amyloid
peptideAIAPP Type 2
diabetes
Clinical Features
It is usually a rapidly progressive disease. The clinical features depends on
the organs involved.
Nonspecific symptoms: These include fatigue and weight loss.
Renal amyloidosis: Kidneys are affected in about 70% of patients. It
usually presents with proteinuria (often in the nephrotic range),
hypoalbuminemia, secondary hypercholesterolemia, and edema or
anasarca.Cardiac amyloidosis: The heart is the second most commonly (50%)
affected organ and may show concentric thickening of ventricles and
diastolic dysfunction, leading to a restrictive cardiomyopathy. It may
present with heart failure.Neuropathies: Autonomic dysfunction with gastrointestinal motility
disturbances (diarrhea, constipation) and peripheral sensory neuropathies
are relatively common. Carpal tunnel syndrome with weakness and
paresthesia of the hands may be an early presenting feature.Macroglossia (Fig. 20.9A): Enlarged tongue, is pathognomonic of AL
amyloidosis that may be found in ~10% of patients.
Amyloidosis of liver: Causes cholestasis and hepatomegaly.
Amyloidosis of spleen: May produce functional hyposplenism in the
absence of significant splenomegaly.
Cutaneous amyloidosis: It can produce:
–  Easy bruising due to amyloid deposits in capillaries or to deficiency of

clotting factor X, which can bind to amyloid fibrils.
–  Cutaneous ecchymosis especially around the eyes and can produce
“raccoon-eye” sign (Fig. 20.9B).
Other findings: These include nail dystrophy, alopecia, and amyloid
arthropathy with thickening of synovial membranes in wrists and
shoulders.
Figs. 20.9A and B:  (A) Macroglossia; (B)  Racoon eyes in amyloidosis.
Diagnosis
Key feature for diagnosis of AL amyloidosis is the identification of the
underlying B-lymphoproliferative process and clonal light chain.
Serum protein electrophoresis (SPEP) and urine protein electrophoresis
(UPEP) are NOT useful screening tests. However, more than 90% of
cases, show serum or urine monoclonal LC or whole immunoglobulin by
immunofixation electrophoresis of serum (SIFE) or urine (UIFE).
Heredofamilial Amyloidosis

1. Familial Mediterranean Fever
Autosomal recessive disorder.
Characterized by recurrent attacks of fever accompanied with
inflammation of serosal surfaces (peritoneum, pleura, and synovial
membrane).
2. Familial Amyloidotic Neuropathies
Familial amyloidotic neuropathies are characterized by deposition of
amyloid in peripheral and autonomic nerves and the fibrils are made
up of mutant TTRs.
ATTR (transthyretin associated) amyloidosis are transmitted as
autosomal dominant diseases.
Clinically, they present with peripheral sensorimotor and autonomic
neuropathy and symptoms of autonomic dysfunction, diarrhea and weight
loss. Renal involvement is less common than with AL amyloidosis.
Macroglossia does not develop.
Hemodialysis-associated (Dialysis Related) AmyloidosisPatients with chronic renal failure (ESRD) on long-term hemodialysis
have high levels of β2-microglobulin in the serum because it cannot be
filtered through dialysis membranes → gets deposited as amyloid. Its
incidence appears to be decreasing with newer high-flow dialysis
techniques.It produces rheumatologic manifestations and usually presents with carpal
tunnel syndrome, persistent joint effusions, spondyloarthropathy, or cystic
bone lesions.
Other AmyloidsCerebral amyloidosis: Brain is a common site of amyloid deposition,
though it is not directly affected in any form of acquired systemic
amyloidosis.Alzheimer’s disease: Intracerebral and cerebrovascular amyloid deposits
are found in Alzheimer’s disease. Most cases are sporadic.
Transmissible spongiform encephalopathy: In hereditary spongiform
encephalopathies, several amyloid plaques are observed.
Treatment

Aim of treatment: To support the function of affected organs and, in
acquired amyloidosis, treatment of the associated primary disorder to
prevent further amyloid deposition.
Treatment of underlying disorder: Treatment of any underlying
inflammatory source or infection may produce regression of existing
amyloid deposits. Chemotherapy with melphalan plus dexamethasone or
stem cell therapy in useful in AL amyloidosis. Guidelines for the treatment
of newly diagnosed primary amyloidosis is presented in Flowchart 20.1.Second-line chemotherapy includes thalidomide/lenalidomide,
bortezomib, carfilzomib plus dexamethasone.
Colchicine may be useful in familial Mediterranean fever.
Nephrotic syndrome and congestive cardiac failure are treated with the
relevant therapies.
Hereditary transthyretin amyloidosis: In ATTR amyloidosis, where
transthyretin is mainly produced in the liver, liver transplantation is the
definitive therapy.
Immunoblot (Western Blot)
Q. Write short note on Western blot.
It is a test to detect antibodies. According to molecular weight, the microbial
proteins are separated by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE). They
are transferred (blotted) on to a nitrocellulose membrane, which is incubated
with serum of patient. Binding of specific antibody is detected with an
enzyme–anti-immunoglobulin conjugate (similar to in ELISA), and
specificity is confirmed by its location on the membrane. The test is a highly
specific and can be used to confirm the results of less specific tests such as
ELISA.
Flowchart 20.1:  Guidelines for the treatment of newly diagnosed primary amyloidosis.

Geriatrics

CHAPTER
21
BIOLOGY OF AGING
Aging
Q. What is aging?
Definition: Aging can be defined as gradual, insidious, and progressive
decline in structure and function which begins to unfold after the
achievement of sexual maturity. Various mechanisms that cause and
counteract cellular aging are shown in Figure 21.1.
Fig. 21.1:  Mechanisms of cellular aging and that counteract cellular aging.
(IGF: insulin-like growth factor; TOR: target of rapamycin)
Changes in Physiologic Function with Age (Table 21.1)
Table 21.1: Changes in physiologic function with age.

Organ system Age-related change
Cardiovascular Impaired contractile function and baroreceptor function
Decreased conductivity and ventricular filling
Increased systolic blood pressure
Respiratory Decreased lung elasticity, decreased maximal breathing capacity, decreased
number of cilia and diminished mucus clearance, decreased arterial PO2
Diminished cough reflex and diminished number of functional alveoli
Gastrointestinal Decreased esophageal and colonic motility
Renal Decreased renal blood flow and glomerular filtration rate
Kidney size decreases by 20–30% by age 90
Bladder Decline in bladder capacity from about 500–600 mL to about 250 mL
Immune Decreased cell-mediated immunity, decreased T-cell number, decreased T-
helper cells
Increased T-suppressor cells, increased autoimmunity
Loss of memory cells
Decline in antibody titers to known antigens
Endocrine Decreased hormonal responses to stimulation and decreased androgens and
estrogens
Impaired glucose tolerance and impaired norepinephrine responses
Autonomic
nervousImpaired response to fluid deprivation
Decline in baroreceptor reflex
Increased susceptibility to hypothermia
Neurologic Decreased vibratory sense and decreased proprioception
Slowed neuronal transmission
Special senses Presbyopia
Lens opacification
Decreased hearing, taste, and smell
Musculoskeletal Sarcopenia (reduced muscle mass and contractile force)
Integumentary
changesDecreased skin elasticity-wrinkling, senile purpura
Increased dryness
Thickened nails
Thinning of hair (baldness)
Decreased subcutaneous fat
Factors which makes assessment/treatment of elderly different is presented in
Box 21.1
Box 21.1: What makes the assessment/treatment of elderly different?
Individuals become more dissimilar as they grow.
Abrupt decline in any system is always due to disease and not due to normal aging.

Multiple pathology
Missing symptoms (e.g. angina in an elderly patient with osteoarthritis—may not manifest)
Masking symptoms (e.g. history of fall and fracture neck of femur in an elderly female-masked a
coexistent hemiparesis due to a internal capsule infarct.)
Atypical Disease Presentations in Older Adults (Table 21.2)
Table 21.2: Atypical disease presentations in older adults.
Diagnosis Potential presenting
symptoms and signsDiagnosis Potential presenting
symptoms and signs
Myocardial
infarctionAltered mental status
Fatigue
Fever
Functional declineMalignancy Altered mental status
Fever
Pathologic fracture
Infection Altered mental status
Functional decline
HypothermiaPulmonary
embolusAltered mental status
Fatigue
Fever
Syncope
Hyperthyroidism Altered mental status
Anorexia
Atrial fibrillation
Chest pain
Constipation
Fatigue
Weight gainVitamin
deficiencyAltered mental status
Ataxia
Dementia
Fatigue
Depression Cognitive impairment
Failure to thrive
Functional declineFecal impaction Altered mental status
Chest pain
Diarrhea
Urinary incontinence
Electrolyte
disturbanceAltered mental status
Falls
Fatigue
Personality changesAortic stenosis Altered mental status
Fatigue
COMPREHENSIVE GERIATRIC ASSESSMENT
Q. What is comprehensive geriatric assessment?
Comprehensive geriatric assessment (CGA) is a multi-dimensional, multi-
disciplinary diagnostic and therapeutic process conducted to determine the

medical, mental, and functional problems of older people with frailty so
that a co-ordinated and integrated plan for treatment and follow-up can be
developed (Table 21.3).
Domains assessed and considered in the multidimensional approach of
comprehensive geriatric assessment (CGA) are shown in Figure 21.2.
Basic activities of daily living (BADL) and instrumental activities of daily
living (IADL) are presented in Table 21.4.
Such assessments may be done by a Geriatrician working independently,
or as part of an interdisciplinary team that often include specially trained
nurses (RNs), occupational therapists (OT), physical therapists (PT),
social workers (SW), dieticians, speech language pathologists (SLP) and
specialty pharmacists.
How to identify elderly patients who would benefit from such an
assessment (i.e. the frail elderly)? Strongly consider if they have three or
more of the ‘Red Flags’ listed in Box 21.2.


Fig. 21.2:  Components of comprehensive geriatric assessment (CGA).
Table 21.3: Systematic comprehensive geriatric evaluation of an older
person.
Medical evaluation PLUS Additional assessment
Standard medical history PLUS Slow the pace of history taking
Ensure the patient can hear
Obtain collateral history
Ask about functional independence
Ask a full drug history
Table 21.4: Basic activities of daily living (BADL) and instrumental
activities of daily living (IADL)
Basic activities of daily living (BADL) Instrumental activities of daily living (IADL)
Toileting, self-hygiene, bathing, grooming,
dressing, feeding, and ambulation (stairs too).Tasks and roles you do at home
For each of the questions, enquire whether
the person can perform it independently,
whether he/she needs assistance or he/she is
completely caregiver dependentShopping, meal planning and preparation,
housekeeping, laundry, transit, financial
management, using a telephone, medication
management and driving
Objective Measures of Physical Function (Table 21.5)
COMMON CLINICAL PROBLEMS OF AGING
Gerontology
Gerontology is the study of aging from a multidisciplinary perspective. It
examines specific changes common to older adults as well as the broader
social issues. Both the normal and the problematic aspects of aging are
considered. In addition to education and research about adulthood and aging,
practice is emphasized in order to provide services more effectively to older
adults and their families.
Box 21.2: Red flags in the comprehensive geriatric assessments.>75 years
Needs help with ADLs/IADLs by caregiver
Lives alone

Falls
Delirium/confusion
Incontinence
>2 admissions to acute care hospital/year
‘Failure to thrive.’
Geriatric Giants (Fig. 21.4)
It is a term coined by Bernard Isaacs.
It refers to the principal chronic disabilities of old age that have an impact
on physical, mental and social domains of older adults. Many of these
conditions are often wrongly perceived to be an unavoidable part of old
age. However, they can be improved.
Table 21.5: Objective measures of physical function.
Timed Get-Up-and-Go (TUG- test) (Fig.
21.3)>30 sec: fall risk
6 meter walk <5.8 sec
Gait speed >6.0 sec
6 minute walk <300 m: mortality
<400 m: functional impairment

Fig. 21.3:  Timed Get-Up-and-Go (TUGTest).

Fig. 21.4:  Modern geriatic giants.
Dementia
Q. Write short notes on dementia and its causes.
Dementia is typically progressive and nonreversible. It affects 5–10% of
those above 65 years and 20–25% over 85 years.
Box 21.3: Diagnostic Criteria for Dementia (DSM-IV).
Memory impairment:  Impaired ability to learn new information or to recall old information.
One or more of the following:
–   Aphasia (language disturbance); apraxia (impaired ability to carry out motor activities despite
intact motor function); agnosia (failure to recognize or identify objects despite intact sensory
function); disturbance in executive functioning-impaired ability to plan, organize, sequence,
abstract.
Cognitive deficits result in functional impairment (social/occupational).

Cognitive deficits do not occur exclusively solely during a delirium.
NOT due to other medical or psychiatric conditions.
Diagnostic Criteria for Dementia (DSM-IV) (Box 21.3)
The old dementia terminology required the presence of memory impairment
for all of the dementias. It has been recognized that memory impairment is
not the first domain to be affected. Hence, DSM 5 has subgrouped
neurocognitive disorder into minor or major (Table 21.6).
Table 21.6: DSM 5 subgroups of neurocognitive disorder.
Minor neurocognitive disorder ( DSM-5) Major neurocognitive disorder (DSM-5)
Modest cognitive decline from a previous level of
performance in one or more of the domainsSubstantial cognitive decline from a previous
level of performance in one or more of the
domains
Deficits are insufficient to interfere with
independence, but greater effort, compensatory
strategies, or accommodation may be required to
maintain independenceDeficits are sufficient to interfere with
independence
The cognitive deficits do not occur exclusively in the context of a delirium.
The cognitive deficits are not primarily attributable to another mental disorder.
Classification of DementiaCortical
–   Disorder affecting the cortex, the outer portion or layers of the brain.
–   Alzheimer’s and Creutzfeldt-Jakob are two forms of cortical dementia.
–   Memory and language difficulties (aphasia) are most pronounced
symptoms.
Subcortical
–   Dysfunction in parts of the brain that are beneath the cortex.
–   Memory loss and language difficulties not present or less severe than
cortical.
–   Huntington’s disease and AIDS dementia complex.
–   Changes in their personality and attention span. Thinking slows down.
Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI)/Prodromal DementiaIt is a condition in which there is mild memory impairment alone (1.5 standard deviations below
that of age matched controls) in the absence of global cognitive decline or functional disabilities; it

can only be diagnosed by sophisticated neuropsychiatric testing. It does not meet criteria for
dementia.
Dementia will develop about 30% of those with MCI within three years. The remainder have
stable, mild cognitive impairments that do not appear to progress.
Causes of Dementia (Table 21.7)
Table 21.7: Causes of dementia.
Degenerative/inherited
Alzheimer’s disease (60–70%)
Neurodegenerative disorders: Frontotemporal
dementia (including Pick’s disease), Lewy
body disease, Parkinson’s disease,
Huntington’s disease.
Vascular dementia (10–20%):  Diffuse small
vessel disease
Neoplastic:  Primary/secondary depositsTraumatic:  Chronic subdural hematoma,
posthead injury
Infections:  Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease, HIV,
syphilis
Toxic/nutritional:  Alcohol, thiamine deficiency,
vitamin B12 deficiency
Prion diseases
Reversible dementia
ALZHEIMER’S DISEASE
Q. Write a short essay/note on Alzheimer’s disease.
Introduction and Definition
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia in the
world. It is the most common cause of dementia above the age of 40.
In India: Most common cause of dementia is AD (50–60%) followed by
vascular and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB).
Etiology
Genetic factors
–   Genetic factors play an important role and about 15% of AD is
familial. Familial cases may be of two main groups: 1. early-onset
disease with autosomal dominant mode of inheritance and 2. a later-
onset group with polygenic inheritance.
–   Mutations: It can occur in several genes.
♦  Point mutation in amyloid precursor protein (APP) can cause AD.
♦  Mutations in the gene presenilin-1 (PS1) and presenilin-2 (PS2).
PS1 mutations are implicated in over 50% of families with familial

AD.
♦  The inheritance of one of the alleles of apolipoprotein ε4(apo ε4) is
associated with an increased risk of AD.
Environmental risk factors
–   Age: If is the main risk factor and incidence of AD increases
exponentially with age.
–   Female gender may also be a risk factor independent of the greater
longevity of women.
–   Head trauma and vascular risk factors.
–   According to some studies long-term consumption of NSAIDs and
acetaminophen have shown protection.
Clinical Feature
Q. Write a short essay/note on clinical features of Alzheimer’s disease.
The main clinical features are:
Memory impairment/loss: Early recent (short-term) memory loss is key
feature of AD.
Language problem: It is the next common symptom, common being
anomia and difficulty with word finding is characteristic.
Apraxia: It is impaired ability (inability) to carry out (perform) skilled,
complex, organized motor activities.
Agnosia: It is failure to recognize objects (e.g. clothing, places or people).
Frontal executive function: It is impairment of organizing, planning and
sequencing.
Parietal presentation: Visuospatial difficulties and difficulty with
orientation in space.
Myoclonic jerks (sudden brief contractions of various muscles or the
whole body) may occur spontaneously or in response to physical or
auditory stimulation. This phenomenon raises the possibility of
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), but the course of AD is much more
prolonged.Generalized seizures may also occur.
Death usually results from malnutrition, secondary infections, or heart
disease.

The typical duration of AD is 8 to 10 years, but the course can range from
1 year to 25 years.
Diagnostic Criteria for AD (Box 21.4)
Box 21.4: Diagnostic criteria for Alzheimer’s disease.
Memory impairment
One or more of the following
–   Aphasia
–   Apraxia
–   Agnosia
–   Disturbance in executive functioning.
Investigations
Investigation is aimed at excluding other treatable causes of dementia.
Neuroimaging studies (computed tomography (CT) and magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI)) are not specific for AD and may be normal
early in the course of the disease. As AD progresses, diffuse cortical
atrophy becomes apparent, and detailed MRI scans show atrophy of the
hippocampus.PET–Scan: It is the test of choice. It shows hypoperfusion in bilateral
perietotemporal cortex.
CSF markers: (1) Raised tau proteins, (2) low B42 amyloid, and (3)
elevated ceremides level.
Routine investigations: Blood chemistry, a complete blood count, tests for
syphilis, serum levels of vitamin B12 and thyroid functions.
Treatment for Alzheimer’s Disease
There is no specific treatment and the primary focus is on long-term amelioration of associated
behavioral and neurologic problems. Supportive therapy for AD is listed in Box 21.5.
Box 21.5:  Supportive therapy for AD.
Rehabilitation
–   Cognitive rehabilitation
–   Exercise programs
–   Occupational therapy
Drugs used  (Table 21.8): Donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine and tacrine are cholinesterase
inhibitors. Patients with Alzheimer disease (AD) have reduced cerebral content of choline acetyl
transferase, which leads to a decrease in acetylcholine synthesis and impaired cortical cholinergic

function.
Memantine appears to act by blocking overexcited N-methyl-D-Aspartate NMDA channels.
Statins may have protective effect on dementia especially vascular. Antioxidants (vitamin E,
selegiline), estrogen replacement, Ginkgo biloba have been tried.
Mild to moderate depression is common in the early stages of AD and responds to antidepressants.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors SSRIs are commonly used due to their low anticholinergic
side effects.
Newer developmental agents:Immunization against β-amyloid.
Huprine X-acetylcholinesterase inhibitor.
Xanomeline patch-m1/m4 muscarinic receptor agonist.
AIT-082 (purine hypoxanthine derivative)-increases neurotransmission.
COX 2 inhibitors-neuroinflammation therapy.
Protease inhibitors-target gamma-secretases to prevent amyloid formation.
Vascular dementia (Multi-infarct dementia)
Q. Discuss the clinical features of vascular dementia.
Second most common cause of dementia. Found in 15–30% of patients
with dementia.
Risk factors: Male sex, advanced age, diabetes, hypertension and/or other
cardiovascular disorders.
Abrupt onset of symptoms followed by stepwise deterioration .
Findings on neurologic examination consistent with prior stroke(s),
infarcts on cerebral imaging.
Focal neurologic symptoms: Pseudobulbar palsy, dysarthria and
dysphagia are most common.
Table 21.8: Drugs used for Alzheimer’s disease and their adverse reactions.
Drug and dosage Adverse drug reactions
Tacrine: 80 to 160 mg/day Liver toxicity, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea
Donepezil: 5 and 10 mg/day Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, muscle cramps
Rivastigmine: 6 to 12 mg/ day Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, headache, dizziness
Galantamine: 20 to 50 mg/ day Nausea, vomiting, agitation, sleep disturbances
NINDS-AIREN criteria for vascular dementia
All the following criteria should be present:
Dementia.
Focal signs on examination + evidence of cerebrovascular disease by CT or MRI.

A relationship of the two above, with dementia within 3 months of a recognized stroke and or
abrupt deterioration in fluctuation, or fluctuating stepwise progression of cognitive deficits.
Physical examination
May show increased tone (especially in the legs), exaggerated deep tendon
reflexes, and Babinski responses.
Examination may reveal carotid bruits, fundoscopic abnormalities and
enlarged heart.
Gait apraxia (‘magnetic’ gait) may be seen.
MRI may reveal hyperintensities and focal atrophy suggestive of old
infarctions.
Treatment
Control of risk factors such as hypertension, smoking, diabetes, hyperlipidemia.
Antiplatelets/statins.
Correction of sources of emboli, endarterectomy and anticoagulant therapy.
Frontotemporal dementia (FTD)
Q. Write short essay on the clinical features of frontotemporal
dementia.
Characterized by focal atrophy of the frontal and temporal lobes in the
absence of Alzheimer pathology.
Pick’s disease was the first recognized subtype of FTD, one that is
characterized pathologically by the presence of Pick bodies (silver staining
intracytoplasmic inclusions) in the neocortex and hippocampus.Clinically, presents initially with language abnormalities and behavioral
disturbances.
Occurs between the ages of 35 and 75 years, and only rarely after age 75;
the mean age of onset is the sixth decade.
Both sexes are equally affected.
Box 21.6: Core diagnostic features of FTD.
Insidious onset and gradual progression
Early decline in social interpersonal conduct
Early impairment in regulation of personal conduct
Early emotional blunting
Early loss of insight

Genetics of FTD
45% of patients have a family member affected.
Up to 18% of these have an abnormality on the short arm of chromosome
17 localized near gene for the microtubule associated protein, tau.
Box 21.6 lists the core diagnostic features and of Table 21.9 lists the
supportive diagnostic features of frontotemporal dementia.
Table 21.9: Supportive diagnostic features of frontotemporal dementia.
Behavioral disorder Speech and language deficits
Decline in personal hygiene and grooming
Mental rigidity and inflexibility
Distractibility and impersistence
Utilization behavior hyperorality and dietary
changes
Perseverations and stereotyped behaviorAltered speech output (aspontaneity and
economy of speech).
Stereotype speech
Echolalia
Perseverations
Mutism
Physical signs Investigations
Primitive reflexes; at least one of grasp, snout
and sucking
Incontinence
Akinesia, rigidity and tremor (rarely)
Low and labile blood pressureNeuropsychology:  Significant impairment on
frontal lobe tests in the absence of severe
amnesia, aphasia or percetuospatial disorder
EEG:  Normal despite clinically evident
dementia
Brain imaging (structural or functional)
predominant frontal and/or temporal
abnormality
Normal-pressure hydrocephalus
It is a condition of pathologically enlarged ventricular size with normal
opening pressures on lumbar puncture, clinically presents with a triad of
dementia, gait disturbance, and urinary incontinence (Adam’s triad —The
‘Wet, Wobbly, and Wacky’ Triad) reversible by the placement of a
ventriculoperitoneal shunt.
Dementia with lewy bodiesMost common dementia syndrome associated with Parkinsonism.
Second most common form of neurodegenerative dementia after
Alzheimer disease (AD).
For a probable diagnosis (Box 21.7) of Lewy body disease need at least
two of the following:
–   Fluctuating cognition with pronounced variations in attention and

alertness.
–   Recurrent visual hallucinations which are typically well-formed and
detailed.
–   Spontaneous motor features of parkinsonism.
Box 21.7: Features supporting the diagnosis dementia with Lewy bodies.
Syncope or transient loss of consciousness (LOC)
Neuroleptic sensitivity (i.e. new shuffling gait, tardive dyskinesia)
Systematized delusions
Hallucinations in other modalities (i.e. smell, hearing, taste)
Falls
Parkinson’s disease (refer pages 1008-13)
Salient features of Pick’s disease and Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease are presented
in Table 21.10.
Table 21.10: Salient features of Pick’s disease and Creutzfeldt-Jacob
disease.
Pick’s disease Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease
Subtype of frontal lobe dementia
Pick bodies (silver staining intracytoplasmic
inclusions in neocortex and hippocampus)
Language abnormalities
Logorrhea (abundant unfocused speech)
Echolalia (spontaneous repetition of
words/phrases)
Palilalia (compulsive repetition of phrases)Rapid onset and deterioration
Motor deficits
Seizures
Slowing and periodic complexes on EEG
Myoclonic activity
Modifiable/Reversible Causes of Dementia (Table 21.11)
Q. List the reversible causes of dementia.
Table 21.11: Modifiable causes of dementia.
Depression so-called ‘Pseudodementia’
Electrolyte disorders (hyponatremia,
hypercalcemia, etc.)
Hypothyroidism
Late onset psychosisVitamin deficiencies (B12, folate)
Obstructive sleep apnea
Normal pressure hydrocephalus (reverse with
shunting)
Brain tumor (post resection)

Medication side effects (e.g. sedatives,
anticonvulsants, antihypertensives,
anticholinergics, first generation neuroleptics)
Ethanol overuse/misuseSubdural hematoma (SDH)
Sub-acute CNS infections (i.e. meningitis,
encephalitis, syphilis)
Cognitive Testing
Mini-Mental State Examination tests a broad range of cognitive functions
including orientation, recall, attention, calculation, language manipulation,
and constructional praxis. Scores can be classified as: no cognitive
impairment = 24–30; mild cognitive impairment = 18–23; severe cognitive
impairment = 0–17. Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) is a 30-point
test that is more sensitive for the detection of mild cognitive impairment, and
it includes items that sample a wider range of cognitive domains, including
memory, language, attention, visuospatial, and executive functions.
Frailty SyndromeFrailty is defined as the loss of an individual’s ability to withstand minor
stresses because of decreased functional reserve of several organ systems.
The functional decline is so severely reduced that even a trivial illness or
adverse drug reaction may result in organ failure and death.
In a fit person of the same age, the same stresses would cause little upset.
Frailty indicates increased vulnerability to loss of function.
Characterized by multisystem dysregulation involving four main domains that includes: (1) chronic
inflammation, (2) sarcopenia, (3) osteoporosis and (4) alteration in neuroendocrine function.
Box 21.8: Conditions required for the diagnosis of frailty.
1. Unexplained weight loss (>5% over a year)
2. Poor endurance and energy (self-reported)
3. Poor strength (in lowest 20th percentile)
4. Slow walking speed (Poor ‘Get up and Go’ test)
5. Low physical activity (lowest 20th percentile)
Clinical Criteria
Five key elements form the core of the frailty cycle, including the following;Frailty is defined as the presence of three or more of conditions listed in Box
21.8.
Two main criteria used in diagnosing frailty are Linda Fried/Johns

Hopkins Frailty Criteria and the Rockwood Frailty Index.
Delirium in the Elderly
Definition: It is an acute syndrome of transient, reversible cognitive
dysfunction (details discussed on pages 1086-7).
Management
Prevention is the best medicine.
Eliminate extra medications, reverse metabolic abnormalities, hydration, and nutrition.
Education of patients and family.
Re-orientation by staff, family, sitters, clocks, calendars.
Remove nonessential lines and tubes.
Drug therapy:
–   Delirium that causes injury to the patient or others should be treated with medications.
–   The most common medications used are neuroleptics (Haloperidol, risperidone, olanzapine).
–   Benzodiazepines (lorazepam) often are used for withdrawal states.
–   Thiamine, cyanocobalamine supplementation.
DepressionDepression is the most common psychiatric illness in the elderly.
Although common, it is NOT a natural part of aging.
The prevalence in community dwelling elders range from 8% to 15%; it
raises to as much as 30% of those in long-term care facilities. Depression
and suicide are common in the elderly (especially older males; those over
75, have the same risk of suicide as 20–24 years old depressed males).Depression is NOT present in ALL older adults, but is under recognized
and under treated.
Bereavement or grief reaction  is commonly misdiagnosed as depression. A
normal grief reaction after the death of a spouse or a loved one lasts about 2
months in time, with the mourning process being complete in <2 years.
Feelings of sadness and preoccupation with the deceased are not helped by
anti-depressant medications during this time of mourning.
Treatment of depression in the elderly is discussed on pages 1076-8.
Box 21.9: Potentially reversible causes (‘DIAP-PERS’ mnemonic).
D - Delirium
I - Infection
A - Atrophic vaginitis or urethritis

P - Pharmaceuticals
P - Psychological disorders
E - Endocrine disorders
R - Restricted mobility
S - S tool impaction
Incontinence
Involuntary loss of urine or stool in sufficient amount or frequency to
constitute a social and/or health problem.
Urinary IncontinenceUrinary incontinence is defined as the involuntary loss of urine. It is a
heterogeneous condition that ranges in severity from dribbling small
amounts of urine to continuous urinary incontinence.
The prevalence increases with age, but it is not a part of normal aging. It
affects about 25–30% of community dwelling older women and 10–15%
of community dwelling older men, 50% of nursing home residents; often
associated with dementia, fecal incontinence, inability to walk and transfer
independently.Bladder record or diary needs to be maintained.
Reversible Conditions Associated with Urinary Incontinence
(Box 21.8)
Potentially reversible causes urinary incontinence are listed in Box 21.9.
Box 21.10: Medications causing incontinence.
Diuretics
Anticholinergics: Antihistamines, antipsychotics, antidepressants
Sedatives/hypnotics
Alcohol
Narcotics
α-adrenergic agonists/antagonists
Calcium channel blockers
Medications causing incontinence are listed in Box 21.10.
Categories of Incontinence
Urge incontinence: Other Names: Detrusor hyperactivity, detrusor

instability, irritable bladder, spastic bladder.
–   Most common cause of UI >75 years of age.
–   Abrupt desire to void cannot be suppressed.
–   Usually idiopathic.
–   Causes: Infection, tumor, stones, atrophic vaginitis or urethritis,
stroke, Parkinson’s disease, dementia.Stress incontinence
–   Most common type in women <75 years old.
–   Occurs with increase in abdominal pressure; cough, sneeze, etc.
–   Hypermotility of bladder neck and urethra; associated with aging,
hormonal changes, trauma of childbirth or pelvic surgery (85% of
cases).
–   Intrinsic sphincter problems; due to pelvic/incontinence surgery, pelvic
radiation, trauma, neurogenic causes (15% of cases).Overflow incontinence
–   Over distention of bladder.
–   Bladder outlet obstruction; stricture, BPH, cystocele, fecal impaction.
–   Non-contractile bladder (hypoactive detrusor or atonic bladder);
diabetes, MS, spinal injury, medications.
Functional incontinence
–   Does not involve lower urinary tract.
–   Result of psychological, cognitive or physical impairment.
A recently defined syndrome, overactive bladder, includes urinary
frequency (more than eight voids per 24 hours), nocturia (awakening at night
from sleep to void), and urgency (the acute need to void), with or without
incontinence is prevalent in around 31% women 75 years and older and 42%
men 75 years and older.
Treatment Options in Urinary Incontinence (Flowchart 21.1)
General treatment options in urinary incontinence are mentioned in Table 21.12.
Pharmacological interventionsUrge incontinence:  Oxybutynin, Propantheline, Imipramine.
Stress incontinence:  Phenylpropanolamine, Pseudo-Ephedrine, Estrogen (orally, trans-dermally
or transvaginally).
Surgical interventions

Urethral hypermotility:  Marshall-Marchetti-Krantz procedure, needle neck suspension.
Intrinsic sphincter deficiency: Sling procedure.
Other interventions (Box 21.11)
Flowchart 21.1:  Approach to urinary incontinence.
Box 21.11: Other interventions in urinary incontinence.
Pessaries
Periurethral bulking agents (periurethral injection of collagen, fat or silicone)
Diapers or pads

Chronic catheterization
–   Per urethral or suprapubic
–   Indwelling or intermittent
Table 21.12: General treatment options in urinary incontinence.
Reduce amount and timing of fluid intake
Avoid bladder stimulants (caffeine)
Use diuretics judiciously (not before bed)
Reduce physical barriers to toilet (use bedside
commode)
Bladder training
Patient educationScheduled voiding
Positive reinforcement
Pelvic floor exercises (Kegel exercises)
Biofeedback
Caregiver interventions: Scheduled toileting,
habit training, prompted voiding
Table 21.13: Falls in elderly.
Intrinsic factors Extrinsic factors
Medical conditions Medications
Impaired vision and hearing Improper use of assistive devices
Age-related changes Environment
Falls in the Elderly
Q. Write short note on falls in elderly.
About 30% of individuals over 65 years of age fall each year. About 10–15%
of falls result in serious injury and they are the cause of >90% of hip fractures
in this age group. Factors causing falls in elderly are listed in Table 21.13.
Normal Changes with Aging (Table 21.14)
Table 21.14: Normal changes with aging.
Neurologic changes
Increased reaction time
Decreased righting reflexes
Decreased proprioceptionChanges of gait
Slower gait
Decreased stride length and arm swing
Forward flexion at head and torso
Increased flexion at shoulders and knees
Increased lateral swayVision changes
Decreased accommodation and dark
adaptation
Decreased muscle mass

Fall risk factors and targeted interventions (Table 21.15 and Fig. 21.5)
Table 21.15: Fall risk factors and targeted interventions.
Risk factor Targeted intervention
Postural hypotension Behavioral recommendations, such as hand
clenching, elevation of head of bed;
discontinuation or substitution of high-risk
medications
Use of benzodiazepine or sedative-hypnotic agent Education about sleep hygiene; discontinuation
or substitution of medications
Use of multiple prescription medications Review of medications
Environmental hazards Appropriate changes; installation of safety
equipment (e.g. grab bars)
Gait impairment Gait training, assistive devices, balance or
strengthening exercises
Impairment in transfer or balance Balance exercises, training in transfers,
environmental alterations (e.g. grab bars)
Impairment in leg or arm muscle strength or limb
range of motionExercise with resistance bands or putty, with
graduated increases in resistance
Fig. 21.5:  Multidisciplinary approach to prevent falls
Box 21.12 lists the common pathologies associated with fall.
There are several reasons for the greater incidence of iatrogenic drug
reactions in the elderly, the most important of which is the high number of
medications that are taken by elders, especially those with multiple
comorbidities.
Guidelines for Drug Therapy in the Elderly (Box 21.13)
Elder Abuse
More than a million people world over aged 65 or older have been injured,

exploited, or otherwise mistreated by someone on whom they depended
for care or protection. Neglect is the most common form of abuse
followed by financial and emotional abuse.
Elder abuse can be suspected when the patient exhibits behavioral changes
in the presence of the caregiver, delays between occurrence of injuries and
sought treatment, inconsistencies between an observed injury and
associated explanation, lack of appropriate clothing or hygiene, and not
filling prescriptions.Many elders with cognitive impairment become targets of financial abuse.
Abuse and self-neglect has increased risk of mortality.
Major Forms of Abuse
1. Physical and sexual abuse: Any act of violence or rough treatment,
whether or not actual physical injury results. For example, slapping,
punching, kicking, pinching, burning, restraints.2. Emotional and psychological abuse: Any act that diminishes dignity and
self worth. For example, confinement, isolation, verbal assault, humiliation
and infantilization.3. Financial abuse and material exploitation: Any improper conduct that
results in monetary or personal loss for the older adult.
4. Abandonment and neglect
Active neglect: Intentional (deliberate) withholding of basic necessities
and/or care for physical or mental health.
Passive neglect: Not providing basic necessities and care. There is no
conscious attempt to inflict distress.
5. Medical abuse: Any medical procedure or treatment done without the
permission of the older person or their Power of Attorney or substitute
decision maker.
Box 21.12: Common pathologies associated with fall.
Ophthalmologic diseases
Arthritis
Foot problems
Neurologic illness
Parkinson’s and related disorders
Strokes

Peripheral neuropathy
Dizziness and disequilibrium
Box 21.13: Guidelines for drug therapy in the elderly.
Recommended approach
Use nonpharmacologic approaches whenever possible.
Avoid routine use of ‘as needed’ drugs for sleep, anxiety, pain.
Choose the drug with the least toxic potential. Substitute less toxic alternatives whenever possible
(antacid or sucralfate for an H2-blocker or proton pump inhibitors, Metamucil or Kaopectate for
Imodium, scheduled acetaminophen regimen for pain management).
Reduce the dosage.
‘Start low and go slow.’
Start with 25–50% of the standard dose of psychoactive drugs in the elderly.
Titrate the drug slowly.
Set realistic end points: Titrate to improvement, not elimination of symptoms.
Keep the regimen simple.
Regularly reassess the medication list.
Re-evaluate long-time drug use because the patient is changing.
Review over-the-counter medication use.

Dermatology

CHAPTER
22
INTRODUCTION
Description of Primary Skin Lesions (Fig. 22.1)
Q. Write short note on:
Macule and causes of macular lesions.
Plaque and its common causes.
Papule and causes of papular lesions.
Fig. 22.1:  Schematic representation of common primary skin lesions.

Description of Secondary Skin Lesions (Fig. 22.2)
Fig. 22.2:  Schematic representation of common secondary skin lesions.
PSORIASIS
Q. Write short essay/answer on etiology, clinical manifestations, and
management of psoriasis.
It is a non-infectious, chronic papulosquamous T cell mediated inflammatory
skin disorder and is one of the most common skin diseases. It usually follows
a relapsing and remitting course.
Gender: It equally affects males and females.
Age: It occurs in two peaks of age.
–   Early onset (age 16–22) is commoner and is often with a positive
family history. It has an increased prevalence of the HLA group Cw6.
–   Late onset (peaks at age 55–60 years) and no HLA association.
Etiology
The exact etiology of psoriasis is not known.

Genetic factors: The genetic component is complex and polygenic. There
is a clear genetic predisposition (with a positive family history in more
than 50% of patients) in association with certain environmental triggers.
Nine susceptibility genes have been identified (PSORS1 to PSORS9), most
important being PSORS1 (on chromosome 6p21.3).Environmental factors: Several environmental triggers produce psoriasis
in a genetically predisposed individual. These include infections, stress,
physical injury, trauma, smoking, alcohol and drugs.
PathogenesisPsoriasis results from interactions of genetic and environmental
factors. There is a shortened cell cycle time for keratinocytes (36 hours
compared with 311 hours in normal skin) and a decreased turnover time of
the epidermis (four days from basal cell layer to stratum corneum,
compared with 27 days in normal skin).Available evidence suggests that in genetically susceptible individuals,
triggering factors activate the antigen-presenting cells
(dendritic/Langerhans) which in turn activate CD4+ TH1 and TH17 cells
via IL-12 and IL-23 respectively and these T cells enter the skin and
accumulate in the epidermis. These T cells secrete mediators (TNF-α and
interferon-γ by TH1; IL-17A, 17F and 22 by TH17) which activate
keratinocytes to produce antimicrobial peptides (e.g. β-defensins),
cytokines (e.g. TNF-α, IL-1β, IL-6) and chemokines.
PathologyIncreased epidermal cell proliferation (hyperproliferation of
keratinocytes).
Proliferation of the subepidermal vasculature leads to dilated, tortuous
blood vessels within the dermal papillae surrounded by a mixed
neutrophilic and lymphohistiocytic perivascular infiltrate.Dense inflammatory cell infiltrate. Polymorphonuclear abscesses may be
seen within mildly spongiotic foci of the superficial epidermis
(spongiform pustules) and within the parakeratotic stratum corneum
(Munro microabscesses).
Clinical FeaturesPsoriasis can involve the skin, scalp, and nails and can present in

different clinical patterns.
Clinically skin lesions are characterized by well-defined pink-red, sharply
demarcated macules, papules, or rounded plaques, that are usually covered
by silvery scales with a whitish halo around lesions (Woronoff’s sign).
On removal of the scales, by scrapping using a microscopic slide,
multiple, minute, pin-point bleeding points may be observed (the Auspitz
sign/Grattage test). This finding reflecting the proliferation of blood
vessels in the superficial dermis. It predominantly affects extensor
surfaces and scalp, and has a chronic fluctuating course. There is
increased association of psoriasis with HIV infection.
Box 22.1: Types of psoriasis.
Plaque psoriasis (psoriasis vulgaris), chronic plaque psoriasis
Guttate psoriasis (small rain drop like psoriatic lesions)
Inverse psoriasis (flexural psoriasis)
Localized pustular psoriasis
Generalized pustular psoriasis
Erythrodermic psoriasis
Von Zumbasch psoriasis-pustular+erythroderma
Types of Psoriasis (Box 22.1)
Q. Write short essay/note on types and diagnosis of psoriasis.
Plaque Psoriasis (Psoriasis Vulgaris), Chronic Plaque Psoriasis
Most common form and accounts for 90% of cases.
Lesions (Figs. 22.3A and B):
–   Symmetrically distributed plaques involving the scalp, extensor
surfaces of the elbows, knees, gluteal cleft, and lower back, ears, scalp
and back. Plaques 1–10 cm in diameter with raised, well-defined
margins.
–   Thick silvery scale frequently present (although bathing may remove
scale).
–   Classically asymptomatic, although some patients report pruritis,
irritation, or pain.
–   Pitting of nail plates and involvement of intertriginous areas (umbilicus
and intergluteal cleft) may occur.

–   Psoriatic lesions can be induced in susceptible individuals by minor
local injury/trauma, a process known as the Koebner phenomenon
(Fig. 22.4).
Exacerbating factors: Drugs (lithium, beta-blockers, chloroquine,
NSAIDs, ACE inhibitors, terbinafine), infections (bacterial and viral), and
ethanol abuse.
Figs. 22.3A and B:  Skin lesion of psoriasis.

Fig. 22.4:  Koebner phenomenon in psoriasis.
Associated Features of Psoriasis
Nails (Fig. 22.5): Involvement is common and may be observed up to
50% of patients with psoriasis. These include (a) ‘thimble pitting’ of the
nail plate; (b) distal separation of the nail plate from the nail bed
(onycholysis); (c) yellow-brown discoloration underneath the nail plate
(‘oil drop’ sign), (d) subungual hyperkeratosis and (e) thickening of the
nail (onychodystrophy).
For diagnosis of nail involvement: > 6 nails should be involved with
each nail should have >20 pits.Psoriatic arthropathy: It may be seen in 5–10% of psoriatic patients. It
usually develops several years after appearance of skin lesions and most of
these will have nail changes. It is a form of chronic sero-negative
spondyloarthropathy (discussed on page 668).
Others: It may be associated with the co-morbidities such as ulcerative
colitis, Crohn’s disease, coronary artery disease, metabolic syndrome and
lymphoma.

Fig. 22.5:  Nail changes in psoriasis.
Investigations and Diagnosis
In most cases, the diagnosis can be made based on the history and physical
examination alone. Biopsy is seldom necessary.
Management of Psoriasis
Treatment depends on the type, location, and extent of disease.
General Management
Education, explanation reassurance and instruction are important.
Instructed to avoid excess drying or irritation of skin and to maintain adequate hydration of skin.
Treatment  can be divided into four broad categories namely (1) topical agents, (2) UV therapies, (3)
systemic agents, and (4) biological therapies.
Treatment of psoriasis vulgaris:  A three step approach.
Step 1: Topical treatments
Emollients/moisturizers:  Petroleum jelly and thick creams, especially effective when applied
after hydrating bath or shower.
Topical corticosteroids:  Mainstay for treatment. Moderate to high potency ointments (e.g.
betamethasone 0.5%) +/- occlusion by tape or plastic wrap recommended for thick plaques on
extensor surfaces, whereas low potency (e.g. 0.05% fluocinonide) usually sufficient for face and
intertriginous areas.
Coal tar:  Usually used in conjunction with steroids, although may be used alone.
Calcipotriene and Calcitriol:  Vitamin D3 analog that affects growth and differentiation of
keratinocytes.

Tazarotene:  Topical retinoid (vitamin A derivative).
Topical calcineurin inhibitors: Topical tacrolimus and pimecrolimus.
Salicylic acid: Keratolytic that softens and removes scale from plaques, allowing topical meds to
penetrate.
Topical anthralin
Q. Write short note on PUVA therapy in psoriasis.
Step 2: Phototherapy:  Effect likely through immunomodulatory properties
Sunlight: Careful sun exposure may improve psoriasis, but sunburn may exacerbate it.
UVB (295–320 nm) radiation:  Erythema inducing doses (3–5x/week until remission) used for
moderate to extensive disease, alone or in combination with topical tar.
UVB narrow band (311nm): Has been shown to be more effective than the broader band in some
studies, inducing more apoptosis of T-cells.
PUVA:  Photochemotherapy with oral psoralen (8-methoxypsoralen) followed by exposure to
UVA (320–400 nm) radiation used for moderate-severe disease when UVB fails. Effective (75%
of patients note marked improvement), but increases risk for cataract, pigmentation, premature
skin aging and skin cancer. Psoralens are natural photosensitizers found in many plants. Psoralen
molecules intercalate between the two strands of DNA and, on excitation with ultraviolet A
(UVA), photons cross-link the DNA strands. It is thus a pro-drug which after oral administration is
distributed throughout the body, but only activated in skin that is exposed to UVA. Other uses of
PUVA include vitiligo, mycosis fungoides, atopic dermatitis and senile pruritis.High Energy 308 nm excimer laser: Treats only involved skin, allows higher doses to be delivered
to the plaques, compared with traditional phototherapy.
Two regimens used commonly are:
1. Goeckerman regimen:  UVB + coal tar.
2. Ingram regimen:  coal tar+UVB+ dithranol.
Step 3: Systemic therapy
Methotrexate:  Effective in severe psoriasis, psoriatic arthritis, and psoriatic nail disease.
Acitretin:  Vitamin A analog used for treatment of severe psoriasis, especially pustular and
erythrodermic variants. It is a teratogen and pregnancy is contraindicated for three years after
discontinuing the drug. May be used in combination with UVB or PUVA.
Cyclosporine:  T-cell suppressor indicated for severe psoriasis not responsive to other agents.
Biologics, Immunomodulatory Drugs
Etanercept: Recombinant TNF-alpha inhibitor, approved for treatment of psoriatic arthritis and for
adults with moderate-severe plaque psoriasis.
Alefacept: Recombinant protein that binds to CD2 receptor on T-lymphocytes.
Efalizumab: Monoclonal antibody to CD11a. Approved for moderate-severe plaque psoriasis.
Infliximab: TNF-alpha inhibitor.
Human interleukin12/23 monoclonal antibody: Ustekinumab, a fully human monoclonal antibody
against the p40 subunit of IL-12 and IL-23 is effective Guselkumab is a human immunoglobulin
G1 (IgG1) lambda monoclonal antibody that binds to the p19 subunit of IL-23.Monoclonal antibody against the p40 molecule shared by IL12 and IL23: For example,
brikinumab is effective in moderate and severe psoriasis.
Others: Brodalumab (an antiIL17 receptor antibody) and ixekizumab (an anti IL17 monoclonal
antibody) can also be effective in psoriasis.
Newer treatment options: (i) Climatotherapy (bathing in sea water in combination with sun

exposure) and (ii) Balneophototherapy (salt water baths with artificial UV exposure).
LICHEN PLANUS (LP)
Q. Write short essay on lichen planus.
Lichen planus is a pruritic inflammatory dermatosis that is commonly
associated with mucosal involvement. Rarely, it may be associated with
involvement of nail (nail dystrophy) and hair (scarring alopecia).
Etiology
Autoimmune: An autoimmune mechanism is suspected, because of its
association with inflammatory bowel disease, primary biliary cirrhosis,
autoimmune hepatitis, hepatitis B and C, alopecia areata, myasthenia gravis
and thymoma. There are similarities with graft-versus-host disease (GVHD).
Drugs like thiazides, INH can produce lichenoid eruptions.
Clinical Features
Age and gender: Lichen planus affects women more than men (at a ratio of
3:2), and occurs most often in middle-aged adults.
Characteristics of LesionSkin lesions (Figs. 22.6A and B):


Figs. 22.6A and B:  Skin lesions in lichen planus.
–   The typical rash of lichen planus is well-described by the ‘5 P’s’: Well-
defined pruritic, planar, purple, polygonal papules or plaques.
–   Sites involved: Flexor surfaces especially wrists, flanks, medial thighs,
shins of tibia, glans penis, nails, scalp and oral mucosa.
–   There may be a characteristic fine lacy white pattern (network) on the
surface of lesions (Wickham’s striae).
–   Koebner’s phenomenon .
–   After lesions subside, post lichen hyperpigmentation occurs.
Mucous membrane: Involvement is common (30–70%) and prominent
symptom is of severe pain rather than itch. The mouth is the most
commonly affected. It can also affect genital and other mucosal surfaces.
Nail involvement: Occurs in about 10% and causes a thinning of the nail
with longitudinal ridges and may progress to complete loss of the nail
plate (pterygium formation) (Fig. 22.7).
Fig. 22.7:  Nail changes (pterygium formation) in lichen planus.
Scalp involvement: Lichen planopilaris is the specific name given to
lichen planus on the scalp that may cause permanent, scarring alopecia.

Diagnosis
Histological changes: Characteristic histological changes include: (1)
hyperkeratosis with thickening of the granular cell layer, (2) basal cell
degeneration and (3) dense, band-like T-lymphocyte infiltrate at the dermal-
epidermal junction, with affinity for the epidermis (epidermotropism). The
dermoepidermal junction becomes ragged and appears ‘saw-toothed’. The
basal layer shows liquefactive degeneration with colloid (apoptotic) bodies,
Colloid or Civatte bodies in the upper dermis.
Prognosis
It is usually self-limiting and often clears by 18 months but can recur at
intervals.
Complications of Lichen Planus (Box 22.2)
Box 22.2: Complications of lichen planus.Squamous cell carcinoma in oral ulcerative lesions
Cicatricial alopecia in scalp LP
Postinflammatory hyperpigmentation.
Management
Treatment is symptomatic.
Topical corticosteroids: Potent local corticosteroids (e.g. 0.05% clobetasol propionate, 0.1%
triamcinolone ointment, twice daily for 2 to 4 weeks) are helpful in patients with limited disease.
Oral lesions may require high potency steroids given as an ointment, gel or mouth wash. Topical
0.1% tacrolimus ointment or pimecrolimus may be very useful for painful oral disease
unresponsive to steroids.Oral therapy: Short courses of systemic corticosteroids (oral prednisolone 30 mg daily for 2–4
weeks) are sometimes required for extensive disease.
Widespread lichen planus may require UVB, PUVA or UVA1 and in resistant cases retinoids or
immunosuppressants such as azathioprine and ciclosporin may be helpful.
Hydroxychloroquine and dapsone have also been tried.
ACANTHOSIS NIGRICANS (AN)
Q. Write short note on acanthosis nigricans.
It is a skin lesion marked by thickened, verrucous (warty) hyperpigmentation
of the skin with a velvety texture (Fig. 22.8) predominantly of the flexural
areas (axillae, skin folds of the neck, groin, and anogenital regions) including

the lips.
In 80% of cases, it is associated with benign conditions (most commonly
with obesity, insulin resistance and diabetes, drugs like nicotinic acid,
fusidic acid, stilbestrol, OCPs), develops gradually, usually during
childhood or puberty. They are associated with very high levels of insulin
owing to insulin resistance. Obesity associated AN is sometimes termed
‘pseudo-acanthosis nigricans’.In the remaining cases, it arises in association with underlying cancers
(most commonly gastrointestinal adenocarcinomas), usually in middle-
aged and older individuals. In this setting, it occurs as a paraneoplastic
phenomenon caused by growth factors released from tumors. Other tumors
producing this are Wilm’s tumor malignant tumors of bronchus, pancreas,
ovary, bile duct, gallbladder, breast and thyroid.
Associated thickening of palms with accentuated dermatoglyphics is
called Tripe palms. Acrochordons (skin tags) may be present.
Fig. 22.8:  Skin lesions of acanthosis nigricans.
Treatment
Treat any underlying disease/malignancy.

Weight loss is advised in the obese.
Topical or oral retinoids (0.5 mg/kg per day) may be helpful.
Few may benefit from metformin, oral isotretinoin, topical retinoic acid, topical salicylic acid and
oral fish oil.
ECZEMA
Q. Write short essay/answer on:
Types of eczema and outline their clinical features and general
management.
Give a brief account of dermatitis.
Eczema is catarrhal inflammation of a sensitive skin, synonymous with the
term dermatitis. Eczema is not a specific disease entity and may develop as a
final common response of the skin to several causes. These causes may be
either exogenous or endogenous in origin. It presents with spectrum of
clinical presentation from acute through to chronic. Acute type is
histologically characterized by spongiosis (intercellular edema of the
epidermis) and intra-epidermal vesiculation (producing multilocular blisters).
Chronic eczema shows more epidermal thickening (acanthosis).
Classification of Eczema (Table 22.1)Atopic Dermatitis
Q. Write short essay/answer on atopic dermatitis.
Atopic dermatitis (AD) is an endogenous type of eczema that develops in
individuals who are ‘atopic’ and is the cutaneous expression of the atopic
state. Atopic state is characterized by a family history of asthma, allergic
rhinitis, or eczema.
Table 22.1: Classification of eczema.
Endogenous ExogenousAtopic eczema
Discoid eczema (nummular eczema)
Seborrheic eczema
Hand eczema
Venous (‘gravitational’)/Asteatotic eczemaContact eczema
–   irritant
–   allergic
Photosensitive eczema
Lichen simplex/nodular prurigo

Pityriasis alba, pompholyx Infective dermatitis
Etiology
The exact pathophysiology is partially defined in atopic dermatitis.
Genetic factors: Atopic eczema is a genetically complex familial disease
and often associated with positive family history of atopic disease (90%
concordance in monozygotic twins but only 20% in dizygotic twins).
Environmental allergens: Atopy is characterized by generalized,
prolonged hypersensitivity to common environmental antigens (e.g.
pollen, food, animal hair and house dust mite). Atopic individuals develop
one or more of a group of diseases such as asthma, hay fever, food and
other allergies, and atopic eczema.Epidermal barrier impairment: It is a major and perhaps primary factor
in atopic eczema. It was observed in Caucasian individuals that loss of
function mutations in the epidermal barrier protein filaggrin can
predispose to atopic eczema. Filaggrin is coded by FLG gene on
chromosome 1q21.
Exacerbating factors: Factors that can exacerbate eczema include:Infection: Infection in the skin or systemic infection can exacerbate atopic
eczema. Paradoxically, lack of infection (in infancy) may allow eczema to
develop (‘hygiene hypothesis’).Irritants: Such as strong detergents, chemicals and woollen clothes.
Severe anxiety or stress in some individuals.
Others: Cat and dog fur, food allergens, dairy products or eggs.
Clinical Features (Box 22.3)
Box 22.3: Clinical features of atopic dermatitis.
Family history of atopy (asthma, allergic rhinitis, food allergies, or eczema)
Itching and scratching
Lichenification of skin (in adults)
Dry skin (xeroderma)
Course
–   Characterized by exacerbations and remissions
–   Lasts for more than 6 weeks
Age: Atopic eczema is most commonly seen among young children. About

50% present within the first year of life, and 80% present by 5 years of age.
Character of lesion (Fig. 22.9):
Fig. 22.9:  Skin lesions of atopic dermatitis.
Primary lesions include erythematous macules, papules, and vesicles,
which can coalesce to form patches and plaques. Commonest
presentation  is extremely itchy erythematous scaly patches
accompanied by scratching.
The symptom of itch is so central in the pathogenesis that atopic dermatitis
is described as ‘the itch that rashes and not the rash that itches’.
It may also present as widespread cutaneous dryness (roughness).
Acute lesions can produce small vesicles. In severe cases, secondary
lesions from infection or excoriation (due to scratching) may be marked
by weeping and crusting.In chronic lesions, repeated rubbing produces lichenification.
Distribution of lesion: Vary with age:
Lesions are usually found in the periorbital area and the flexor areas such
as in front of the elbows and ankles, behind the knees (popliteal fossae)
and around the neck.
In infants eczema usually starts on the face before spreading to the body.

Table 22.2: Cutaneous and vascular stigmata of atopic dermatitis.
Cutaneous stigmata Vascular stigmata
Dennie-Morgan  infraorbital fold
Pityriasis alba
Keratosis pilaris
Hertoghe’s sign —thinning of the lateral
eyebrowsHeadlight sign —perinasal and periorbital
pallor
White dermographism  (Fig. 22.10)—
blanching of the skin at the site of stroking
with a blunt instrument—cause edema and
obscure color of underlying vessels
Box 22.4: Complications of atopic eczema.
Secondary infection
Bacterial: Staphylococcus aureus  most common
Viral: For example, viral warts and Molluscum contagiosum especially if treated with topical
corticosteroids. Herpes simplex virus (HSV) can cause severe widespread eruption (eczema
herpeticum).
Increased susceptibility to irritants due to defective barrier function
Increased susceptibility to allergyFood allergy mainly in infants, e.g. egg, cow’s milk, protein, fish, and wheat may cause an
urticarial eruption.
Fig. 22.10:  Dermographism seen in urticaria and atopic dermatitis.

Cutaneous and vascular stigmata of atopic dermatitis (Table 22.2)
Diagnosis: It is made based on (1) morphologic features, (2) the distribution
of the lesions, and (3) a family and personal history of atopy. About 80% of
patients may have high serum IgE levels or high specific IgE levels to certain
ingested or inhaled antigens and a blood eosinophilia. Hanifin and Rajka
Criteria is used for diagnosis.
Complications of Atopic Eczema (Box 22.4)
Management
General measures
Box 22.5:  Classification of topical corticosteroids by potency.
1. Mild: 1% hydrocortisone or 2.5% hydrocortisone
2. Moderately potent: 0.05% clobetasone butyrate or 0.05% alclometasone dipropionate
3. Diluted potent: 0.025% betamethasone valerate or 0.00 625% fluocinolone acetonide
4. Potent: 0.1% betamethasone valerate or 0.025% fluocinolone acetonide
5. Very potent: 0.05% clobetasol propionate or 0.3% diflucortolonevalerate
Atopic eczema
1. Education, explanation and reassurance.
2. Avoidance of contact with skin irritants (especially soaps or furry animals), heat and dryness.
Advised to wear cotton clothes.
3. Emollients for moisturizing:  Emollients are used to moisturize, lubricate, protect and soften skin.
4. Topical anti-inflammatory agents:
a. Topical corticosteroid ointments:  They should be used judiciously. Depending on the
potency, topical corticosteroids can be divided into five groups (Box 22.5). Mid potency topical
glucocorticosteroids are used in most treatment regimens.
b. Topical immunomodulators:  These include two macrolide immunosuppressant namely
tacrolimus ointment (0.1% for 3–4 weeks), and pimecrolimus cream (1% for 3–4 weeks).
The ‘triple’ combination of topical steroid, emollients and bath oil and soap substitute (e.g.
aqueous cream) is usually helpful.
5. Adjunct therapies
a. Oral antihistamines:  Control of pruritus is most often achieved by use of antihistamines. These
include fexofenadine, 180 mg every morning, and hydroxyzine hydrochloride 10–25 mg at
nighttime.
b. Bandaging:  Paste bandaging may be used for lichenified eczema of the limbs. It helps
absorption of topical treatment and also acts as a barrier to prevent scratching.
c. Prompt treatment of secondary infection by antibiotics:  Secondary infection of eczema may
lead to exacerbation of atopic dermatitis. The causative agent for secondary infection should be
identified by culture and treated with appropriate systemic antibiotics.
6. Phototherapy
•   Narrow-band-UVB phototherapy: Ultraviolet radiation (UVR) treatment: Most commonly
narrowband ultraviolet B is used.

•   Psoralen and ultraviolet A (PUVA) .
7. Systemic therapy:
a. Systemic glucocorticosteroids should be given to severe exacerbations that do not respond to
topical therapy. Generally, oral prednisolone is given in the dose of 0.5–1 mg/kg/day.
b. Use of cyclosporin: Cyclosporin is an immunosuppressant that inhibits production of
interleukin2 by T lymphocytes.
Contact Dermatitis
Allergic Contact Eczema (Figs. 22.11A and B)
This develops as a manifestation of delayed hypersensitivity reaction
following contact with antigens or haptens. Many agents can cause allergic
contact eczema and common agents include nickel in costume jewellery and
buckles (e.g. eczema of the earlobes and umbilicus); chromate in cement
(eczema of the hands and foot) and latex in surgical rubber gloves (eczema of
the hands and wrist). Allergy persists indefinitely and eczema develops at
sites of contact of allergen.
During the acute phase, lesions show edema, erythema and vesicle
formation. Later, vesicles rupture producing oozing and papules and plaques
appear. In the chronic phase, scaling, lichenification and excoriations
predominate.

Figs. 22.11A and B:  (A) Skin lesions of symmetrical atopic dermatitis; (B) Chronic contact dermatitis.
Irritant Contact Eczema
This type of eczema can occur in any individual and the injury is due to an
inherent characteristic of compound-irritant contact dermatitis. It usually
develops on the hands after repeated exposures to irritants (e.g. detergents,
soaps or bleach, alkalis, acids) and is common in housewives, cleaners,
hairdressers, mechanics and nurses. The lesions may be acute (wet and
edematous) with strong irritants or chronic (dry, thickened, and scaly) with
weak irritants.
Treatment of Contact DermatitisIdentify and avoid the contact with causative agent/irritants and use of protective gloves or
clothing. In extreme cases even changing of occupation or hobbies may be needed.
Treatment with high-potency topical glucocorticoids.
In cases where systemic therapy is indicated, daily oral prednisone beginning at 1 mg/kg, but
usually 60 mg/day is given. It should be tapered over 2 to 3 weeks.
Seborrheic Dermatitis

Seborrheic dermatitis is a common, chronic disorder, characterized by red
scaly patches or plaques.
Etiology: It is due to Pityrosporum ovale (also called Malassezia furfur in its
hyphal form).
Sites of involvement: Seborrheic dermatitis affects body sites rich in
sebaceous glands.
Scalp: It most commonly affects the scalp (recognized as severe
dandruff).
Facial region: On the face, it affects the nasolabial folds, eyebrows,
eyelids, and glabella. Scaling of the external auditory canal and the
postauricular areas often show maceration and tenderness.Other sites include central chest, axilla, groin, submammary folds, and
gluteal cleft.
Clinical features: Three age groups are affected by seborrheic dermatitis.
In neonates: Presents as yellowish thick crusts on the scalp (cradle cap),
face, or groin. Normally, it improves spontaneously after a few weeks.
In young adults (especially males): The rash is more persistent and
presents as an erythematous scaling along the sides of the nose, in the
eyebrows, around the eyes and in the scalp (dandruff). It is more common
in patients with Parkinson’s disease, in those who have had
cerebrovascular accidents, and in those with HIV infection  (especially
with CD4 cell count <400/mm3). In elderly people: It can be more severe and progress to involve large
areas of the body.
Treatment of Seborrheic Dermatitis: Treatment is suppressive rather than curative.
A combination of low-potency topical glucocorticoids  (e.g. 1% hydrocortisone applied twice
daily) with a topical antifungal cream  (e.g. miconazole or ketoconazole or Ciclopirox olamine
cream applied twice daily) is often effective. Topical 0.1% tacrolimus ointment or pimecrolimus
cream can also be effective.
Antipityrosporal agents, such as ketoconazole shampoo and arachis oil are useful for the scalp
and beard areas. Emollients and a soap substitute may be used as adjuncts. High-potency topical
glucocorticoids (betamethasone or clobetasol) are effective in cases with severe scalp
involvement. However, they should not be used on the face because they may be associated with
steroid-induced rosacea or atrophy.
Pityriasis Versicolor (Tinea Versicolor)

Q. Write short essay/note on pityriasis versicolor (tinea versicolor).
Pityriasis versicolor is a relatively common persistent, superficial skin
condition caused by a common commensal lipophilic yeast, Malassezia
furfur (also known as pityrosporum ovale). The yeast is a normal
inhabitant of the skin.
Predisposing factor: Infection is more frequent in warmer, humid
climates, and is usually more severe and persistent in the
immunocompromised individuals.Appearance of skin lesion (Fig. 22.12): Typical lesion is round, scaly,
oval macules on the upper trunk. It is usually hypopigmented (on dark
skin) but occasionally hyperpigmented (on light skin). Hypopigmentation
is more obvious after sun exposure and tanning. Sometimes it may have
raised erythematous margins. Inappropriate use of topical steroids causes
spread the lesion.Sites affected: Upper back, shoulders and chest but also affects upper
arms, neck and rarely on the face. The lesions are more extensive in
patients in tropics.Other diseases associated with tinea versicolor: Cushing’s syndrome,
hyperhidrosis and altered immune status (e.g. HIV).
Fig. 22.12:  Skin lesions of pityriasis versicolor (tinea versicolor).
Diagnosis: The diagnosis can be confirmed by
Skin scrapings: Shows characteristic ‘spaghetti and meatballs’
appearance.
Wood’s light examination: Shows some pigment (yellow fluorescence)

in skin regions involved by tinea versicolor whereas in vitiligo, there is
total loss of pigment in the affected areas.
Treatment
Topical antifungals
Selenium sulfide or 2% ketoconazole shampoo to be applied to the affected areas of the body and
removed after 30–60 minutes and repeated daily for 1 week. In resistant cases, overnight
application may be useful.
Topical imidazole (miconazole, clotrimazole, ketoconazole) cream twice daily for 10 days.
Oral antifungals
Oral itraconazole (100 mg twice daily for 1 week) in resistant cases. The pigmentation takes months
to recover even after successful treatment. Others include ketoconazole (200 mg daily for 10 days or
400 mg/day for 2 days, though less effective), and fluconazole (150–300 mg weekly for 2–4 weeks).
The condition may recur but can be re-treated.
BLISTERING (BULLOUS) DISORDERS OF
SKIN
Blistering skin disease (BSD) are skin conditions characterized by blister
formation. A blister is an accumulation of fluid between cells of the
epidermis or upper dermis (Fig. 22.13). Causes of blister formation may be
genetic, physical, inflammatory, immunologic and as a reaction to drugs.
Blistering disorders are mostly due to autoimmune mechanism.
Types of Blistering Diseases (Box 22.6)
Pemphigus VulgarisQ. Write short essay/note on etiology, clinical features, diagnosis and
treatment of pemphigus vulgaris.
Pemphigus vulgaris (PV) is a potentially fatal mucocutaneous blistering
disease.
Etiology
Autoimmunity: It is thought to be an autoimmune disorder. Patients with
PV have IgG 4 autoantibodies directed against desmosomal protein
desmoglein 1 and 3 (belong to the cadherin family of calcium-dependent
adhesion molecules). Desmoglein 1 and 3 is expressed in skin and
mucosal surfaces. IgG 4 autoantibodies are responsible for blister
formation and their titer correlates with disease activity.

Drug-induced: Pemphigus may also be drug-induced (e.g. sulfonamides,
penicillins and antiepileptic drugs).
Clinical features
Age and gender: It predominates in patients between the fourth and sixth
decades of life and both sexes are affected equally.
Lesions: They typically begin on mucosal surfaces and often progresses to
involve the skin. Lesions consist of fragile, flaccid blisters that rupture to
produce erosions in mucous membranes and skin.
Box 22.6: Types of blistering diseases.
Genetic blistering diseases:  (1) Epidermolysis bullosa, (2) Hailey-Hailey disease (Benign familial
pemphigus)
Immunobullous diseases:Intraepidermal immunobullous diseases:  (1) Pemphigus vulgaris (PV), (2) Pemphigus vegetans,
(3) Pemphigus foliaceus, (4) Pemphigus erythematosus, (5) Paraneoplastic PV
Subepidermal immunobullous diseases:  (1) Bullous pemphigoid, (2) Pemphigoid gestations, (3)
Linear IgA disease, (4) Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita and (5) Dermatitis herpitiformis
Oral cavity
Characteristic of lesion: Mucosal involvement (especially oral
ulceration) is the most common (up to 75% of cases) presenting sign.
Lesions consist of fragile, flaccid blisters that rupture to produce erosions
in mucous membranes.Sites: Lesions within the oral cavity can be seen anywhere and are most
often found in areas subjected to friction trauma (e.g. cheek mucosa,
tongue, palate and lower lip).
Skin lesionsSites: Typically involves scalp, face, neck, trunk and intertriginous areas
(axilla, groin).
Skin lesions follow oral lesion and appear as non-itchy flaccid blisters
filled with clear fluid  that arises on normal skin. Blistering usually
becomes widespread and is fragile. They rapidly denude/rupture giving
rise to painful erythematous, weeping erosions. Erosions are often large.
Intact blisters may be sparse.

Fig. 22.13: Location of bullae and few associated diseases.
Q. Write short essay/note on Nikolsky’s sign.
Nikolsky’s sign: It is positive. It is elicited by applying gentle manual sliding
pressure to the affected skin (e.g. where a blister is located), or rub sideways
the perilesional skin or normal skin with a cotton swab or finger). A positive
response is indicated by extension of the blister and/or separation of the
epidermis in the area immediately and is known as Nikolsky’s sign. This sign
is not specific to pemphigus but is also seen in toxic epidermal necrolysis
(TEN), Stevens-Johnson syndrome, staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome,
bullous impetigo and epidermolysis bullosa. This sign is usually negative in
bullous pemphigoid.Diagnosis
Skin biopsy: Microscopically, it shows suprabasal blister due to suprabasilar
(immediately above the basal cell layer) acantholysis (the dissolution or lysis
of the intercellular bridges that connect squamous epithelial cells).
Acantholytic cells separate from one another, lose their polyhedral shape and
appear round (tombstone appearance).

Direct immunofluorescence: Lesions show a characteristic net-like pattern
of intercellular IgG deposits. IgG is usually seen at all levels of the
epithelium.
Treatment
Anesthetic mouth lozenges to reduce the pain of mouth ulcers.
Fluids and electrolytes balance, and nutritional support if required.
Antibiotics to control secondary infections.
Patients with moderate to severe PV:
Systemic glucocorticoids:  Mainstay of treatment to inhibit production of the autoantibodies.
Usually started on oral prednisone, 1 mg/kg/day as an early morning dose.
Immunosuppressive agents:  If new lesions continue to appear after 1–2 weeks of treatment with
prednisone, the dose is to be increased and/or combined with other immunosuppressive agents
such as azathioprine, mycophenolate mofetil, or cyclosporin, or cyclophosphamide.
Immunoglobulins:  One course of intravenous immunoglobulin (400 mg/kg/day for 5 days) may
be a safe and effective treatment for cases resistant to steroids.
Severe/treatment-resistant disease:
Plasmapheresis  [six high-volume exchanges (i.e. 2–3 L per exchange) over ~2 weeks], IV
immunoglobulin  (IVIg) (2 g/kg over 3–5 days every 6–8 weeks), or rituximab  (375 mg/m2 per
week x 4, or 1,000 mg on days 1 and 15). The duration of therapy varies according to the level of
disease activity.
Bullous Pemphigoid
Q. Write short essay/note on:
Bullous pemphigoid or pemphigoid
Etiology, clinical features, diagnosis and treatment of bullous
pemphigoid.
Bullous pemphigoid (BP) is the most common autoimmune subepidermal
blistering disease. Mucosal involvement is rare.
Age and gender: It occurs in elderly in the fifth to seventh decades, with an
average age of onset of 65 years. Males and females are equally affected.
Etiopathogenesis
Bullous pemphigoid is caused by autoantibodies against specialized proteins
that are involved in adherence of basal keratinocytes to the basement
membrane. These linking proteins are called hemidesmosomes and the so-
called bullous pemphigoid antigens (BPAGs) are components of these
hemidesmosomes.

Clinical Features
Bullae (Fig. 22.14): Patient usually presents with large tense bullae
anywhere on the skin but often involve flexor surfaces of the arms and legs,
axilla, groin, and abdomen. The bullae may be centered on an erythematous
or urticated skin. The bullae may contain hemorrhagic fluid. Pemphigoid can
be very itchy. Mucosal ulceration is uncommon and when seen, it is of minor
clinical significance. Nontraumatized bullae usually heal without scarring.Diagnosis
Skin biopsy: Biopsies of skin lesion shows subepidermal blisters with an
eosinophil-rich inflammatory infiltrate at sites of vesicle formation and in
perivascular areas.
Direct immunofluorescence: Shows linear deposits of IgG and C3 at the
dermoepidermal junction.
Fig. 22.14: Bullous pemphigoid.
Treatment
Patients with local or mild disease can sometimes be controlled with the application of very potent
topical steroids to all sites in frail elderly patients. Occasionally it can be controlled by oral
dapsone or high-dose oral minocycline or tetracyclines.
The mainstay of treatment is systemic glucocorticoids  (oral prednisolone 30–60 mg daily).

Patients with more extensive lesions respond to systemic glucocorticoids either alone or in
combination with immunosuppressive agents. Immunosuppressive agents include azathioprine,
mycophenolate mofetil, or cyclophosphamide.
Intravenous immunoglobulin as a steroid-sparing therapy in BP may also be useful.
Dermatitis Herpetiformis (DH)
Q. Write short note on dermatitis herpetiformis.
Characterized by intensely itchy, chronic papulovesicular eruption
distributed symmetrically on extensor surfaces.
Age: It may start at any age. Most commonly it occurs in 2nd, 3rd, and 4th
decades of life.
Skin biopsy: If a vesicle can be biopsied before it is scratched away, the
microscopic examination shows a subepidermal blister, with dermal
papillary collections of neutrophils (microabscesses).DIF (direct immunofluorescence): Granular IgA deposits in normal-
appearing skin are diagnostic for DH.
Most DH patients (not all) have an associated gluten-sensitive
enteropathy. So associated anti-endomyseal antibodies are positive.
Treatment
The rash responds rapidly to dapsone therapy.
Gluten-free diet works very slowly.
REACTIVE DISORDERS OF SKIN
Erythema Multiforme
Q. Write short essay/note on precipitating causes, clinical
manifestations and management of erythema multiforme.
Erythema multiforme (EM) is an uncommon acute, self-limiting, recurrent
cutaneous and/or mucocutaneous blistering eruption that occurs in
individuals of any age.
Eruptions are characterized by target-shaped plaques commonly over
extremities and face.
Causes

Erythema multiforme can be triggered by variety of factors (Box 22.7).
Box 22.7: Precipitating factors in erythema multiforme.
1. Infections
•   Viral, e.g. herpes simplex, Orf, infectious mononucleosis, hepatitis B, HIV
•   Mycoplasma and other bacterial infections (e.g. typhoid)
•   Fungal, e.g. histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis
•   Rickettsia
2. Exposure to drugs
For example, sulfonamides, penicillins, barbiturates salicylates, hydantoins, antimalarials and
carbamazepine
3. Systemic disease
•   Sarcoidosis
•   Malignancy (carcinomas and lymphomas),
•   Collagen vascular diseases [Systemic lupus erythematosus (Rowell’s syndrome), Wegener’s
granulomatosis, dermatomyositis, and polyarteritis nodosa].
4. Other
Radiotherapy, pregnancy
Pathogenesis
Immune mediated disease: It is characterized by keratinocyte injury caused
by CD8+ cytotoxic T lymphocytes in the skin. The CD8+ cytotoxic T cells
are found in the central portion of the lesions, and CD4+ helper T cell and
Langerhans cells are found in the peripheral portions. The epidermal antigens
causing the disease are not known.
Box 22.8: Classification of erythema multiforme (EM).EM Minor: Cutaneous without mucous involvement
EM Major (EMM): Cutaneous + mucous involvement
Mucosal EM: Fuch’s ectodermosis pluriorificialis
HAEM: Herpes associated EM
MPAEM: Mycoplasma associated EM
Classification (Box 22.8)
Clinical Features of Erythema Multiforme
Male:Female = 3:2.
Occurs in the young/adolescents.
About 50% of patient give history of preceding herpetic infection.

Associated with HLA – DQB1 * 0301 Allele.
Elementary skin lesions
Multiforme: As the name implies, it presents with a diverse array of lesions
(multiforme), including macules, papules, vesicles, bullae.
Distribution of skin lesions (topography)
Lesions are symmetrical, acral, centripetal in distribution
Extensor aspect: Extremities > face > neck > trunk
Predilection to sun-exposed areas/Koebnerization present.
Fig. 22.15: Erythema multiforme with target lesion.
Characteristic lesion
Q. Write short essay/note on target lesions, iris lesions and bull’s eye
lesions of erythema multiforme.
Classic target lesion (Fig. 22.15): Consists of three concentric distinct
zones/rings of different colors: a dark central circular dusky red
(darker red) zone is surrounded by an intermediate light rim (white),
which in turn is encircled by a outermost red zone (iris lesions). Central
circular zone may show bulla formation or crust. The lesion may resemble

a ‘bull’s eye’.
Larger lesions show central bulla and marginal ring of vesicles: Herpes
iris of Bateman.
Mucosal lesions
Mucosal (oral mucosa) involvement is usually absent and, when present,
lesions are few in number and mildly symptomatic.
Stevens-Johnson Syndrome (Figs. 22.16A to C)
Q. Write short essay/note on Stevens-Johnson syndrome.
Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS) is a rare, acute and life-threatening
mucocutaneous disease with systemic involvement and is nearly always
drug-related.
SJS is a ‘minor form of TEN’ with less than 10% body surface area (BSA) detachment
Overlapping Stevens-Johnson syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis (SJS/TEN): Detachment of
10–30% BSA.
Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN): Detachment of more than 30% BSA.
Clinical features of Stevens-Johnson syndrome are listed in Table 22.3.
Mortality rate in SJS: 1–5%.
Table 22.3: Clinical signs and symptoms of Stevens–Johnson
syndrome/toxic epidermal necrolysis.
CutaneousMucous membranea Extracutaneous
Initial phase:
Erythematous, dusky red, flat,
atypical targetoid macules
Symmetrical lesions distributed on
the face/trunk/proximal part of
limbs. It can spread to entire body
Later phase:Lesions progressively coalesce and
evolve into flaccid blisters
Detachment of epidermisOcular:  Edema of eyelid,
redness, photophobia,
discharge, lacrimation,
corneal scarringBuccal:  Erosive
hemorrhagic lesions,
grayish-white
pseudomembranes and
crust on lipsGenital:  Erosive
hemorrhagic lesions,
painful urinationNonspecific:  Fever, pain,
weakness
Respiratoryb:
Respiratory distress
Gastrointestinal:
Diarrhea, nausea,
malabsorption,
perforation of colon
melenaRenalb: Proteinuria,
hematuria,
microalbuminuria
a. Normally involves at least two sites. b. Lower occurrence in SJS compared to TEN.

Figs. 22.16A to C:  (A) Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS)-toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN); (B) Toxic
epidermal necrolysis; (C) Oral lesions in SJS/TEN.
Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis (Lyell’s Syndrome)
Q. Write short essay/note on toxic epidermal necrolysis.
Toxic epidermal necrolysis is characterized by diffuse necrosis and
sloughing of skin and mucosal epithelial surfaces. It begins with severe
mucosal erosions and progresses to diffuse, generalized detachment of the
skin epidermis.Nikolsky sign often positive, i.e. sliding pressure from a finger on normal-
looking epidermis dislodges the epidermis.
No target lesions seen.
Mortality rate in TEN: High (30%).
Management
Treatment of Erythema Multiforme
Management of the precipitating factors/causes. If a drug is suspected, it must be discontinued and
precipitating infection should be treated.
Treatment of EM otherwise is nonspecific.
Severe cases may require systemic corticosteroids.
Oral acyclovir early reduces the number and duration of lesions.
Chronic antiviral treatment with acyclovir (400 mg twice daily for 6 months) in herpes-associated
outbreaks in patients with recurrent erythema multiforme.
Treatment of SJS (Stevens-Johnson syndrome) and TEN (Toxic epidermal necrolysis)
Maintain the fluid and electrolyte balance.
Manage oral mucosal lesions with mouthwashes. Topical anesthetics may reduce pain and allow
the patient to take in fluids.

Area of denuded skin should be covered with compresses of saline.
Systemic corticosteroid is contraindicated  in Stevens-Johnson syndrome.
Treatment of toxic epidermal necrolysis is very difficult, but intravenous immune globulin (2–3
g/kg over a period of 2–5 days) may improve the prognosis.
PIGMENTARY DISORDERS OF SKIN
Hypopigmentation
Causes of Hypopigmentation (Box 22.9)
Q. Write short note on causes and differential diagnosis of
hypopigmented cutaneous lesions/hypopigmentation.
Box 22.9: Causes of hypopigmentation and/or depigmentation.
Generalized loss of pigmentation: Albinism
Patchy loss of pigmentation: Vitiligo
Localized loss of pigmentation: Piebaldism, pityriasis alba, pityriasis versicolor, idiopathic guttate
hypomelanosis, leprosy, leukoderma
Other rare causes: Phenylketonuria and hypopituitarism
Vitiligo
Q. Write short note on etiology, clinical features and treatment of
vitiligo.
Vitiligo is a common, slowly progressive acquired condition caused by focal
loss of melanocytes within the skin resulting in the development of well
circumscribed patches of hypopigmentation (Figs. 22.17A to C).
Figs. 22.17A to C: (A) Vitiligo; (B) Acral vitiligo; (C) Koebner phenomenon in vitiligo.
Classification (Box 22.10)

Clinical Features
Non-segmental vitiligo
It presents as small, depigmented macule that may enlarge and coalesce
into larger patches. It is often symmetrical and occurs mainly around body
orifices (around the eyes, nose, lips, genitalia), hands, feet, flexor surface
of the wrists, ankles, elbows, knees, and major body folds.The hair of the scalp, beard, eyebrows and lashes (leukotrichia) may also
show depigmentation.
Vitiligo fulminans/galloping vitiligo: Rapid downhill course with rapid
progression of skin lesions.
Patients are very susceptible to sunburn.
Non-segmental vitiligo can spread by Koebner phenomenon (Fig.
22.17C). Other skin conditions that spread by Koebner phenomenon
include psoriasis, molluscum contagiosum, warts, EM and lichen planus.
Box 22.10: Classification of vitiligo.
Localized
Focal vitiligo:  One or more macules in one area not clearly in a segment
Segmental vitiligo:  Number of macules in unilateral segment of the body (stops abruptly at
midline)
Mucosal vitiligo:  Affects lips, oral cavity and genitalia
Generalized
Acrofacial vitiligo:  Lesions on the acral (hand and feet) and face (perioral)
Vitiligo vulgaris: Multiple macules bilaterally symmetrically scattered.
Lip-tip vitiligo:  Tips of digits and lips only
Mixed:  Any combination of the above
Universal vitiligo:  Complete or near complete depigmentation of the body.
Segmental vitiligo
It is restricted to one part of the body. The patches of depigmentation are
sharply defined. Spotty perifollicular pigment may be seen within the
depigmentation. Sensation in the depigmented patches is normal (unlike in
tuberculoid leprosy). Wood’s light examination shows the contrast between
pigmented and nonpigmented skin.
Trichrome vitiligo (vitiligo gradate): Presence of tan colored zone in
between normal skin and the depigmented macule. Sometimes a fourth color
dark brown is present at sites of perifollicular repigmentation-quadrichrome

vitiligo.
Association of vitiligo with other diseases (Box 22.11)
Box 22.11: Vitiligo association with other diseases.
Autoimmune thyroiditis
Addison’s disease
Pernicious anemia
Diabetes mellitus
Vogt Koyanagi Harada syndrome: Vitiligo, poliosis, uveitis, alopecia and hearing difficulties.
Management
Protect the patches from excessive sun exposure with clothing or sunscreen to avoid sunburn.
Treatment:  Often unsatisfactory
Topical treatment
Includes the use of potent topical corticosteroids, topical immunomodulators (e.g. calcineurin-
inhibitors tacrolimus 0.1% ointment especially on the face).
Phototherapy
Topical psoralen plus ultraviolet-A (UV-A) phototherapy (PUVA therapy) is a most effective
repigmentary treatment available for non-segmental generalized vitiligo.
Narrow-band UV-B (NB-UVB) phototherapy: It is the treatment of choice for active, generalized
vitiligo. Cosmetic results are better and side effects are less than PUVA.
Topical application of corticosteroids along with UV-A exposure is often effective.
Autologous melanocyte transfer is effective for treating stable, focal vitiligo
Extensive vitiligo may be treated with removal of pigment from the remaining normally
pigmented skin by using bleaching creams (e.g. monobenzylether of hydroquinone and 4-
methoxy-phenol).Human placental extract and calcipotriol have been tried.
Systemic treatment (Box 22.12)
Surgical treatment (Box 22.13)
Box 22.12: Systemic treatment for vitiligo.
Psoralen and UVA
Corticosteroids
Immunomodulators (Cyclosporine, levamisole, azathioprine)
Phenylalanine plus UVA
Khellin
Antioxidants
Box 22.13: Surgical treatment for vitiligo.
Punch grafting

Split skin thickness grafting
Blister grafting
Melanocyte culture and transplantation
Tattooing
Pityriasis Alba
Q. Write short note on pityriasis alba.
Common skin disorder in children that is usually evident before puberty.
Cause: Not known, however there is often a history of atopy.
Clinical Features
Hypopigmented patches or macules with slight scale, mainly on the face and
less frequently on the neck, trunk and extremities. No permanent damage to
the skin. Often improves after puberty.
Treatment:  Use of lubricants and mild topical steroids.
Inherited Hypopigmentation Disorders
Q. Write short note on inherited hypopigmentation disorders.
Albinism
Autosomal recessive inherited disorder.
Genetic defect in melanin synthesis and normal melanocyte number and
structure.
Mutation in tyrosinase gene.
Affected individual will be born with white hair and skin and blue eyes
(retinal pigment epithelium involved).
Selenium deficiency in the setting of total parental nutrition can lead to
pseudoalbinism.
Piebaldism
Rare autosomal dominant disease
Congenital white forelock
Hyperpigmented macules within the amelanotic macules and normally
pigmented skin is characteristic.
Waardenburg syndrome

Autosomal dominant disorder characterized by white forelock, heterochromia
iridis, and hypomelanotic macules.
Conditions Associated with Increased Pigmentation (Box 22.14)
Box 22.14: Conditions associated with increased pigmentation.
Melasma
Freckles (Ephelides)
Lentiges (NAME syndrome, Leopard syndrome)
Peutz Jegher syndrome
Q. Write short note on conditions associated with increased
pigmentation.
Systemic Diseases Causing Hyperpigmentation (Table 22.4)
Table 22.4: Systemic diseases causing hyperpigmentation.
Post inflammatory
Syphilis, malaria
Pellagra, scurvy, vitamin A deficiency,
vitamin B 12 deficiency
Addison’s disease: Diffuse melanosis
pronounced in the axillae and palmar creases,
and nipples and genitals, and buccal mucosaDiabetes produces diffuse bronzing of the
skin
Nelson’s syndrome (a pituitary MSH-
producing tumor)
Pheochromocytoma
Hemochromatosis
AmyloidosisScurvy
Pregnancy
Menopause
Porphyria cutanea tarda
Vitamin B 12 deficiency
Kwashiorkor
Vitamin A deficiency
Primary biliary cirrhosis (triad =
hyperpigmentation, pruritis, xanthomas)
Industrial hyperpigmentation: Occurs in coal
miners, anthracene workers, pitch workers,
etc.
SKIN TUMORS
Q. Write short essay/answer on benign, premalignant conditions of the
skin.
Benign and Premalignant Lesions of Skin (Table 22.5)
Table 22.5: Benign and premalignant lesions of skin.

Benign conditions Premalignant conditions
Ephelide
Melanotic naevi
Granuloma telangiectaticum
Hemangioma of skin
Dermatofibroma
PapillomaSeborrheic keratosis
Squamous cell
papilloma
Warts
Skin tags (acrochordons)
Pyogenic granuloma
KeloidsBowen’s disease
Keratoacanthoma
Marjolin’s ulcer
Paget’s disease of the nipple
Senile keratosis/actinic
keratosis
Erythroplasia of Queyrat
Malignant Skin Tumors
Q. Write short essay/answer on common malignant skin tumors.
Malignant tumor of skin is the most common malignancy in fair-skinned
populations.
Categories (Table 22.6)
Etiology and Pathogenesis of Skin Malignancy
Sun exposure: UVR (ultraviolet radiation) is the main environmental risk
factor for skin cancer.
Genetic predispositions:
–   Xeroderma pigmentosum.
–   Basal cell nevus (Gorlin’s) syndrome.
Cutaneous immune surveillance: Immunosuppressed organ transplant
recipients have an increased risk of skin cancer, particularly SCC
(squamous cell carcinoma). Patients who have received high numbers of
PUVA treatments (more than 150), which are immunosuppressive, are
also at increased risk of skin cancer, particularly SCC.Chronic inflammation: It is also a risk factor for SCC, which may arise
in chronic skin ulcers/scars.
Table 22.6: List of malignant skin tumors.
Common malignant tumors Uncommon malignant tumors
Basal cell carcinoma
Squamous cell carcinoma and its precursor
Bowen’s diseasesPrimary
–   Malignant melanoma
–   Cutaneous T-cell lymphomas (e.g.
mycosis fungoides)

–   Kaposi sarcoma
–   Apocrine carcinoma of the skin
Metastasis
Basal Cell Carcinoma (Rodent Ulcer)
Basal cell carcinomas (BCC) are the most common slow-growing invasive
malignant skin tumor that rarely metastasizes.
Types of Basal Cell Carcinoma (Box 22.15)
Box 22.15: Types of basal cell carcinoma (BCC).
Superficial BCC
Nodular BCC, Rodent type (most common type—75%)
Pigmented BCC
Sclerosing or morphea form BCC
Metaphysical
Recurrent BCC
Cystic BCC
Clinical Presentation
Incidence of BCCs increases with age on exposed sites and males are
more commonly affected.
Sites: Occur at sun-exposed sites and in fair skinned people. Usual site is
above a line drawn from angle of mouth to the pinna of the ear.
Appear as a slow-growing pearly papules or nodule (or rarely be cystic),
often containing prominent, dilated subepidermal blood vessels
(telangiectasia).
Advanced tumors may ulcerate to form a crater with a rolled, pearled
edge. They locally invade and erode the underlying bone or facial
sinuses like a rodent and are known as rodent ulcers. Crusting and
bleeding in the center of the tumor is frequently seen.
They are 10–20 times more common in the chronically immunosuppressed
solid organ transplant recipients.
Management/Treatment
Basal cell carcinoma rarely metastasizes. Hence, a metastatic work-up is usually not required.
Surgical therapy:
–   Surgical excision  with controlled borders is often the treatment of choice and recurrence rates

are lowest.
–   Mohs’ micrographic surgery
Non-surgical therapies:
–   Topical photodynamic therapy and topical 5% imiquimod cream and 5-fluorouracil.
–   Cryotherapy: It is a destructive treatment that uses liquid nitrogen.
–   Radiotherapy
–   Hedgehog pathway inhibitors (vismodegib) for advanced inoperable BCC.
–   Curettage and cautery: Occasionally can be used in older patients.
Squamous Cell CarcinomaSecond most common skin cancer  arising on sun-exposed sites.
More aggressive than basal cell carcinoma as it can metastasize if left
untreated.
Sex: More common in elderly men  than in women.
Clinical presentation: Appear as sharply defined, red, scaling plaques.
Risk Factors (Box 22.16)
Clinical Features
Sites: Usually occurs on chronically sun-exposed portions of the skin,
such as bald scalp, tops of ears, face, lower lip and back of hands.
Appearance: Depends on histological grading. Well-differentiated tumors
present as keratotic nodules, whereas poorly differentiated tumors tend to
be ill-defined and infiltrative, often-warty nodule or plaque that may
ulcerate.Behavior: They can grow very rapidly. SCC has metastatic potential.
Box 22.16: Risk factors for squamous cell carcinoma of skin.
Precursors of SCC: Solar/actinic keratoses or Bowen’s disease
Industrial carcinogens: Tars and oils
Chronic non-healing skin ulcers, e.g. chronic osteomyelitis
Old burn scars (e.g. Marjolin’s ulcers)
Ingestion of arsenicals
Ionizing radiation or previous X-ray therapy
Tobacco and betel nut chewing in the oral cavity
Chronic venous ulcers, discoid lupus erythematosus
Management

Early diagnosis is important. Regional lymph nodes  should be routinely examined particularly
for high-risk tumors arising on lips, ears, perigenital regions, or tumor developing at sites of
chronic ulceration, burn scars, or sites of previous radiotherapy.
Complete surgical excision is the usual treatment of choice. Excision with a 3–4 mm margin has
a cure rate of about 90–95% for most SCC.
Other options:
–   Curettage and cautery: Curettage should be avoided and is reserved for small, low-risk lesions.
–   Radiotherapy: If surgery is not feasible.
–   Medical management  is not usually considered for invasive SCC. These include
photodynamic therapy, systemic retinoids, imiquimod and other immunomodulators, new
formulations of 5-fluorouracil, diclofenac in hyaluronic acid gel and ingenol mebutate.
Malignant Melanoma
Malignant melanoma is a relatively common and is the most serious
malignant tumor of epidermal melanocytes. Melanoma has metastatic
potential which can occur early and it causes deaths even in young individual.
Etiology and Pathogenesis
Predisposing factors
A. Sun exposure
•   Melanomas most commonly develop on sun-exposed surfaces,
particularly the upper back in men and the back and legs in women.
•   Lightly pigmented  (pale/fair skinned) individuals are at greater risk
than darkly pigmented individuals.
Other environmental factors may also contribute to risk.
B. Inherited genes
About 10–15% of melanomas are familial and the genetic abnormalities
are:
Mutations in tumor suppressor gene: CDKN2A  gene, RB gene, PTEN
gene, mutations of NRAS and BRAF
C. Other risk factors: These include, multiple melanocytic nevi (>50), sun
sensitivity, immunosuppression, giant congenital melanocytic nevi, lentigo
maligna and a family history of malignant melanoma.
Clinical Features
Age and gender: Can occur at any age and either sex, but typically affects
the leg in females and back in males. It is rare before puberty.

Sites
Skin: It is the most common site and may develop in the trunk, leg, face,
sole, palm and nail beds.
Other sites: Oral and anogenital mucosal surfaces, esophagus,
leptomeninges, eye, and the substantia nigra.
Classification of Malignant Melanoma of Skin (Box 22.17)
Clinical signs that help distinguish malignant from benign moles are
presented in Table 22.7.
Box 22.17: Classification of malignant melanoma of skin.
Melanoma without metastatic potential (non-invasive)
–   Melanoma in situ
–   Lentigo maligna
Melanoma with invasive potential
–   Superficial spreading melanoma
–   Nodular melanoma
–   Acral lentiginous melanoma
–   Lentigo maligna melanoma
–   Subungual melanoma
Table 22.7: Clinical criteria for the diagnosis of malignant melanoma.
ABCDE  features of malignant melanoma
Asymmetry of mole
Border irregularity
Color variegationDiameter greater than 6 mm
Elevation irregular
(+ loss of skin markings)
The Glasgow 7-point checklist
Major criteriaChange in size
Change in shape
Change in colorMinor criteria
Diameter >6 mm
Inflammation
Mild itch or altered sensation
Oozing or bleeding
Management/Treatment
Surgical excision: For local disease, surgical excision is the only curative treatment.
–   Metastatic disease:  If there is sentinel node metastasis, surgical resection of lymph nodes,
isolated limb perfusion, radiotherapy, immunotherapy (Peginterferon alfa-2b, Ipilimumab
(anti-CTLA-4), Vemurafenib, Dabrafenib (BRAF inhibitor) Trametinib (MEK inhibitor)
Pembrolizumab (PD-1 blocker) and chemotherapy may be required.

Mycosis Fungoides (MF)
MF is a cutaneous lymphoma of mature CD4+ T-cells. The commonest
cutaneous T-cell lymphoma. Not all cutaneous T-cell lymphomas are MF.
Incidence: 3 per million (0.29 per 100,000 population in USA) and 2% of all
new cases of NHL. Age: Older adults (55–60 years). Male: Female: 2:1.
Clinical Features
MF patches are usually distributed in sun-shielded areas such as those
covered by a bathing suit or intertriginous regions The cardinal features of
MF are infiltration of epidermis and then dermis by atypical cerebriform
lymphoid cells–Pautrier micro abscess. It is a chronic, slowly progressive
disease that evolves from patch stage to plaque stage and subsequently to
nodule/tumor stage. A diagnosis of Sézary syndrome is made when there is
high number of these cells circulating in the peripheral blood in the presence
of a lymphadenopathy and cutaneous erythroderma occupying more than
80% of the body surface area.
Chemotherapy, retinoids, electron beam therapy, photochemotherapy are
used in the treatment.
PHAKOMATOSES
Neurocutaneous SyndromesQ. Write short note on neurocutaneous syndromes.
They are group of inherited syndromes characterized by involvement of
the brain and skin (sometimes retina).
Phakomatoses (or neuro-oculo-cutaneous syndromes) are multisystem
disorders that have characteristic central nervous system, ocular and
cutaneous lesions (embryologically all originate from ectoderm) of
variable severity.
Common Neurocutaneous Syndromes (Box 22.18)
Box 22.18: Common neurocutaneous syndromes.
Neurofibromatosis I and II
Tuberous sclerosis
Von Hippel-Lindau disease

Sturge-Weber syndrome
Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber syndrome
Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome
Wyburn-Mason syndrome
Linear sebacious nevus syndrome
Neurocutaneous melanosis
Waardenburg syndrome type 1 and 2
Fabry’s disease
Lentiginosis, deafness, cardiopathy syndrome
Hypomelanosis of Ito
Ataxia-telangiectasia (Louis–Bar syndrome)
Xeroderma pigmentosum (Fig. 22.18)
Cockayne’s syndrome
Rothmund-Thomson syndrome
Sjögren-Larsson syndrome
Neuroichthyosis
Werner syndrome and Progeria
Incontinentia pigmenti
Neurocutaneous melanosis
Retinal-neuro-cutaneous cavernous hemangioma syndrome (Weskamp-Cotlier syndrome)
Neurofibromatosis Type 1
Q. Write short note on neurofibromatosis.
Synonyms: von Recklinghausen disease, Watson disease
An autosomal dominant neurogenetic disorder.
Box 22.19: Diagnostic criteria for neurofibromatosis type 1.
Two or more of the following clinical features must be present:
Six or more café-au-lait macules of >5 mm in greatest diameter in prepubertal individuals, and
more than 15 mm in greatest diameter in postpubertal individuals
Two or more neurofibromas of any type (Fig. 22.19) or one plexiform neurofibroma
Freckling in the axillary or inguinal regions
Optic glioma
Two or more iris hamartoma (Lisch nodules) (Fig. 22.20)
Distinctive bony lesion, such as sphenoid dysplasia, or thinning of the long bone cortex with
or without pseudoarthrosis
A first-degree relative (parent, sibling, or offspring) with NF1 based on the above criteria.
Box 22.20: Diagnostic criteria for neurofibromatosis type 2.
Bilateral vestibular schwannomas

A first-degree relative with NF2 and
–   Unilateral vestibular schwannoma or
–   Any two of: meningioma, schwannoma, glioma, neurofibroma, posterior subcapsular
lenticular opacities*
Unilateral vestibular schwannoma and
–   Any two of: Meningioma, schwannoma, glioma, neurofibroma, posterior subcapsular
lenticular opacities*
Multiple meningiomas and
–   Unilateral vestibular schwannoma or
–   Any two of: Schwannoma, glioma, neurofibroma, cataract
* ‘Any two of’ = Two individual tumors or cataract.
Fig. 22.18:  Xeroderma pigmentosum.

Fig. 22.19: Neurofibromatosis.
Fig. 22.20: Iris nodules (Lisch nodules) in neurofibromatosis.
NF1 affects about 1 in 3000 people. Neurofibromatosis type I (NF1) is
caused by mutation in the neurofibromin gene located on chromosome 17,
at the band q11.2.

Diagnostic Criteria for Neurofibromatosis Type 1 (Box 22.19)
Three subtypes of neurofibroma exist: Cutaneous, subcutaneous, and
plexiform. Freckles can be present since birth or sometimes appear later in
life especially in the intertriginous region (Crowe’s Sign).
Neurofibromatosis Type 2
Neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) is associated with abnormalities of the
NF2 gene, which is located on chromosome 22.
The NF2 gene produces merlin, also known as schwannomin, a cell
membrane-related protein that acts as a tumor suppressor. NF2 has an
estimated birth frequency of 1 in 33,000 to 40,000.
Diagnostic criteria for NF2 (Box 22.20).
Tuberous Sclerosis
Q. Write short note on tuberous sclerosis.
Tuberous sclerosis complex is an inherited neurocutaneous disorder
characterized by pleomorphic features involving many organ systems,
including multiple benign hamartomas of the brain, eyes, heart, lung, liver,
kidney, and skin.Called as Bourneville disease  as it was first described by him in 1880.
Clinical triad of Vogt—EPI-LOI-A: Epilepsy, low intelligence and
adenoma sebaceum (Fig. 22.21A).
Incidence 1 in 6000–9000
Dominant inheritance but a high frequency of spontaneous mutation
Diagnostic criteria for tuberous sclerosis complex (Table 22.8)
Figs. 22.21A to C: (A) Adenoma sebaceum; (B) Ash leaf shaped macule is a hypopigmented macule
oval at one end and pointed at the opposite end; (C) Shagreen patches.

Table 22.8: Diagnostic criteria for tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC).
Major features Minor features
Facial angiofibromas or forehead plaque
Non-traumatic ungual or periungual fibroma
Hypomelanotic macules (more than three)
(Fig. 22.21B)
Shagreen patch (connective tissue nevus) (Fig.
22.21C)
Multiple retinal nodular hamartomas
Cortical tuber
Subependymal nodule
Subependymal giant cell astrocytoma
Cardiac rhabdomyoma, single or multiple
Lymphangiomyomatosis
Renal angiomyolipomaMultiple randomly distributed pits in dental
enamel
Hamartomatous rectal polyps
Bone cysts
Cerebral white matter migration lines
Gingival fibromas
Non-renal hamartoma
Retinal achromic patch
“Confetti” skin lesions
Multiple renal cysts
Definite TSC: Either 2 major features or 1 major feature with 2 minor features
Probable TSC: One major feature and one minor feature
Possible TSC: Either 1 major feature or 2 or more minor features
Café-au-lait Macules (CALM)
Q. Write short note on café-au-lait macules (CALM).
Well-circumscribed, evenly pigmented macules (Fig. 22.22), size ranges
from 1 to 2 mm to greater than 20 cm.
Microscopically shows, increased melanin in both melanocytes and basal
keratinocytes.
In McCune-Albright syndrome, CALM may have a block-like distribution
with midline demarcation and an irregular, jagged outline (‘coast of
Maine’).In NF1, there is more numbers of CALM and has more widespread
distribution (with the exception of segmental NF1) which is ‘typical’
based on their regular borders, smooth (‘coast of California’) and uniform
pigmentation. In adults, the presence of six or more café-au-lait macules is
highly suggestive of NF1.In fair-skinned infants, they may be difficult to detect on routine physical
examination, but are accentuated with examination under a Wood’s lamp.
CALMs may be observed in tuberous sclerosis, ataxia telangiectasia,
Bloom’s syndrome, Watson’s syndrome.

Fig. 22.22: Café-au-lait macules (CALM).
DISORDERS OF SKIN APPENDAGES
Acne Vulgaris
Q. Write short note on etiology, clinical features and management of
acne vulgaris.
Acne is a multi-factorial disease characterized by abnormalities in sebum
production, follicular desquamation, bacterial proliferation and
inflammation.
Age and gender: It starts after puberty and is seen primarily in teenagers
(12–20 years of age) and young adults. 85% adolescents experience it.
Prevalence of comedones in adolescents approaches 100%. But, it can
persist into the thirties and forties, particularly in females. Affects both
males and females, although males tend to have more severe disease.
Bacterial (Propionibacterium acnes) colonization within the upper and
midportion of the hair follicle converts lipids within sebum to
proinflammatory fatty acids.
Clinical Features (Table 22.9)
Table 22.9: Factors that induce or exacerbate acne vulgaris (secondary
acne).Endocrine causes:  Polycystic ovary syndrome, Cushing’s syndrome, congenital adrenal
hyperplasia, androgen-secreting tumors of adrenals, ovary and testis, and acromegaly
Drugs
–   Glucocorticoids:  Systemic and local agents
–   Hormones:  Adrenocorticotropic hormone, testosterone, gonadotropins, oral contraceptives

–   Halides: Iodides and bromides
–   Anabolic:  Danazole, stanazole
–   Anticonvulsants/antipileptics:  Phenytoin, carbamazepine, topiramate, gabapentin, lithium
–   Antidepressants:  Amitryptyline, lithium, setraline
–   Antituberculous:  Isoniazid, rifampicin
–   Chemotherapeutic agents:  Dactinomycin, pentostatin, gefitinib
–   Antineoplastic drugs: Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitor, cetuximab
–   Antiviral:  Ritonavir, ganciclovir
–   Vitamins:  B6, B12
Occupational exposures: To cutting oils, chlorinated aromatic hydrocarbons, and coal tars
Conditions favoring occlusion of sebaceous glands:  e.g. heavy clothing, greasy cosmetics, and
tropical climates.
Genetic factors
Sites: Most common location for acne is the face (Fig. 22.23), but it may
involve the chest and back (trunk).
Greasiness of the skin (seborrhea) is often observed.
Type of lesions: The hallmark is the comedone.
Fig. 22.23:  Acne vulgaris.
Microcomedone
Hyperkeratotic plug made of sebum and keratin in follicular canal.
These comedones may be noninflammatory or inflammatory type (open or
closed comedones).
Open comedones (blackheads) appear as black papules due to the keratin
debris and closed comedones (white heads) usually have no visible
follicular opening. Inflammatory papules, nodules and cysts may arise
from comedones.
–   Most cases remain mild and do not lead to scarring. Few may develop
large inflammatory cysts and nodules and may heal by significant

scarring.
Clinical variants
Acne conglobata is rare and commonly affects adult males. It is a severe form of acne
characterized by numerous comedones, large abscesses with sinuses, grouped inflammatory
nodules associated with suppuration. It may be associated with hidradenitis suppurativa (a
chronic, inflammatory disorder of apocrine glands, mainly affecting axillae and groins), folliculitis
and pilonidal sinus.Acne fulminans  is a rare, severe variant of acne, usually affecting the trunk in adolescent males. It
present with fever, arthralgias and systemic inflammation, with leukocytosis and raised plasma
viscosity.
Acne excoriée (also known as “picker’s acne”) is self-inflicted excoriations produced by
compulsive picking of pre-existing or imagined acne lesions. It is usually observed in teenage girls
with psychological problems.SAPHO Syndrome:  Synovitis, Acne, Pustulosis, Hyperostosis, and Osteitis syndrome.
Acne venenata: Contact with acnegenic chemicals can produce comedones. For example,
chlorinated hydrocarbons, cutting oils, petroleum oil, coal tar.
Acne aestivalis  (Mallorca acne): Rare, seen in females 25–40 years. Starts in spring, resolves by
fall characterized by small papules on cheeks, neck, upper body. Comedones and pustules are
sparse or absent.
Management
Mild to moderate disease
Local therapy:Areas affected with acne should be kept clean by regular washing with soap and water. However,
vigorous scrubbing may cause mechanical rupture of comedones.
Topical agents such as benzoyl peroxide (most cost-effective therapy), retinoids {tretinoin (most
potent keratolytic agent), adapalene (less irritating), or tazarotene}, or salicylic acid should be
used.Topical antibacterial agents: Inflammatory acne responds to topical antibacterial agents such as
azelaic acid, topical erythromycin, or clindamycin.
Systemic therapy:
Antibiotics: Moderate inflammatory acne will benefit from the addition of systemic therapy such
as oral tetracycline (oxytetracycline or lymecycline), doxycycline (200 mg/day), or minocycline
(200 mg/day) for 3–6 months.Hormonal therapy: These include, estrogen-containing oral contraceptives or a combined
estrogen/anti-androgen (such as cyproterone acetate) contraceptive.
Moderate to severe disease
Isotretinoin:  Moderate to severe acne or if there is no adequate response to 6 months of therapy
with the other therapies (combined systemic and topical approaches), patients should be
considered for isotretinoin (13 cis -retinoic acid).
Mechanism of action:  It decreases sebaceous gland size and sebum excretion, decreases follicular
hypercornification and reduces P. acnes colonization.
Side effects:  Oral isotretinoin is teratogenic (prevent pregnancy while taking isotretinoin), and
possibly associated risk for severe depression, pseudotumor cerebri and other significant side
effects.

Other treatments and physical measures:
For inflamed acne nodules or cysts:  They may require intralesional injections of triamcinolone
acetonide or incision and drainage, or excision under local anesthesia.
Scarring: Prevention of scarring by adequate treatment of active acne. Keloid scars respond to
intralesional steroid injection and/or silicone dressings. Other measures for scarring include carbon
dioxide laser, microdermabrasion, chemical peeling or localized excision.
UVB phototherapy:  They are rarely used in patients with inflammatory acne who are unable to
use conventional therapy, such as isotretinoin.
HAIR DISORDERS
Q. Write short note on alopecia/causes of alopecia.
Alopecia: Alopecia is loss of hair.
Alopecia
Classification and Causes of Alopecia (Table 22.10)
Table 22.10: Classification and causes of alopecia.
Localized Diffuse
Non-scarring
A. Abnormality of cycling
•   Alopecia areata
•   Syphilitic alopecia
B. Production decline
•   Androgenetic alopecia
•   Triangular alopecia
C. Hair breakage
•   Trichotillomania
•   Tinea capitis
•   Traction alopecia
•   Primary or acquired hair shaft abnormalityA. Abnormality of cycling
•   Alopecia areata
•   Telogen effluvium
•   Anagen effluvium
•   Loose anagen syndrome
B. Hair shaft abnormality
•   Hair breakage
•   Unruly hair
C. Failure of follicle production
•   Congenital universal atrichia
•   Atrichia with papular lesions
•   Hereditary vitamin-D-resistant rickets
Androgenetic, hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism,
hypopituitarism, diabetes mellitus, HIV,
nutritional (especially iron) deficiency, liver
disease, post-partum, alopecia areata, syphilis,
drug-induced (e.g. chemotherapy, retinoids
Scarring
A. Lymphocytic •   Discoid lupus erythematosus

•   Chronic cutaneous lupus erythematosus,
discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE)
•   Lichen planopilaris
•   Classic pseudopelade of Brocq
•   Alopecia mucinosa
B. Neutrophilic
•   Folliculitis decalvans
•   Dissecting folliculitis/cellulitis
C. Mixed
•   Folliculitis (acne) keloidalis
•   Folliculitis (acne) necrotica
•   Erosive pustular dermatitis•   Radiotherapy
•   Folliculitis decalvans
•   Lichen planus
Alopecia Areata
Definition: Rapid and complete loss of hair in one or most often several
round or oval patches, usually on the scalp (Fig. 22.24), bearded area,
eyebrows, eye lashes and less commonly on other hairy areas of the body.
Approximately 1.7% of the population will experience an episode of
alopecia areata during their life time.
Etiology
It is an autoimmune disease
Mediated by the cellular arm (T- cell, macrophages).
Modified by genetic factors (HLA-R4,DR11,DQ7).
Stages of Alopecia Areata (Box 22.21)
Clinical feature
Rapid and complete loss of hair in one or several patches (Fig. 22.24).

Fig. 22.24:  Alopecia areata.
Site: Scalp, bearded area, eyebrows, eye lashes and less commonly other
areas of body.
Size: Patches of 1–5 cm in diameter.
Treatment
Spontaneous recovery is extremely common for patchy alopecia areata.
Steroid: Both local (intralesional and topical) and systemic (in short course).
Topical 1% anthralin cream: Applied for 15–20 minutes and then shampooed off the treated side.
5% topical minoxidil: As a single agent or as an adjuvant with topical anthralin.
PUVA.
Contact sensitizer: Squaric acid dibutyle ester, diphencyprone, dinitrochlorobenzene.
Psychological support.
In extensive scalp hair loss: Cosmetically expectable alternatives.
Box 22.21: Stages of alopecia areata.
Acute hair loss
Persistent (chronic) baldness
Partial telogen to anagen conversion (incomplete recovery)
Normal recovery
LEG ULCERS
Q. Write short note on causes of non-healing leg ulcer.

Ulceration of the skin is defined as complete epidermal loss. It results in
exposure of dermal (or deeper) layers.
Causes of Leg Ulcers (Table 22.11 and Fig. 22.25)
Table 22.11: Causes of leg ulcer.
Venous hypertension
Deep vein thrombosisBlood disorders
Sickle-cell anemia
Cryoglobulinemia
Spherocytosis
Hyperviscosity states, e.g. polycythemia
Immune complex diseaseArterial disease
Atherosclerosis
Vasculitis
Buerger’s disease
Small-vessel disease
Diabetes mellitus
VasculitisNeuropathy
Diabetes mellitus
Leprosy (Hansen’s disease)
Syphilis
Malignant skin tumors
Squamous cell carcinoma
Basal cell carcinoma
Malignant melanoma
Kaposi’s sarcomaTrauma
Injury
Artifact
Fig. 22.25:  Causes of leg ulcers.

XEROSTOMIA
Q. Write short note on xerostomia.
Normal healthy adults daily produce about 1500 mL of saliva.
Xerostomia is characterized by dry mouth and may be due to decrease in
the production of saliva.
Effects of Xerostomia
Symptoms may be minor or may hamper activities of daily living.
May produce burning sensation in mouth, difficulty in eating, chewing and
swallowing.
May produce tooth decay, bad breath, candida infection and viral
infections (e.g. herpes simplex).
Etiology
Anticholinergic drugs (reduce volume of saliva): For example, anticho-
linergics, antidepressants, antipsychotics, antiemetics, antihistamines,
antihypertensives, antiparkinsonian drugs, antispasmodics, diuretics.Sympathomimetic drugs (produce viscous saliva): For example,
amphetamines, appetite suppressants, decongestants, bronchodilators.
Systemic diseases: Addison’s disease, Alzheimer’s diseases, salivary
gland infection, Sjögren’s syndrome, alcoholic cirrhosis, diabetes mellitus,
HIV/AIDS, radiation to head and neck region (e.g. for cancer therapy),
severe dehydration.Other causes: Elderly individuals, sleep-related xerostomia (due to
mouth-breathing during sleep).
Management
Stop the offending drug.
Frequent sips of water and teeth brushing.
Oral hygiene: Chlorhexidine rinses.
Artificial salivary substitutes:  They act as lubricant and protective and not as substitutes for
digestive and enzymatic actions (e.g. sodium carboxymethyl cellulose, potassium dihydrogen
orthophosphate and sorbitol).
Cholinergic agonists:
–   Pilocarpine and cevimeline: Should be cautiously used in patients with cardiovascular disease
and chronic respiratory conditions. They are contraindicated in patients with uncontrolled
asthma, angle-closure (narrow angle) glaucoma and liver disease.

PRURITUS
Q. Write short essay/note on pruritus/generalized pruritus and its
causes.
The terms ‘itch’ and ‘pruritus’ are used synonymously; however, ‘pruritus’ is
often used for generalized itch.
Definition: Itch is an unpleasant cutaneous sensation that leads to scratching
or rubbing.
Box 22.22:  Dermatological causes of pruritus.
Atopic dermatitis Ichthyoses
Scabies Dermatitis herpetiformis
Xerosis Psoriasis
Lichen simplex chronicus Lichen planus
Contact dermatitis Fungal infections
Insect bites Pediculosis
Sunburn Plaster of Paris casts
Causes (Box 22.22 and Table 22.12)
Management/Treatment
General measures:Avoid soap
Control of xerosis with moisturizers and humidification of indoor environment.
Specific measures:
Establish the diagnosis and treat the underlying skin or systemic disease.
If a clear-cut diagnosis is not possible, various non-specific measures can be used for symptom
control. It is necessary to re-assess intermittently in order to avoid missing the diagnosis.
UVB (ultraviolet B) phototherapy in chronic kidney disease.
Ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) in cholestasis.
Cholestyramine, rifampicin and opioid antagonists (e.g. naltrexone) in primary biliary cirrhosis.
Corticosteroids in Hodgkin’s disease.
Paroxetine (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor) in itching as paraneoplastic manifestation of
malignancies.
Symptomatic measures:
These include sedation, often with H 1 antagonist antihistamines; emollients; and counter-irritants
(such as topical menthol-containing preparations).
Intractable cases: Phototherapy, low-dose tricyclic antidepressants (e.g. amitriptyline) or

gabapentin may help.
Complications of pruritus:
Prurigo nodularis is a variant of lichen simplex chronicus in which nodules develop at the site of
scratching.
Local infection due to scratching.
Lichen simplex chronicus is localized skin thickening produced due to intense scratching.
PANNICULITIS
Panniculitis is an inflammatory reaction in the subcutaneous fat tissue.
Panniculitis may preferentially affect (1) the lobules of fat (lobular
panniculitis with necrosis and purpura), or (2) the connective tissue that
separates fat into lobules (septal panniculitis).
Table 22.12: Systemic causes of pruritus.
Autoimmune
Dermatitis herpetiformis
DermatomyositisHepatobiliary
Biliary cirrhosis
Drug-induced cholestasis
Hematological
Hemochromatosis
Mastocytosis
Polycythemia veraMetabolic and endocrine
Carcinoid syndrome
Chronic renal disease
Diabetes mellitus
Infectious diseases
AIDS
Infectious hepatitis
Parasitic diseases (e.g. giardiasis, ascariasis)Malignancy
Leukemia, lymphoma
Multiple myeloma
Solid tumors with paraneoplastic syndrome
Neurologic
Cerebral abscess
Cerebral tumorOthers
Drug
Pregnancy
Erythema Nodosum
Q. Write short essay/note on the etiology, clinical features, diagnosis
and treatment of erythema nodosum.
Erythema nodosum (septal panniculitis) is the most common form of
panniculitis
Most common type of panniculitis. It is also called subacute migratory
panniculitis of Vilanova and Piñol.

Etiology
Factors provoking erythema nodosum
Occurrence of erythema nodosum is often associated with provoking factors
(Box 22.23)
Most often (0.50%) it is idiopathic without any identifiable underlying cause.
Clinical Features
Age and gender: Age 20 to 30 years but any age group may be affected,
Female to male ratio is 3-6:1.
Lesions (Table 22.13 and Fig. 22.26)
Fig. 22.26: Erythema nodosum on both legs.
Table 22.13: Features of lesions erythema nodosum.
Sudden onset
Symmetrical
Painful
Erythematous
Warm
Nonulcerated nodules/plaques
Knees, shins, feet, may be at thighs, arms, and
faceUndergo color changes as advance in the
duration
Resolve without scarring or atrophy
Associated with pyrexia, malaise, headache,
arthralgias
Recurrent episodes are known
Diagnosis
Most often based on clinical presentation.
Deep wedge biopsy including the subcutis is usually required for
histologic diagnosis. Histologically shows: Inflammation of the connective

tissue septa in the subcutaneous fat tissue (septal panniculitis). Vasculitis
is not observed.
Identification of triggering factors causing erythema nodosum:
–   Complete blood count (CBC) with differential; ESR (erythrocyte
sedimentation rate) and C-reactive protein level.
–   Evaluation for β-hemolytic streptococcal infection: Throat culture for
group A streptococci, rapid antigen test, antistreptolysin-O titer and
polymerase chain reaction assay.
–   Chest radiograph, e.g. to detect tuberculosis and sarcoidosis, Mantoux
test.
–   Stool examination for ova and parasite, e.g. in patients with GIT
symptoms.
–   Evaluation for inflammatory bowel disease in patient with symptoms
of IBD.
Treatment
Identify and remove/treat any underlying cause (treatment of tuberculosis/IBD/sarcoid).
Bed rest, leg elevation and analgesics with NSAIDs may produce symptomatic relief. However,
avoid NSAIDs if secondary to Crohn disease because they may trigger a flare-up the underlying
Crohn disease.
Systemic corticosteroids must be avoided in cases with infection and malignancy.
Dapsone and potassium iodide orally (400–900 mg/day) have been effective for stubborn disease
(if NSAIDs do not relieve pain or the lesions persist) for symptomatic relief. Recalcitrant, chronic,
or recurring EN is treated with thalidomide, colchicine, and hydroxychloroquine.
Box 22.23:  Triggering factors associated with erythema nodosum.
InfectionsBacteria, e.g. β -hemolytic streptococci , mycobacteria (usually primary tuberculosis , leprosy),
Brucella, Mycoplasma, Rickettsia, Chlamydia, Salmonella, Yersinia.
Viruses, e.g. hepatitis B and infectious mononucleosis
Fungi, e.g. coccidioidomycosis, histoplasmosis, blastomycosis
Parasitic, e.g. amebiasis, giardiasis.
Drug administration, e.g. sulfonamides, sulfonylureas, oral contraceptives
Systemic disease, e.g. sarcoidosis , inflammatory bowel disease, Behcet’s
Malignancies: Lymphoma, leukemia, renal cell carcinoma.
Idiopathic: >50% cases

Clinical Pharmacology

CHAPTER
23
INTRODUCTION
Drug metabolism that varies on genetic basis is often called polymorphic
drug metabolism (Table 23.1).
Pharmacogenetics: It is the study of individual gene-drug interactions,
usually one or two genes that have dominant effect on a drug response.
Pharmacogenomics is the study of genomic influence on drug response
Table 23.1: Genetic polymorphisms in drug metabolism.
Defect Enzyme involved Drug Consequences
Oxidation CYP2D6 Codeine Reduced analgesia
Oxidation Aldehyde
dehydrogenaseEthanol Facial flushing, hypotension,
tachycardia, nausea, vomiting
N-Acetylation N-acetyl
transferaseIsoniazid Peripheral neuropathy
Ester hydrolysis Plasma
cholinesteraseSuccinylcholine Prolonged apnea
Oxidation CYP2C9 Warfarin Bleeding
ADVERSE DRUG REACTION (ADR)
Definition: An unwanted or harmful reaction experienced following the
administration of a drug or combination of drugs under normal conditions of
use and suspected to be related to the drug.
It could be trivial or serious or fatal.
Classification of ADR (Table 23.2)
Table 23.2: Classification of adverse drug reactions.

Type A
Response qualitatively normal but
quantitatively abnormal.
Common, less serious, dose-related.
Corrected by dose adjustment.
Include side effect, toxic effect, and
withdrawal.Type D
Refer to carcinogenic and teratogenic effects.
These reactions are delayed in onset.
Type B
Because of patient peculiarities such as
allergy, idiosyncrasy, dose-related.
Uncommon.
Serious reactions need withdrawal of drug
required.
Not always predictable OR preventable.Type E
End of dose effect.
For example, abrupt cessation of
corticosteroids produces acute adrenal
insufficiency and stoppage of propranolol can
produce rebound effect.
Type CAssociated with long-term drug therapy, e.g.
benzodiazepine dependence and analgesic
nephropathy.They are well known and can be anticipated.Type F
Failure of therapy.
Oral contraceptive pill (OCP) failure when on
antitubercular therapy.
Severity of ADR
Minor: No need of therapy, antidote, or hospitalization.
Moderate: Requires drug change, specific treatment, hospitalization.
Severe: Potentially life-threatening; permanent damage, and prolonged
hospitalization.
Lethal: Directly or indirectly leads to death.
Types of ADR
1. Side effects:
Unavoidable, predictable, decreased dose results in amelioration.

Figs. 23.1A to C:  (A) Mucositis induced by anticancer drug; (B) Phenytoin-induced gum
hyperplasia; (C) Zidovudine- induced nail pigmentation.
Occurs as extension of the same therapeutic effect , e.g. atropine as
antisecretory in preanesthetic medication → dry mouth, mucositis
induced by anticancer drug(Fig. 23.1A).
Occurs as a distinctly different effect , e.g. promethazine as antiallergic
→ sedation, phenytoin-induced gum hyperplasia(Fig. 23.1B),
Zidovudine-induced nail pigmentation(Fig. 23.1C).
Estrogen as antiovulatory → nausea.
Side effect exploited for a therapeutic use , e.g. codeine [antitussive]
constipating action used in diarrhea.
–   Sulfonylureas [tested as antibacterial] were found to decrease blood
glucose.

Figs. 23.2A and B: Drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms
syndrome (DRESS)(A) presteroid therapy; (B) poststeroid therapy.
2. Secondary effects: Indirect effect of therapy. For example, intestinal
microflora killed by tetracycline causing superinfection, corticosteroids
decreases immunity causing oral candidiasis.3. Toxic effects: Overdose or prolonged use. Examples of toxic effects,
overdosage or prolonged use includes atropine → delirium, paracetamol
→ hepatic necrosis, barbiturates → coma and morphine → respiratory
failure.4. Intolerance: It is opposite of tolerance and characterized by increased
sensitivity to low doses. Examples, few doses of carbamazepine → ataxia,
single dose of triflupromazine → muscular dystonia.5. Idiosyncrasy: Genetically determined atypical or bizarre effect.
Examples, barbiturate → excitement and mental confusion, streptomycin
→ deafness with single dose. Drug reaction with eosinophilia and
systemic symptoms (DRESS) is a rare, potentially life-threatening, drug-
induced hypersensitivity reaction that includes skin eruption, hematologic
abnormalities (eosinophilia, atypical lymphocytosis), lymphadenopathy,
and internal organ involvement (liver, kidney, lung). Common drugs
associated are phenytoin, olanzepine, sulfonamides, febuxostat, dapsone
and vancomycin (Figs. 23.2A and B).6. Drug allergy or hypersensitivity: Immunologically mediated,
independent of dose and occurs in a small proportion of patients. Prior
sensitization is required and occurs after 1–2 weeks required after first

dose. Drug acts as an antigen or hapten. Chemically-related drugs may
show cross sensitivity. Same drug can cause different allergic reactions in
different individuals. Types of allergy include:
Type I: Urticaria(Fig. 23.3), angioedema, asthma, anaphylactic shock.
Type II: Thrombocytopenia, agranulocytosis, aplastic anemia, SLE.
Type III: Arthralgia, lymphadenopathy, Stevens-Johnson syndrome.
Type IV: Contact dermatitis, fever, photosensitization, e.g. penicillin,
sulfonamides, carbamazepine, and methyldopa.
Fig. 23.3:  Nevirapine-induced rash.
7. Photosensitivity
Phototoxic: Drug accumulates in skin → absorbs light →
photochemical reaction → photobiological reaction → tissue damage.
Example, erythema, edema, blistering, etc. e.g. tetracyclines.Photoallergic: Drug → cell-mediated immune response → contact
dermatitis on exposure to light, e.g. sulfonamides, griseofulvin.

8. Drug dependence: Can be psychological and/physical dependence.
9. Teratogenicity: Drug use in pregnancy affects offspring. Examples,
thalidomide → phocomelia, phenytoin → cleft palate.
10. Carcinogenicity and mutagenicity: For example, anticancer drugs,
estrogens.
11. Drug-induced diseases, iatrogenic diseases:  Examples, salicylates →
peptic ulcer, phenothiazine → Parkinsonism, INH → hepatitis.
12. Drug withdrawal reaction: Examples, propranolol → hypertension,
acute adrenal insufficiency following withdrawal of corticosteroids.
Management of ADR
Evaluation
Airway
Breathing
Circulation
Degree of consciousness
History of
exposure/ingestion
Physical examinationSupportive Care
Respiratory
Cardiovascular
CNSEnhancing Elimination
Activated charcoal
Forced alkaline diuresis
Hemodialysis/perfusion
Decontamination
Gastric lavage
Induction of emesis
Activated charcoal
Other decontaminationDiagnostic Studies
Blood tests
ECG
X-rays
Specific drug levelsAntidotes
Organophosphates—atropine,
oximes
Morphine—naloxone
Benzodiazepines—flumazenil
Paracetamol—N-acetyl cysteine
The ways of preventing ADR are listed in Box 23.1.
Box 23.1: Prevention of ADR.
Avoid inappropriate drugs in the context of clinical condition
Use right dose, route, frequency based on patient variables
Elicit medication history; consider untoward incidents
Elicit history of allergies (higher chances in patients with allergic diseases)
Rule out drug interactions
Adopt right technique, e.g. slow IV injection of aminophylline
Carry out appropriate monitoring, e.g. prothrombin time (PT) with warfarin; drug levels
DRUG INTERACTION
Definition: A measurable modification (in magnitude and/or duration) of the

action of one drug by prior or concomitant administration of another
substance, including prescription, non-prescription (including complementary
medicines) drugs, food, alcohol, cigarette smoking or diagnostic tests.
Outcomes of drug interaction are listed in Box 23.2.
Box 23.2: Outcomes of drug interaction.
Loss of therapeutic effect
Toxicity
Unexpected increase in pharmacological activity
Beneficial effects, e.g. additive and potentiation (intended) or antagonism (unintended)
Chemical or physical interaction, e.g. intravenous incompatibility in fluid or syringes mixture
Mechanism of Drug Interaction
Pharmacokinetic Interaction
Altered GIT absorption
Altered pH: The nonionized form of a drug is more lipid soluble and
more readily absorbed from GIT than the ionized form does. For example,
antacids and H2 blockers change gastric pH → decrease the dissolution of
ketoconazole which requires acidic pH. Therefore, these drugs must be
separated by at least 2 hour in the time of administration of both.Altered intestinal bacterial flora: In patients receiving digoxin, 40% or
more of the administered dose is metabolized by the intestinal flora. If
patients simultaneous take antibiotics which destroy the intestinal flora,
digoxin toxicity can occur.Complexation or chelation: Tetracycline interacts with iron preparations
→ unabsorbable complexes. Decrease absorption of ciprofloxacin by 85%
due to chelation, if given along with antacids.Drug-induced mucosal damage: Antineoplastic agents, e.g.
cyclophosphamide, vincristine, procarbazine → mucosal damage and
inhibit absorption of several drugs, e.g. digoxin.Altered motility: Metoclopramide (antiemetic) → increase absorption of
cyclosporine due to the increase of stomach empting time.
Displaced protein binding
It depends on the affinity of the drug to plasma protein.
Phenytoin is a highly bound to plasma protein (90%), tolbutamide (96%),

and warfarin (99%). Drugs that displace these agents are aspirin,
sulfonamides and phenylbutazone.
Altered metabolism
The effect of one drug on the metabolism of the other is well documented.
The liver is the major site of drug metabolism but other organs can also be
involved, e.g. WBC, skin, lung, and GIT.
CYP450 family is the major metabolizing enzyme in phase I (oxidation
process).
Therefore, the effect of drugs on the rate of metabolism of others can
involve the following examples:
–   Enzyme induction:
♦   A drug may induce the enzyme that is responsible for the
metabolism of another drug or even itself, e.g. carbamazepine
(antiepileptic drug) increases its own metabolism.
♦   Phenytoin increases hepatic metabolism of theophylline → leading
to decrease its level, reduces its action and vice- versa.
–   Enzyme inhibition:
♦   It is characterized by reduction of the rate of metabolism of a drug
by another drug. This leads to increased concentration of the target
drug and thereby increases its toxicity.
♦   Inhibition of the enzyme may be caused by the competition on its
binding sites. This shortens the onset of action (may be within 24
hours).
♦   Example, erythromycin inhibit metabolism of astemazole and
terfenadine → Raises the serum concentration of the antihistaminic
and thereby increasing the cardiotoxicity which may be life-
threatening.
First-Pass MetabolismAdministration of drug by oral route increases its metabolism in the liver
and GIT. This causes loss of a part of the drug dose and decreases its
action.This is more evident when such drug is an enzyme inducer or inhibitor.
By increase its first pass, rifampin reduces serum concentration of
verapamil level. Also, rifampin induces the hepatic metabolism of

verapamil.
Renal Excretion
Active tubular secretion
It occurs in the proximal tubules (a portion of renal tubules).
The drug combines with a specific protein and reaches the proximal
tubules.
When a drug has a competitive reactivity to the protein that is responsible
for active transport of another drug. This will increase its toxicity by
reducing drug excretion and increasing its concentration.For example, probenecid → decreases tubular secretion of methotrexate.
Passive tubular reabsorption
In the tubules, excretion and reabsorption of drugs is by passive diffusion
and is regulated by concentration and lipid solubility.
For example, sodium bicarbonate → increases lithium clearance and
decreases its action.
Pharmacodynamic Interaction
It indicates that there is alteration of the drug action without change in its
serum concentration by pharmacokinetic factors.
For example, synergism  means = 1 + 1 = 3, additive means = 1 + 1 = 2, potentiation  means = 1 +
0 = 2, and antagonism  means 1 + 1 = 0 or 0.5.
Prevention of Drug Interaction
Monitoring therapy and making adjustments.
Monitoring blood level of some drugs with narrow therapeutic index, e.g.
digoxin, anticancer agents, etc.
Monitoring of some parameters may help to detect the early events of
interaction or toxicity. For example, with warfarin treatment, it is
necessary to monitor the prothrombin time to detect any change in the
drug activity.Increase the interest in case report studies to report different possibilities
of drug interaction.
DRUGS USED IN LIVER DISORDER

Common drugs metabolized in liver are mentioned in Table 23.3.
Table 23.3: Common drugs metabolized in the liver.
Type of conjugation Endogenous reactant Examples
Glucuronidation UDP glucuronic acid Nitrophenol, morphine,
acetaminophen, diazepam, N-hydroxy
dapsone, sulfathiazole, digitoxin,
digoxin
Acetylation Acetyl-CoA Sulfonamides, isoniazid, clonazepam,
dapsone, mescaline
Glutathione conjugation Glutathione (GSH) Acetaminophen, ethacrynic acid,
bromobenzene
Glycine conjugation Glycine Salicylic acid, benzoic acid, cholic
acid, deoxycholic acid
Sulfation Phosphoadenosyl
phosphosulfateEstrone, aniline, phenol, 3-hydroxy-
coumarin, acetaminophen, methyldopa
Methylation S- adenosylmethionine Dopamine, epinephrine, pyridine,
histamine, thiouracil
Water conjugation Water Carbamazepine
Cirrhotic Patients with Portosystemic ShuntsBlood from intestines bypasses the liver, delivering much more of orally
administered drugs to the systemic circulation. Thus, systemic
bioavailability of orally administered high clearance drugs is much
greater.Hepatic impairment:
–   Research has shown reduced drug-metabolizing enzyme (CYP and
conjugation reactions) in cirrhotics which worsen disease severity
(Child-Pugh score), but with large variability!
–   Preferentially recommend conjugatively metabolized agents in
cirrhotics
–   In the absence of recommended doses:
♦   Child-Pugh A: Reduce maintenance to 50%
♦   Child-Pugh B: Reduce maintenance to 25%
♦   Child-Pugh C: Use drugs proven safe, or drugs with level
monitoring available.

DRUGS USE IN KIDNEY DISORDERS
Dosing of Drugs in Renal Failure
Without careful dosing and therapeutic drug monitoring in patients with
renal dysfunction, accumulation of drugs/toxic metabolites can occur.
Drug dosing has to be adjusted to the calculated GFR.
Renal disease affects the pharmacokinetic as well as pharmacodynamic
effect of drugs.
Uremia can alter drug disposition, protein binding, pharmacokinetics
(PK), pharmacodynamics (PD) and can also increase sensitivity to drugs.
Effect of Renal Failure on Bioavailability
Absorption of drugs in patients with renal disorders could be inhibited by
GI disturbances seen in uremia (nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea), uremic
gastritis, and pancreatitis.Edema of GI tract can occur with nephrotic syndrome and impair
absorption.
Gastric motility can be impaired by uremia.
Uremia can also increase gastric ammonia and lead to increased gastric pH
> affecting drugs that require acidic pH (e.g. ferrous sulfate).
First-pass effect is reduced in patients with renal disease (therefore,
absorption of drugs with high first pass effect is increased, e.g.
propranolol).
Effect of Renal Failure on Protein Binding (PB)and Volume of
Distribution (VD)The effect of a drug is related to the amount of free or unbound drug
available to target tissues.
Also, hypoalbuminemia is common to patients with renal failure.
Therefore, highly PB drug has fewer albumins to cling to. This is
especially important with phenytoin.
EliminationAs kidney disease progresses, the kidney’s ability to excrete uremic toxins
decreases as does its ability to eliminate certain drugs.
Kidney eliminates primarily through filtration or active secretion.

Drugs with low protein binding are filtered more readily.
Large molecules (molecular weight >20000) daltons are not readily
filtered due to size.
Drug Removed by Dialysis
Removal by dialysis is specific to each drug.
Factors affecting removal: Type of machine, membrane surface area, pore
size, flow rates.
Dialysis is sometimes used to remove excess drug in an overdose
situation.
Table 23.4: Current categories for drug use in pregnancy.
Category Description
A Adequate, well-controlled studies in humans show no risk to the fetus (e.g.
magnesium sulfate)
B No well-controlled studies have been conducted in humans. Animal studies
show no risk to the fetus (e.g. amoxicillin, amoxicillin + clavulanic acid,
cefotaxime, methyldopa, metronidazole, erythromycin).
C No well-controlled studies have been conducted in humans. Animal studies have
shown an adverse effect on the fetus (e.g. diclofenac, rifampicin,
fluoroquinolones, aminoglycosides, glyburide).
D Human studies have demonstrated a risk to the fetus. However, the benefits of
therapy may outweigh the potential harm (e.g. tetracyclines, phenytoin, valproic
acid, carbamazepine, ACE inhibitors).
X Controlled studies in animals or humans have demonstrated fetal abnormalities.
The use of the product is contraindicated in women who are or may become
pregnant (e.g. thalidomide, oral contraceptive pills, misoprostol).
DRUGS USE IN PREGNANCYThe safety of approximately 50% of medications for the mother and fetus
remains unknown.
Pharmacokinetics are profoundly affected by pregnancy associated
physiologic changes and dose adjustments are sometimes necessary for
optimal clinical outcome.
Current Categories for Drug Use in Pregnancy (FDA) (Table
23.4)

Few drugs contraindicated during pregnancy and those which have
teratogenic effects are listed in Table 23.5. Common problems in pregnancy
and drugs that can be safely used in these cases are mentioned in Table 23.6.
CLINICAL TRIALS BASIC CONCEPTS
Clinical trial is an experimental epidemiological method. It is an
interventional study on individuals, usually on patients.
Objectives of Clinical Trials
Intervention trials determine whether experimental treatments or trials are
safe and effective under controlled environments.
Observation trials address health issues in large groups of people in natural
settings.
Levels of Evidence (Table 23.7)
Levels of evidence (sometimes called hierarchy of evidence) are assigned to
studies based on the methodological quality of their design, validity, and
applicability to patient care. These decisions gives the “grade (or strength) of
recommendation.”
Features of observational and experimental studies are mentioned in Table
23.8.
Table 23.5: List of few drugs contraindicated during pregnancy and those
which have teratogenic effects.
Drug Side effects
Tetracycline Yellow staining of the primary or deciduous teeth and diminished
growth of the long bones
Phenytoin Fetal hydantoin syndrome consisting of intrauterine growth
retardation, microcephaly, mental retardation, distal phalangeal
hypoplasia
Retinoic acid Craniofacial dysmorphisms, cleft palate, thymic aplasia, and neural
tube defects
Thalidomide Meromelia, absence of the limbs to rudimentary limbs to abnormally
shortened limbs
Alcohol IUGR, small head, small eyes or short eye openings, or a poorly
developed philtrum and congenital heart disease
Nicotine Intrauterine growth retardation (IUGR)

Warfarin Nasal hypoplasia and a depressed nasal bridge, stippled epiphysis;
termed fetal warfarin syndrome
Estrogen and androgens Genital tract malformations
Chloramphenicol Gray baby syndrome
Types of Study (Table 23.9)
Phases of Clinical Trials
Most trials that involve new drugs go through a series of steps:
1. Experiments in the laboratory
Table 23.6: Common problems in pregnancy and drugs that can be safely
used.
Common problems in pregnancy Drugs that can be safely used
Nausea and vomiting Pyridoxine, meclizine diphenhydramine
Constipation Mild purgative-like senna
Peptic ulcer Sucralfate, H 2 blockers
Hematopoietic (iron and folic acid deficiency) Iron and folic acid
Urinary tract infections Ampicillin, amoxycillin, cefurixime axetil
Other infections β-lactam antibiotics, cephalosporins
Malaria Chloroquine, quinine, proguanil
Amoebiasis Metronidazole and diloxanide furoate
Worm infestation Piperazine citrate, pyrantel pamoate
Fungal infection Miconazole, clotrimazole, nystatin
HIV infection None of the anti-HIV drugs are safe, except
zidovudine and nevirapine
Tuberculosis INH and ethambutol are safe. If third drug is
needed, then rifampicin
Diabetes mellitus Insulin
Hypothyroidism Thyroxine
Thyrotoxicosis Propylthiouracil
Hypertension α-methyldopa, in emergency—hydralazine, β
blockers—labetolol, atenolol
Thromboembolic disease Heparin
Headache and inflammatory condition Paracetamol, avoid other NSAIDs
Epilepsy Sodium valproate and phenytoin to be avoided,

carbamazepine in lower dose can be used
Migraine Paracetamol, propanolol, amitriptyline
Antidepressants Amitriptyline and imipramine
Table 23.7: Levels of evidence.
Level of evidence (LOE) Description
Level I Evidence from a systematic review or meta-
analysis of all relevant RCTs (randomized
controlled trial) or evidence-based clinical
practice guidelines based on systematic reviews
of RCTs or three or more RCTs of good quality
that have similar results
Level II Evidence obtained from at least one well-
designed RCT (e.g. large multisite RCT)
Level III Evidence obtained from well-designed
controlled trials without randomization  (i.e.
quasi-experimental)
Level IV Evidence from well-designed case-control or
cohort studies
Level V Evidence from systematic reviews of
descriptive and qualitative studies
(metasynthesis)
Level VI Evidence from a single descriptive or
qualitative study
Level VII Evidence from the opinion of authorities and/or
reports of expert committees
Table 23.8: Features of observational and experimental studies.
Observational studies Experimental studies
Cross-sectional, case series, case-control
studies, Cohort studiesIdentify participants
Observe and record characteristics
Look for associationsBefore and after studies, comparative trials
(controlled or head to head), randomized trials
Identify participants
Place in common context
Intervene
Observe/evaluate effects of intervention
2. Once deemed safe, go through 1–4 phases.
Phase I: Small group [20-80] for 1st time to evaluate safety, determine
safe dosage range and identify side effects.

Phase II: Treatment given to larger group (100-300) to confirm
effectiveness, monitor SE, and further evaluate safety.
Phase III: Treatment given to even larger group (1,000-3,000) to
fulfill all of phase II objectives and compare it to other commonly used
treatments and collect data that will allow it to be used safely.Phase IV (Post-marketing surveillance): Done after treatment has
been marketed—studies continue to test treatment to collect data about
effects in various populations and side effects from long term use.
Table 23.9: Types of study with its pros and cons.
Type of Study Description Pros Cons
RCT
(Randomized
controlled trial)An experimental
comparison study
where participants are
allocated to
treatment/intervention
or control/placebo
groups using a random
mechanism. Best for
studying the effect of
an interventionUnbiased distribution
of confounders
Blinding more likely
Randomization
facilitates statistical
analysisExpensive:  Time and
money
Volunteer bias
Ethically problematic at
times
Crossover trial A controlled trial
where each participant
has both therapies,
i.e. randomized to
treatment A first then
starts treatment BAll participants serve
as own controls and
error variance is
reduced, thus reducing
sample size needed
All participants receive
treatment (at least some
of the time)
Statistical tests
assuming
randomization can be
used
Blinding can be
maintainedAll participants receive
placebo or alternative
treatment at some point
Washout period lengthy or
unknown
Cannot be used for
treatments with permanent
effects
Cohort study Data obtained from
groups who have
already been exposed,
or not exposed, to the
factor of interest. No
allocation of exposure
is made by the
researcher. Best for
studying effects of riskEthically safe.
Participants can be
matched
Can establish timing
and directionality of
events
Eligibility criteria and
outcome assessmentsControls may be difficult to
identify
Exposure may be linked to a
hidden Confounder
Blinding is difficult
For rare disease, large
sample sizes or long follow-
up necessary

factors on an outcome can be standardized
Case-control study Patients with a certain
outcome or disease and
an appropriate group of
controls, without the
outcome or disease, are
selected (usually with
somematching); then
information is obtained
on whether the subjects
have been exposed to
the factor under
investigationQuick and cheap as
fewer people needed
than cross-sectional
studies
Only feasible method
for very rare disorders
or those with long lag
between exposure and
outcomeReliance on recall or records
to determine exposure status
Confounders
Selection of control groups
is difficult
Potential bias:  Recall,
selection
Cross-sectional
studyExamines the
relationship between 1)
diseases/other health-
related characteristics,
and 2) other variables
of interest as they exist
in defined population at
one time. Exposure and
outcomes both
measured at the same
time. Quantifies
prevalence, risk, or
diagnostic test
accuracyCheap and simple
Ethically safeEstablishes association at
most, not causality
Recall bias, social
desirability bias
Researcher’s (Neyman) bias
Group sizes may be unequal
Confounders may be
unequally distributed
Informed Consent
Informed consent document will be obtained from the participants in the
study population after explaining them fully about: (1) the purpose; (2)
duration; (3) required procedures; (4) expectations; (5) risks and benefits; (6)
adverse effects of the trial if any and (7) participants rights.
It is a continuous process throughout the study of learning of key facts by
participants about a clinical trial. It also explains the rights of the participant.
It is not a contract and the participant can withdraw from the trial at any time.
Ethical AspectsParticipants are human beings with a motive to help the researcher and
society.
Researcher should never be over-enthusiastic in his intervention to get his
results while dealing with participants.
Informed consent is not having a legal binding on the patients. It is a

communication document.
Random Allocation
The participants in the study population are randomly allocated into two
groups (Arms) using random number tables to avoid selection and
confounding biases.
Purpose of randomization: This elimination of allocation bias will greatly
enhance the validity of the trial.
Blinding
The investigator, the participant and sometimes even the evaluator are all
kept unaware (blinded) of the outcomes of the trial and secrecy is maintained
to improve the validity.
Purpose of blinding: Blinding or masking is done to eliminate: (i)
Investigator bias; (ii) evaluation bias; and (iii) Hawthorne effect.
Types of BlindingSingle blinding means the process wherein only the participant is unaware
about what he is receiving.
Double blinding means is where both the participant and the investigator
are unaware about of the intervention. This eliminates observer bias to a
large extent.Triple blinding is a trial where even the evaluator is also not aware of the
process.
Unblinding
In emergencies and life-threatening situations for participants, unblinding can
be done.
Assessment Criteria
Whether the outcomes or end-points are single or multiple, subjective or
objective, uniform and similar type of evaluation of end-points for both
the groups is to be carried out.
Subjectivity of the outcome, e.g. reduction of pain, may lead to observer
error and poor assessment.
Double blinding eliminates observer bias to a large extent.
Intention-to-treat Principle

Whole of the experimental population including non-participants, once
randomized, whether they are participating or not in the trial, have to
considered for evaluation as our intention is to treat all the people
randomized.
Placebo Effect or Attention Bias
Psychological relief of symptoms, not true biological relief, is often reported.
Hawthorne EffectSometimes the participants in comparison group may exaggerate the
effects/outcomes to please the investigator or when they like the study or
for some other reasons. Investigator does more frequent follow-up of
exposed group in order to establish the cause.This will affect the assessment unless controlled.

Emergencies in Medical Practice

CHAPTER
24
MANAGEMENT OF SEVERE HYPERKALEMIA
Case Scenario
An 80-year-old male found collapsed at home, incontinent of urine and feces. He is a known case of
HTN and CCF on enalapril for HTN, spironolactone and metoprolol for CCF
On Examination:  Patient is confused and combative with GCS of 13.
BP: 78/60 mm
HgPR: 74 bpm RR: 32/min SpO2: 91%
Lab Data:
ABG:pH 7.23K+ - 7.0 Blood glucose:
189 mg/dL
1. Immediate antagonism of cardiac effects of hyperkalemia: Membrane
stabilization
Calcium gluconate 10 mL 10% slow IV over 10 min

Calcium chloride 3–4 mL
2. Rapid reduction in plasma K+ by redistribution into the cells
IV 50 mL of 50% dextrose + 10 units of regular insulin
10–20 mg of nebulized albuterol in 4 mL NS inhaled over 10 minutes
3. Removal of K+  from the body
Ion exchange resin: Sodium polystyrene sulfonate 15–30 g powder
–   Given in a pre-made suspension with 33% sorbitol
IV furosemide and NS
Hemodialysis
METABOLIC ACIDOSIS
Case Scenario
A 56-year-old man with a history of alcohol use presents with a 4 day history of severe abdominal
pain, nausea and vomiting. On examination, his blood pressure is 80/50 mm Hg and has tenderness in
his epigastrium. His initial laboratory studies reveal:
Na: 132 Cl: 92 HCO 3: 16
Creatinine: 1.5 Amylase: 400 Lipase: 250
A room air arterial blood gas
pH: 7.28 PCO 2: 34 mm
HgPO2: 88 mm Hg HCO 3: 16.3
mEq/dL
Investigations: ABG, serum electrolytes
Identify and treat the underlying cause
Determine ΔAG

Dialysis may be necessary in renal failure with metabolic acidosis
HYPOGLYCEMIA
Case Scenario
A 32-year-old patient with altered level of consciousness.
On
examinationPR: 72 bmp BP: 100/56
mm HgSpO2: 98% GCS: 11 (3,
3, 5).
Blood sugar: 32 mg/dL
Medical History
Diabetes mellitus on insulin
Severe:
1. Dextrose 75 mL of 20% dextrose IV
Oral carbohydrate to be given as soon as the patient is able to eat
2. Glucagon 0.5–1 mg SC/IM
3. Octreotide

4. Identify and treat the cause
–   Adjusting the dose of OHA, insulin
–   Changing the timing of insulin injection
MANAGEMENT OF ACUTE PULMONARY
EDEMA
Case Scenario
A 62-year-old elderly male patient came with complaint of sudden severe shortness of breath.
P/H:  MI—6 months back.
On Examination:  Patient is sitting leaning forward.
Appearance:  Pale, distressed, sweaty. Productive pink tinged frothy sputum.
PR: 140 bpm BP: 200/110 mm
HgRR: 38/min SpO 2: 78% at
room air
Ankle edema present bilaterally.
S/E: CVS: Gallop rhythm.
RS: Basal crepitations present bilaterally.
Monitor vitals
Oxygen: Noninvasive positive pressure ventilation or intubation and
mechanical ventilation
Furosemide 0.5 to 1 mg/kg IV bolus
Morphine 2–4 mg IV


MANAGEMENT OF SEVERE
HYPERCALCEMIA
Case Scenario
A 80-year-old woman presented with vomiting, diarrhea, fatigue, malaise, generalized abdominal
pain and weight loss.
P/H:  K/C/O metastatic breast cancer
On Examination:
PR: 98 bpmBP: 90/70
mm HgRR: 14/min
S/E: PA: generalized abdominal tenderness present
Lab Data:  Serum calcium > 11.0 mg/d
1. Intravenous normal saline
4–6 L may be required over first 24 hours
2. Bisphosphonates: Inhibit bone resorption
Zoledronic acid 4 mg IV over 30 min
Pamidronate 60–90 mg IV over 2–4 hours
Ibandronate 2 mg IV over 2 hours
3. Calcitonin: Increases calcium excretion
100 U; 3 times/day; IM/SC for first 24–48 hours
4. Gallium nitrate
200 mg/m2 IV daily for 5 days
Alternative to bisphosphonates

Nephrotoxic
5. Dialysis.
TENSION PNEUMOTHORAX
Case Scenario
A 23-year-old man presents with a single gunshot
wound to the right side of his chest.
On Examination:  Conscious          Palpable pulse
BP: 100/60      RR: 30/min
Trachea deviated to the left
Jugular veins are distended
No breath sounds on right
side of chest
Palpable crepitus
Percussion—hyper-resonance
on right sid
MYXEDEMA COMA
Case Scenario

A 47-year-old female patient known case of hypothyroidism presented to office with complaints of
falls, leg edema and pain, drowsiness, headaches, shortness of breath.
On Examination: PR: 50
bpmBP: 90/70 mmHg RR: 20/min
Periorbital edema is present. Non-pitting tibial edema is present.
S/E: CNS: Delayed tendon reflexes
Free T3—0.05 ng/dL (0.93–1.7) TSH–30.12 µIU/mL (0.27–
5.0)
Na 121 mEq/L K 4.2 mEq/L Cl 87 mEq/L
Treatment must be initiated even before biochemical confirmation of
diagnosis
Monitor vitals – temperature
Sepsis screen
Investigations: T4, TSH, CPK, ABG, RBS, electrolytes.
1. Levothyroxine
500 mg IV bolus
OR
Triiodothyronine 10–25 mg every 8–12 hourly IV
 Followed by
Oral levothyroxine 50–100 mg daily
2. Hydrocortisone 100 mg IV TID
3. Slow rewarming
4. Cautious use of IV fluids: Hypotonic fluids to be avoided because they
increase water retention
5. Broad spectrum antibiotics
6. High flow oxygen
7. Identify and treat the cause
THYROTOXIC CRISIS/THYROID STORM
Case Scenario

A 39-year-old woman presented with a 3 months history of increased sweating and palpitations with
weight loss of 7 kg. She had family history of thyroid disease.
On Examination:  PR: 122 bpm 130/80 mm Hg RR: 20/min
Warm and moist skin. Her thyroid gland is enlarged bilaterally. Bilateral exophthalmos present.
S/E: CVS:
tachycardia presentPA: generalized abdominal
tenderness
T4 - 12.00 ng/dL
(0.73–1.84).T3 - 1173.00 ng/dL (123-
211 ng/dL.TSH <0.018 uIU/m
Investigations:  T3, T4, TSH, sepsis screen, LFT, ECG
1. Rehydrate
2. Propranolol
Per oral: 60–80 mg 4 times a day
IV: 1–5 mg 4 times a day
3. Propylthiouracil
500–1000 mg loading dose → 250 mg 4th hourly oral or via NG tube
4. Carbimazole
15–30 mg STAT → 15 mg TID
5. Lugol’s Iodine
10 drops TID – 1 hour after PTU/Carbimazole
6. Sodium ipodate
500 mg/day orally
7. Hydrocortisone
200 mg IV bolus → 100 mg every 8th hourly
8. Oxygen, IV fluids, external cooling
9. Identify and treat the cause
10. Antibiotics if infection is present.
ACUTE ADRENAL INSUFFICIENCY
Case Scenario
A 38-year-old female is admitted for complaints of progressive fatigue for two weeks. She also
complains of nausea and vomiting. History of loss of 8 kilograms in the past two weeks. History of
recent onset of breathlessness.

On Examination: PR: 134
bpmBP: 80/40 mm Hg
RR: 18/minTemp: 99° F
Appears pale, dehydrated and malnourished.
S/E: Unremarkable
Na—120 mmol/L K—5.9 mmol/L
Hb—12.4 g/dL WBC—11600 and she had a mild eosinophili
Investigations:  Electrolytes, RBS, CBC, plasma cortisol
1. Monitor vitals
2. Rehydration
Normal saline IV infusion: 1L/ hour with continuous cardiac
monitoring
3. Hydrocortisone
100 mg IV bolus
100 mg 6th hourly for first 24 hours
Continue parenteral hydrocortisone till patient can take orally
4. Treat hypoglycemia and hyperkalemia
5. Treat the precipitating cause.
MANAGEMENT OF STATUS EPILEPTICUS
Ensure airway patency – Give oxygen
Monitor vitals, SpO2
Secure IV access
Investigations:  RBS, electrolytes, AED levels, LFT, RFT, CBC.
Early: 5–30 minutes

Established and early refractory: 30–40 minutes
IV antiepileptics with cardiac monitoring
Phenytoin 15–20 mg/kg or 50 mg/min
OR
Fosphenytoin 15 at 50–100 mg/min OR
Phenobarbitone 10 mg/kg at 100 mg/min
OR
Valproic acid 20–30 mg/kg
Levetriacetam 20–30 mg/kgLate refractory >48 hours
IV midazolam 0.2 mg/kg → 0.2–0.6 mg/kg/hr
and/or
Propofol 2 mg/kg → 2–10 mg/kg/hour
Consider intubation and mechanical
ventilation—GA using propofol or
thiopental
Consider EEG monitoring—AIM for
EEG burst suppression pattern
Thiopental 5 mg/kg → 1–5 mg/kg/hour
Once controlled—long-term
anticonvulsants
MANAGEMENT OF COMA
Investigations:  CBC, RBS, electrolytes LFT, RFT, ABG, blood culture, CXR, ECG, CT scan, drug
screen if indicateGeneral measures

–   Monitor vitals
–   Protect the airway: Oropharyngeal airway/intubation if needed
–   Avoid secondary insults to the brain like hypoxia, hypoglycemia,
hypotension
–   Secure IV access: Hypotonic IV fluids with close monitoring
Specific treatment
–   Hypoglycemic coma: Thiamine followed by dextrose
–   Fever and meningismus indicate urgent need for CSF analysis followed
by IV antibiotics
Long-term management
–   Frequent change of position every 2–3 hourly to avoid bedsores
–   Lid taping
–   Catheterization
–   Prevent aspiration by positioning the patient left lateral.
MANAGEMENT OF SNAKE BITEReassure the patient
Immobilize the bitten limb
Investigations: CBC, coagulation screen, RFT, electrolytes, CPK, ECG,
URE, FDP, fibrinogen level
Monitor vitals
I/O charting
Secure IV access
ASV if indicated
–   Mild cases: 5 vials
–   Moderate cases: 5–10 vials
–   Severe cases: 10–20 vials
Given as IV infusion in 5–10 mL/kg of NS and given over 1 hour
Never give locally at the site of snakebite
Keep adrenaline ready in case of anaphylaxis
For coagulopathy: FFP/cryoprecipitate/platelet concentrate
In case of neurotoxic snake bite: If there is respiratory failure or bulbar

paralysis
Antibiotic prophylaxis
Antitetanus prophylaxis
Renal failure managed with hemodialysis.
MANAGEMENT OF HYPOVOLEMIA
Investigations:  Hematocrit, BUN, creatinine, electrolytes, ABG, urinary sodium.
Monitor vitals
Secure IV line
Strict input/output charting
Mild hypovolemia can be treated with oral hydration
Severe hypovolemia requires intravenous hydration
Isotonic normal saline – 0.9 % NaCl (154 mM Na+)
Calculation of free water deficit
Free water deficit = 
50% of this calculated deficit is given over the first 24 hours and the
remaining over the next 24 hours.
Patients with bicarbonate loss and metabolic acidosis may need IV
bicarbonate
Patients with severe hemorrhage should receive red cell transfusion
without increasing hematocrit > 35%
Identify and treat the cause of hypovolemia.

MANAGEMENT OF SHOCK
Case Scenario
A 25-year-old male patient is admitted to ICU with 3 days old perforation. History of chills and fever
present.
On Examination:  Mental status is altered, restless
Skin – warmed and flushed
PR: 130 bpm BP: 80/60 mm Hg
RR: 40/ min
Investigations:  Hemoglobin, hematocrit, sepsis screen, LFT, RFT, electrolytes, ABG.
Secure IV access
Assess GCS
Oxygen/intubation and mechanical ventilation if needed, e.g. GCS <8
Monitor vitals, I/O charting, peripheral perfusion
Optimize Hb: Transfuse red cells
Achieve target BP: Inotropes once the hypovolemia is corrected
–   Dobutamine: 2–8 μmg/kg/min
–   Adrenaline: 1–8 μmg/kg/min

ISCHEMIC STROKE
Case Scenario
A 41-year-old male patient, alcoholic, k/c/o hypertension presents to casualty with chief complaint of
right sided weakness, slurred speech and loss of balance. Symptoms began 90 minutes prior to
arrival.
On Examination: PR: 88
bpm and irregularBP: 177/90 mm Hg RR: 18/ min
S/E: CNS: GCS – 11/15
Right side facial weakness. Power is reduced on right side. No sensory deficit on right side. Plantar
extensor on right sid
Investigations:  Plain CT brain, RBS, electrolytes, ECG, suspected AF → thyroid function tests,
ECHO
1. General measures:
Airway – Ensure airway patency
Breathing – O2 if SpO2 is < 95%
Circulation
–   Check PR, BP. Secure IV access
–   Treat abnormalities with IV fluids/anti-arrhythmias/inotropes
Look for hypoglycemia and treat accordingly
2. IV thrombolytics
Intravenous rtPA within 3 hours of onset of ischemic stroke
Dose: 0.9 mg/kg → 10% of total dose as IV bolus, remaining as IV
infusion over 60 minutes
3. Endovascular mechanical thrombectomy
If IV thrombolysis is contraindicated or has failed

4. Anti-platelets
Aspirin 75–150 mg OD
5. Statins
Atorvastatin, Rosuvastatin 10–20 mg OD
6. Medical support
Catheterization
RT feeding
Treat fever with antipyretics, surface cooling
Pneumatic compression stockings
Prevent bedsores and contractures
Initiates secondary preventive measures
7. Rehabilitation
Early physiotherapy, occupational/speech therapy.
HYPERVENTILATION
Investigation:  ABG
Identify and treat the initiating factor
Reassurance
Rebreathing into a closed bag
If there is associated palpitations/tremors: b-blockers.
Identifying and eliminating habits that perpetuate hypocapnia such as sigh
breathing

Breathing exercises, diaphragmatic retaining may be helpful.
ACUTE PULMONARY EMBOLISM
Case Scenario
A 71-year-old woman bedridden for last 4 days following fall and trauma to right hip is brought to
emergency with complaints of sudden onset of dyspnea and dizziness.
On Examination: PR: 124
bpmBP: 118/89
mm HgSpO2: 84% RR: 28/min
Diaphoresis present.
Right lower limb edema present extending from mid-thigh to foot. Calf muscle tenderness present.
Investigations:  ECG, CXR, D-dimer, pulmonary angiography
Supportive measures: Oxygen and IV fluids
Anticoagulation:
–   Unfractionated heparin: 80 U/kg bolus → 18 U/kg/hr with aPTT
monitoring
♦   Note: Platelet count to be monitored at least every 3rd day
–   LMWH: Subcutaneously
♦   LMWH should not be discontinued until INR is ≥2 for at least 24
hours
Warfarin: 5 mg/day – Started on day 1 with INR monitoring
Fondaparinux
Others: Rivaroxaban, Apixaban, Argatroban, Ximelagatran
Note: Anticoagulation to be continued for at least 6 months
Thrombolysis:
–   Indication: Acute massive pulmonary embolism with cardiogenic
shock. 100 mg rtPA IV infusion over 2 hours
Surgical therapy:
–   Surgical embolectomy
–   Caval filter
MANAGEMENT OF HEMOPTYSIS

Case Scenario
A 40-year-old male chronic smoker, with past history of tuberculosis, presents with history of
hemoptysis 3 episodes since 1 day. On examination he has clubbing, BP-100/60, PR-100 bpm, coarse
crepitations in the right infraclavicular area.
Investigations:  Blood grouping, cross matching, CBC, PT- INR CXR
Measure vitals
Patient should be positioned upright or bleeding side down
Secure airway
–   Intubation with double lumen ET tube is preferable
Secure IV access: large bore IV cannula
Administer IV fluids or blood transfusion, if needed
Vasopressin 0.2 to 0.4 U/min IV
Bronchoscopy
–   Rigid bronchoscopy is preferable
–   Fiberoptic bronchoscopy may be used for cold saline lavage
–   Topical thrombin
–   Laser photocoagulation
–   Balloon catheter can be inflated proximally in the bleeding bronchus
Endovascular embolization
OR
Emergency surgery
HYPERTENSIVE EMERGENCY/CRISIS
Case Scenario
A 69-year-old male patient presented with complaints of chest tightness and shortness of breath.
K/c/o DM since 10 years and is a chronic smoker. History of hypertension, not on treatment.
On Examination:  HR: 110 bpm    BP: 230/120 mm Hg
S/E: CVS: S3 gallop, No murmur
RS: Bi-basal fine inspiratory crackles

Investigations:  RFT, fundoscopy, ECG, echocardiography.
Reduce the MAP by no more than 25% within minutes – 2 hours
Continuous monitoring of BP
1. Labetolol
–   2 mg/min IV; maximum of 300 mg
–   In acute renal failure, SAH, IC bleed, acute aortic dissection
2. Nitroglycerine
–   0.6–1.2 mg/hr IV
–   In acute pulmonary edema, acute coronary syndrome, IC bleed
3. Sodium nitroprusside
–   0.3–1 ug/kg/min IV
–   Drug of choice for hypertensive encephalopathy
4. Nicardipine
–   5 mg/hr IV titrate by 2.5 mg/hr at 5–15 minute intervals → Maximum
15 mg/hr
5. Esmolol
–   80–500 mg/kg over 1 min → 50–300 mg/kg/min IV
6. Hydralazine
–   10–50 mg at 30 minute intervals.
SEVERE DEHYDRATION
Investigations:  Electrolytes, urea, creatinine, RBS.
Signs: Sunken eyes, dry tongue, skin pinch going back slowly—2 or more
positive—severe dehydration.
Secure IV access
Monitor vitals
I/O chartings
IV fluids started immediately
–   RL + 5% dextrose
            OR

     Normal Saline
30 mL/kg 70 mL/kg
< 12 months
> 12 months1 hour
30 minutes5 hours
2.5 hours
ORS can be given as soon as the patient is able to take orally (5 ml/kg/hr)
Reclassify dehydration and treat accordingly
–   For example: Some dehydration → discontinue IV fluids and continue
ORS
Daily fluid requirement:
–   Up to 10 kg: 100 mL/kg
–   10–20 kg: 50 mL/kg
–   >20 kg: 20 mL/kg
MANAGEMENT OF CARDIAC ARREST
BLS: Circulation – Chest compression → Push hard – Push fast
Continue for 2 minutes before re-assessment of rhythm
Breathing: Mouth to mouth
ALS: Airway: Face mask, Ambu bag, Oropharyngeal airway, LMA, ET
tube
Breathing: Supplement oxygen
Circulation: IV access, attaching a cardiac monitor, assess the rhythm,
defibrillation

MANAGEMENT OF VENTRICULAR
FIBRILLATION

UPPER GASTROINTESTINAL BLEED
NPO
Secure IV access
Monitor vitals, I/O charting
Restore blood volume: IV fluids/blood transfusion if needed
IV PPI 80 mg bolus → 8 mg/hr infusion
Suspected variceal bleed

Investigations:  CBC, electrolytes, LFT, urea, PT/INR, blood grouping and cross matching
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT OF ACUTE
MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION
Case Scenario
A 60-years-old male patient, k/c/o diabetes, was brought to casualty with complaints of single
episode of sudden, rapid onset, severe chest pain, lasting more than 30 minutes, radiating to the
medial aspect of his left arm associated with breathlessness, nausea, heavy perspiration,
lightheadedness, fever and cold clammy skin.
On Examination: PR:112
bpmBP:160/110
mm HgRR: 20/min JVP:
Normal
S/E: CVS: S1S2 + tachycardia

Investigations:  12 – Lead ECG, cardiac biomarkers: Troponin I, T, CKMB
Monitor vitals
Oxygen
Nitrates
Glyceryl trinitrate 300–500 mg sublingually
IV NTG 5–10 mg/min (Maintain SBP >40 mm Hg)
Morphine: 2–5 mg IV–analgesia
Antiplatelets
–   Aspirin: 325 mg non-enteric formulations → 75–100 mg/day
–   Clopidogrel: 300 mg orally → 75 mg/day
–   Others: Oral – Prasugrel, Ticagrelor
–   IV – Abciximab, Eptifibatide, TirofibanAnticoagulants
β-blockers unless contraindicated; ACEI; high dose statins
Specific treatment


ORGANOPHOSPHATE POISONING
Case Scenario
A 27-year-old male brought to casualty at 1:00 am with history of sudden loss of consciousness in his
room after having a family quarrel. History of 4 episodes of vomiting and incontinence of urine and
feces.
On Examination:  PR: 100 bpm     BP: 90/70 mm Hg     RR: 28/min, shallow
Temperature: 102 °F
GCS – E1V2M4 = 7/15
S/E: CNS: Pupils – B/L pinpoint,
non-reactingTone: Increased Power: Grade I
Plantar: Non-
elicitable
PA: Bowel sounds are
exaggerated.
Prevent further exposure – remove contaminate clothing, wash the skin
thoroughly with soap and water, irrigate eyes.
Airway cleared of excessive secretions → high flow oxygen.
IV access → 0.9% NS infusion
Monitor vitals, SPO2, auscultate the lungs. Ventilatory support, if needed.
Investigations:  LFT, ABG, ECG, electrolytes, glucose, amylase.
Gastric lavage with activated charcoal if the patient presents within 1 hour
of ingestion

Atropine bolus Atropine infusion
1.8 to 3 mg IV bolus
Start infusion at 20% of total dose of atropine
required for atropinization
Bronchorrhea is the most important sign for
titrating the doseAim for HR >80 bpm
SBP >80 mm Hg
Clear chest
          
  If not
Double the dose every 5 minutes
                    
     Satisfactory improvement
Start atropine infusion
Pralidoxime
Bolus: 30–45 mg/kg over 30 min → Infusion: 8–12 mg/kg/hr
Give PAM until atropine is no longer required
BZP:
Reduces agitation, seizures, fasciculations
Sedation during ventilation
Intensive cardiorespiratory monitoring and support
Others: MgSO4, NaHCO3, clonidine, hemodialysis.
MANAGEMENT OF ANAPHYLAXIS
Case Scenario
A 12-year-old boy is brought to the emergency department after being stung by a bee. Initially
complained of localized pain and swelling, but 15 minutes later he began to complain of shortness of
breath, weakness and dizziness.
On Examination : PR 120
bpmBP: 69/45 mm Hg RR: 39/min
He has generalized urticaria
S/E:  RS: mild wheeze
bilaterallyCVS: tachycardia
presentPA: NAD
Prevent further contact with the antigen
Ensure airway patency

Supportive measures:
–   Oxygen
–   IV fluids
–    B2 agonist
MANAGEMENT OF ANGINA
Case Scenario
A 58-year-old male patient non-smoker, diabetic, hypertensive with dyslipidemia presented with
severe shortness of breath and chest tightness since 1 month. Pain is localized to the breast bone and
does not radiate. It is aggravated while playing golf and subsides on rest.
On Examination: PR: 88 bpm BP: 162/80
mm HgRR: 24/min Temp:
Afebrile
S/E: CVS, RS, PA: NAD
Lifestyle modification:    Limit salt intake to <5 g/day
Increase PUFA consumption
Smoking cessation
Limit alcohol intake
Avoid simple carbohydrate
Saturated fatty acids should be <10% of the total
intake Aspirin 75–150 mg daily OR Clopidogrel 75 mg daily.


MANAGEMENT OF ACUTE SEVERE ASTHMA
Case Scenario
A 16-year-old female patient complains of difficulty in breathing. Symptoms increase on exposure to
cold. Positive family history.
On Examination:  PR: 126 bpm   BP:148/86 mm Hg   RR: 54/min   SpO 2: 88 at room air   RS:
Expiratory wheeze note
MANAGEMENT OF DIABETIC
KETOACIDOSIS
Case Scenario
A 32-year-old male patient k/c/o type 1 diabetes mellitus was taken to casualty with complaints of
drowsiness, fever, cough, diffuse abdominal pain and vomiting.

On Examination: Patient appears confused.
Temperature:
39° CPR: 104 bpm BP: 100/70 mm
HgRR: 24/min
Dry mucous membranes, poor skin turgor and rales in right lower chest pH: 7.12      pCO 2: 17 mmHg
HCO 3: 5.6 mEq/L.
Urinalysis revealed 4+ glucose and 3+ ketones.
Chemistry panel revealed a glucose of 420 mg/dL, BUN of 16 mg/dL, creatinine of 1.1 mg/dL
Na: 139 mEq/dL Cl: 112 mEq/dL HCO 2: 11.2
mEq/LK: 5.0 mEq/dL
Confirm the diagnosis
Assess: Serum electrolytes—Na+, K+, HCO3-, phosphate, Mg 2+


Appendices
APPENDIX 1: LABORATORY VALUES OF
CLINICAL IMPORTANCE
In this appendix, tables of reference values of some important common
laboratory investigations are provided which will help in interpreting the
results during examinations as well as during clinician practice. The term
‘reference values’ has replaced older terminology ‘normal values/ranges’. A
variety of factors can influence reference values and it varies between
laboratories depending on the laboratory methods, mode of standardization
and other factors. This is especially the case with enzyme assays. The
reference or ‘normal’ ranges given in this appendix may, therefore, not be
appropriate for all laboratories and they should only be used as general
guidelines. Hence, reference values provided by the laboratory performing
the test should be used in the interpretation of laboratory results. Most
clinical laboratories and all medical and scientific journals use SI system.
Since, conventional units are still used in many laboratories of developing
countries, in this section, laboratory values are given in both conventional
and international units. Many analytes are measured in either serum (the
supernatant of clotted blood) or plasma (the supernatant of anticoagulated
blood).
The laboratory reference values in this appendix is divided into different
section namely: (1) hematology and coagulation (Table A 1.1), (2) clinical
chemistry of blood (Table A 1.2), (3) lipid profile (Table A 1.3), (4) urea and
electrolytes (Table A 1.4), (5) thyroid function tests (Table A 1.5), (6) urine
(Table A 1.6), and (7) cerebrospinal fluid (Table A 1.7), short list of routinely
used formulas in medicine (Table A 1.8).
Hematology and Coagulation (Table A 1.1)
Table A 1.1: Hematology and coagulation.

Component (specimen) Reference value
Conventional SI units
RBCs and hemoglobin
RBC count
Males
Females4.5−5.5 × 1012/L (mean 5.0
× 1012/L)
3.8−4.8 × 1012/L (mean 4.3
× 1012/L)
RBC diameter 6.7−7.7 μm (mean 7.2 μm)
RBC indices (absolute values)
Mean corpuscular volume (MCV)
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin
(MCH)
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin
concentration (MCHC)
Red cell distribution width (RDW)82−100 fL
27−32 pg
31−35 g/dL
11.5−14.0%
RBC lifespan 120 days
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
(Whole blood)
Westergren, 1st hour
–   Males
–   Females
–   Children0−15 mm 1st hour
0−20 mm 1st hour
0−10 mm 1st hour
Wintrobe, 1st hour
–   Males
–   Females0−9 mm 1st hour
0−20 mm 1st hour
Ferritin (serum)
Males
Females20−300 ng/mL
15−200 ng/mL20−300 μg/L
15−200 μg/L
Folate (serum) 3−20 μg/L 3−20 ng/mL
Hematocrit (PCV)Males
Females
Infants (cord blood)38−47%
36−46%
45−70%
Haptoglobin (serum) 40−240 mg/dL 0.4−2.4 g/L
Hemoglobin (Hb)
Adult hemoglobin (HbA)
Males
Females
Hemoglobin A 2 (HbA 2)
Hemoglobin, fetal (HbF) in adults
HbF, children under 6 months95−98%
13.0−17.0 g/dL
12.0−15.0 g/dL
1.5−3.5%
<0−2%
<5%

Iron, total (serum)
Total iron binding capacity (TIBC)
Iron saturation50−150 μg/dL
310−340 μg/dL
20−45%7−25 μmol/L
45−73 μmol/L
0.20−0.45
Osmotic fragility
Slight hemolysis
Complete hemolysis
Mean corpuscular fragilityat 0.45 to 0.39 g/dL NaCl
at 0.33 to 0.36 g/dL NaCl
0.4−0.45 g/dL NaCl
Reticulocytes
Adults
Infants
Newborn (cord blood)0.5−2.5%
2−6%
1−7%
Transferrin saturation
Male
Female25−56%
14−51%
Vitamin B 12 (serum)
Body stores
Daily requirement
Serum level10−12 mg
2−3 μg
280−1000 pg/mL
Autohemolysis test (whole blood) 0.4−4.50% 0.004−0.045
Autohemolysis test with glucose
(whole blood)0.3−0.7% 0.003−0.007
Leukocytes
Differential leukocyte count (DLC)
P (polymorphs or neutrophils)
L (lymphocytes)
M (monocytes)
E (eosinophils)
B (basophils)40−70% (2,000−7,500/μL)
20−40% (1,500−4,000/μL)
2−10% (200−800/μL)
1−6% (40−450/μL)
<1% (10−100/μL)
Total leukocyte count (TLC)
Adults
Infants (full term, at birth)
Infants (1 year)4,000−11,000/μL
10,000−25,000/μL
6,000−16,000/μL
Platelets and coagulation
Bleeding time (BT)
Ivy’s method
Template method2−7 min
2−9 min
Clot retraction time (clotted blood)
Qualitative
QuantitativeVisible in 60 min (complete
in <24 hours)
48−64% (55%)
Clotting time (CT)
Lee and White method4−11 minutes

D-dimer (plasma) 220−740 ng/mL
Fibrinogen (plasma) 200−400 mg/dL
Fibrin split (or degradation) products
(FSP or FDP)<10 μg/mL <10 mg/L
Partial thromboplastin time with kaolin
(PTTK) or activated partial
thromboplastin time (APTT/aAPTT)30−40 sec
Platelet count 150,000−450,000/μL
Prothrombin time (PT) (Quick’s one
stage method)11−16 sec
Thrombin time (TT) 15−19 sec (control ± 2 sec)
Clinical Chemistry of Blood (Table A 1.2)
Table A 1.2: Clinical chemistry of blood.
Component Specimen Reference value
Conventional SI units
Alpha fetoprotein
(AFP), adultsSerum 0−8.5 ng/mL 0−8.5 μg/L
Aminotransferases
(transaminases)Aspartate (AST,
SGOT)
Alanine (ALT,
SGPT)Serum
Serum12−38 U/L
7−41 U/L0.20−0.65 μkat/L
0.12−0.70 μkat/L
Amylase Serum 20−96 U/L 0.34−1.6 μkat/L
BilirubinTotal
Direct (conjugated)
Indirect
(unconjugated)Serum 0.3−1.3 mg/dL
0.1−0.4 mg/dL
0.2−0.9 mg/dL5.1−22 μmol/L
1.7−6.8 μmol/L
3.4−15.2 μmol/L
CA 125 Serum 0−35 U/mL 0−35 Ku/L
Calcium—ionized Whole blood 4.5−5.3 mg/dL 1.12−1.32 mmol/L
Calcium—total Serum 8.7−10.2 mg/dL 2.2−2.6 mmol/L
Chloride Serum 102−109 mEq/L 102−109 mmol/L
C-reactive proteins Serum 0.2−3.0 mg/L 0.2−3.0 mg/L
Creatine kinase (CK),
total
Males
FemalesSerum 51−294 U/L
39−238 IU/L0.87−5.0 μkat/L
0.66−4.0 μkat/L
Creatine kinase MB Serum 0−5.5 ng/mL 0−5.5 μg/L

(CKMB)
Gamma glutamyl
transpeptidase
(transferase) (γ-GT)Serum 9−58 IU/L 0.15−1.00 μmol/L
Glucose (fasting)
Normal
Impaired fasting
glucose (IFG)
Diabetes mellitusPlasma 70−100 mg/dL
101−125 mg/dL
>126 mg/dL<5.6 mmol/L
5.6−6.9 mmol/L
>7.0 mmol/L
Glucose (2-hour
postprandial)
Normal
Impaired glucose
tolerance (IGT)
Diabetes mellitusPlasma <140 mg/dL
140−200 mg/dL
>200 mg/dL<7.8 mmol/L
7.8−11.1 mmol/L
>11.1 mmol/L
Glycated hemoglobin
(HbA 1c)Whole blood 4.0−6.0% 20−42 mmol/mol Hb
Lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH)Serum 115−221 U/L 2.0−3.8 μkat/L
Muramidase Serum 5−20 μg/mL
5-nucleotidase Serum 0−11 U/L 0.02−0.19 μkat/L
Phosphatases
Acid phosphatase
Alkaline
phosphataseSerum 0−5.5 U/L
33−96 U/L0.90 μkat/L
0.56−1.63 μkat/L
Prostate-specific
antigen (PSA)Serum 0−4.0 ng/mL 0−4.0 μg/L
Proteins—totalAlbumin
Globulins
Albumin/globulin
ratioSerum 6.7−8.6 g/dL
3.5−5.5 g/dL
2.0−3.5 g/dL
1.5−3 : 167−86 g/L
35−55 g/L
20−35 g/L
Rheumatoid factor Serum <15 IU/mL < 15 klU/L
Troponins, cardiac
(cTn)Troponin I (cTnI)
Troponin T (cTnT)Serum
Serum0−0.08 ng/mL
0−0.01 ng/mL0−0.8 μg/L
0−0.1 μg/L
Urea nitrogen (BUN) Blood 7−20 mg/dL 2.5−7.1 mmol/L
Uric acidMales
FemalesSerum 3.1−7.0 mg/dL
2.5−5.6 mg/dL0.18−0.41 μmol/L
0.15−0.33 μmol/L

Lipid Profile (Table A 1.3)
Table A 1.3: Lipid profile.
Component Reference value
Conventional SI units
Total serum cholesterol
Desirable for adults
Borderline high
High undesirable<200 mg/dL
200−239 mg/dL
>240 mg/dL<5.17 mmol/L
5.17−6.18 mmol/L
>6.21 mmol/L
LDL cholesterol
Desirable range
Borderline high
High
Very high100−130 mg/dL
130−159 mg/dL
160−189 mg/dL
>190 mg/dL<3.34 mmol/L
3.36−4.11 mmol/L
4.11−4.20 mmol/L
>4.21 mmol/L
HDL cholesterol
Low
High, protective range<40 mg/dL
>60 mg/dL<1.03 mmol/L
>1.55 mmol/L
Triglycerides <160 mg/dL <2.26 mmol/L
Urea and Electrolytes (Table A 1.4)
Table A 1.4: Urea and electrolytes.
Analyte Reference value
Conventional SI units
Sodium 136−146 mEq/L 136−146 mmol/L
Potassium 3.5−5.0 mEq/L 3.5−5.0 mmol/L
Chloride 95−107 mEq/L 95−107 mmol/L
Urea 20−40 mg/dL 3.3−6.6 mmol/L
Creatinine 0.6−1.2 mg/dL 53−106 μmol/L
Thyroid Function Tests (Table A 1.5)
Table A 1.5: Thyroid function tests.
Thyroid function tests Specimen Reference value
Conventional SI units
Radioactive iodine
uptake (RAIU) 24
hours5−30%
Thyroxine (T4) total Serum 5.4−11.7 μg/dL 70−151 nmol/L

Triiodothyronine (T3)
totalSerum 77−135 ng/dL 1.2−2.1 nmol/L
Thyroid stimulating
hormone (TSH)Serum 0.4−4.25 μU/mL 0.4−4.25 mU/L
Urine (Table A 1.6)
Table A 1.6: Normal urine values.
Component Reference value
Volume—24 hours 600−1800 mL (variable)
pH 5.0−9.0
Specific gravity, quantitative (random) 1.002−1.028 (average 1.018)
Protein—24 hours urine <150 mg/day
Protein, qualitative (random) Negative
Glucose, quantitative—24 hours urine 50−300 mg/day
Glucose, qualitative (random) Negative
Urobilinogen—24 hours urine 1.0−3.5 mg/day
Microalbuminuria (24 hours) 0−30 mg/24 hours (0−0.03 g/day)
(0−30 μg/mg creatinine) (0−0.03 g/g creatinine)
Cerebrospinal Fluid (Table A 1.7)
Table A 1.7: Normal values of cerebrospinal fluid.
Component Reference value
Conventional SI units
CSF volume 120−150 mL
Appearance Clear and colorless
CSF pressure 60−150 mm water
pH 7.31−7.34
Total proteins 20−40 mg/dL 0.14−0.45 g/L
Glucose 40−80 mg/dL 2.3−4.5 mmol/L
Chlorides 720−750 mg/dL
Cells
Polymorphs
LymphocytesUsually absent
0−5/μL
Short list of Routinely Used Formulas In Medicine (Table A
1.8)

Table A 1.8: Short list of routinely used formulas in medicine.
Electrolyte disorders
Plasma osmolality2 Na+ (mEq/L) + Serum glucose (mg/dL)/18 +
BUN (mg/dL)/2.8
Corrected sodiumIncrease Na+ by 1.6 mEq/L for each 100 mg%
(when serum glucose >100 mg%)
Total body sodium deficit (Desired sodium − measured sodium) x Body
weight x [0.6 (men) or 0.5 (women)]
Potassium deficit 1 mmol/L decrease → approximately 200−400
mmol loss of total body K+
Urine-plasma electrolyte ratio
(in chronic hyponatremia)Urinary (sodium + potassium)/plasma sodium
>1 (fluid restriction up to less than 500
mL/day)
=1 (500−700 mL/day)
<1 (fluid restriction up to 1 L)
Water deficit (in hypernatremia) Water deficit = (plasma sodium − 140) x
TBW/140
TTKG (trans-tubular potassium gradient) in
hypokalemiaUrinary potassium x plasma osmolality/serum
potassium x urinary osmolality>4 indicates renal loss of potassium
Corrected calcium 0.8 x (4 − serum albumin) + serum calcium
Acid base disorders
Anion gap (serum) (Sodium + potassium) − (bicarbonate + chloride)
8−16 mEq/L (old methods)
5−11 mEq/L (new techniques)
Urine anion gap Urine sodium + potassium − chloride
−25 to −50 (normal range)
Delta ratio (Serum anion gap − 12)/(24 − serum bicarbonate)
<0.4 hyperchloremic normal anion gap
acidosis
<1 high AG and normal AG acidosis
>2 high AG acidosis and a concurrent
metabolic alkalosis
Respiratory acidosis Acute: 10 increase in pCO 2 → 1 increase in
bicarbonate
Chronic: 10 increase in pCO 2 → 4 increase in
bicarbonate
Respiratory alkalosis Acute: 10 decrease in pCO 2 → 2 decrease in
bicarbonate
Chronic: 10 decrease in pCO 2 → 5 decrease in

bicarbonate
Metabolic acidosis pCO 2 = 1.5 (bicarbonate) + 8 ± 2
Metabolic alkalosis 10 increase in bicarbonate → pCO 2 increases by
6
Nephrology
Renal failure index Urine Na/(Urine Cr/PCr)
Cockcroft-Gault GFR > (140 − Age) × (Body wt. in kg) × (0.85 if
female)/(72 × Cr)
Fractional excretion of sodium (FENa) (Serum Cr × Urine Na)/(Serum Na × Urine Cr)%
Hematology
Corrected reticulocyte count Reticulocyte % × (Hb/15)
Reticulocyte production index = Corrected reticulocyte count/maturation time
At a hemoglobin of 15, the maturation time =
1 day
At a hemoglobin of 12, the maturation time =
1.5 days
At a hemoglobin of 8, the maturation time = 2
days
At a hemoglobin of 5, the maturation time =
2.5 days
Mentzer index (MCV, in fL) divided by (RBC, in millions per
μL)Less than 13, thalassemia is said to be more
likely
Parenteral iron in iron deficiency anemia [2.3 x body weight (kg) x Hb deficit (gm/dL)] +
1000 mg (to replenish stores)
Respiratory system
A-a gradient PAO 2 − PaO 2
(PAO 2 = (FiO 2 x 713) − PaCO 2/0.8; PaO 2 is
obtained from the ABG)
Cardiology
Corrected QT QT/√ RR (Bazzett’s formula)
MAP Systolic BP + (2 × diastolic BP)/3
Miscellaneous
BMIW/H2 (W = weight in kg and H = Height in
meters)
APPENDIX 2: NERVOUS SYSTEM
EXAMINATION FORMAT

General Examination
Patient is conscious, oriented
Height:                         Weight:
Pallor, icterus, clubbing, cyanosis, pedal edema
Carotid bruit, vertebral artery bruit
Pulse: 
BP:
JVP:
Nerve thickening
Neurocutaneous markers
External markers of atherosclerosis
Signs of nutritional deficiency, alcoholism, etc.
Any other general examination finding
Nervous System ExaminationRight/left handed person
Education:
Higher Mental Functions
Consciousness—if impaired document using Glasgow coma scale
Orientation to time/place/person
Memory
–   Immediate (repetition—30 sec)
–   Recent (up to 5 min—recall)
–   Remote (>5 min)
Intelligence
Mood/emotion
Concentration and calculation (subtract seven from 100)
Speech
–   Spontaneous speech—comprehension
–   Fluency
–   Repetition
–   Reading

–   Writing
–   Naming objects
◆   Phonation
◆   Aphasia
◆   Dysarthria
Apraxias—present/absent
Hemineglect—present/absent
Hallucinations and delusions—present/absent
Cranial Nerves
Right Left
Olfactory—I nerve:
Sense of smell (peppermint, soap, coffee, lemon
peel or vanilla)
*Both eyes shut, one nostril checked at a time
Appreciate smell +/− identify it
Optic—II nerve:
Visual acuity (perception of light/hand
movements and finger counting/Snellen’s
chart at 6 mts/Jaeger’s chart at 14 inches)
Visual field (confrontation method/Menace
reflex)—mention defects if any
Color vision (Ishihara’s test)
Fundus
Oculomotor, trochlear, abducens—III, IV, VI
nerves:
Eyelids (any ptosis)
Position of eyeballs at rest  (any deviation,
exophthalmos, enophthalmos)
Extraocular movements:
Binocular movements
–   Saccadic
–   Pursuit
–   Reflex (Dolls eye, Caloric stimulation)
Uniocular movements
(#comment on ophthalmoplegia if present—
supranuclear, internuclear, individual nerves, or
muscles)
Pupil:
Size (in mm)
Shape

Reaction
–   Direct light reflex
–   Consensual light reflex
–   Accommodation reflex
Nystagmus
(describe whether spontaneous or provoked/type
—horizontal, vertical, rotatory, pendular,..)
Trigeminal nerve—V nerve:
Sensory:
–   Touch
–   Pain
–   Temperature
(to be checked on all 3 divisions around the
jaw line, on the cheek and, on the
forehead)Motor:
–   Jaw deviation
–   Hollowing above and below zygoma
–   Clenching teeth (feel temporalis and
masseter)
–   Open mouth against resistance
–   Side to side movement of jaw (pterygoids)Reflexes:
Corneal—Present/absent (superficial reflex, 5th
nerve afferent, 7th nerve efferent)
Jaw jerk—Present/absent/exaggerated (deep
reflex, afferent and efferent both 5th nerve, center
mid-pons)
Facial nerve—VII nerve:
Facial asymmetry (look for absence of wrinkling,
drooping of corner of mouth, obliteration of
nasolabial fold, widened palpebral fissures)Motor:
–   Frontalis (raise the eyebrows)
–   Orbicularis oculi (shut the eyes tight)
–   Buccinator (show teeth, smile, blow
check, whistle)
–   Orbicularis oris (close lips, pronounce
labials ‘p’, ‘b’, ‘m’)
–   Platysma (pull down the corners of
mouth)
(## look for Bells phenomenon)
Sensory:
–   Ant 2/3rd tongue taste (sugar, lime, salt,
qunine)

Lacrimation
Hyperacusis—present/absent
Emotional fibers checking—emotions preserved
or not
Vestibulocochlear nerve—VIII nerve:
(The ability to hear the sound produced by
rubbing the thumb and forefinger together is then
tested for each ear at distances up to a few
centimeters)Rinnes test—AC/BC
Weber’s test—lateralized/centralized
Caloric test (irrigates one external auditory
canal with cool (about 30°C) or warm (40°C)
water. Normally, cool water in one ear
produces nystagmus on the opposite side.
Warm water produces it on the same side)
Glossopharygeal, Vagus—IX, X nerve:
Note: The patient’s ability to drink water and eat
solid food and the character and volume and
sound of the patient’s voicePosition of uvula
Movement of uvula on saying ‘ah’—any
deviation
Gag reflex—present/absent/exaggerated
(Taste sensation over the posterior third of the
tongue and can be tested)
Spinal accessory—XI nerve:
Sternocleidomastoid (instruct the patient to
rotate head against resistance applied to the
side of the chin to tests the function of the
opposite sternocleidomastoid muscle. To test
both sternocleidomastoid muscles together,
the patient flexes the head forward against
resistance placed under the chin)Trapezius (Shrugging a shoulder against
resistance)
Hypoglossal nerve—XII
Inspection (inside the mouth):
–   Size of tongue
–   Symmetry/any wasting
–   Fasciculation (on protrusion)
–   Deviation—side
–   TremorsPalpation:
–   Tone

–   Power
–   Speech
Motor System
Attitude
Upper limb
Lower limb
Bulk
Inspection: Symmetry, generalized wasting comment on small muscle
wasting, deformities, claw hand, foot drop if any
Measurement (cm) Right Left
Arm
Forearm
Thigh
Leg
*Bilateral similar distance from fixed bony points till the maximum bulk of
muscle
Tone
Tone Right Left
Upper limbs
Lower limbs
*Comment whether normal, hypotonia or hypertonia (spasticity/rigidity)
Power
Checked both isometric (resistance against movement) and isotonic
(resistance at end of movement).
Grade the Power (MRC)
Grade 0 Complete paralysis
Grade 1 A flicker of contraction only
Grade 2 Power detectable only when gravity is excluded by postural
adjustment
Grade 3 Limb can be held against gravity but not resistance
Grade 4 Limb can be held against gravity and some resistance

Grade 5 Normal power
Neck
Flexors (SCM, platysma, scalene, suprahyoid, infrahyoid, longus collis and capitus, rectus capitis)
Extensors (Trapezius and paravertebral muscles-splenii, erector spinae, transversospinalis,
interspinal intertransverse)
*avoid active movement checking if cervical cord injury suspected
Upper limb Right Left
Shoulder
Abduction (0−15°—supraspinatus, 15−90°
middle fibers of deltiod, above 90° trapezius
and serratus anterior)adduction (pectoralis major, latissimus dorsi
and teres major)
Flexion (biceps brachii (both heads),
pectoralis major, anterior deltoid and
coracobrachialis)Extension (posterior deltoid, latissimus dorsi
and teres major)
Elbow
Flexion (Biceps brachii)
Extension (Triceps brachii)
Wrist
Flexion (Flexor carpi radialis, flexor carpi
ulnaris)
Extension (Extensor carpi radialis longus,
extensor carpi radialis brevis, extensor carpi
ulnaris)
Hand grip (Long flexors)
Small muscles (if needed)
Thenar muscles Hypothenar muscles Four lumbricals
Opponens policis
Abductor pollicis brevis
Flexor pollicis brevis
All 3 supplied by median nerveOpponens digiti minimi
Abductor digiti minimi
Flexor digiti minimi brevis
All 3 supplied by ulnar nerveMedial two ulnar nerve, lateral
two median nerve
Interossi Palmaris brevis Adductor pollicis
Abduction (dorsal interossei)
and adduction (palmar
interossei)Supplied by ulnar nerve Supplied by ulnar nerve
Trunk

(rectus abdominis, transversus
abdominis, obliqui, pyramidalis)
Elevation of head or leg in
supine position
Beevor’s sign if present
Abdominal binding to check
for intercostal muscle
weaknessIntercostal binding to check
for diaphragmatic weakness
Lower limb Right Left
Hip
Flexion (Iliopsoas)
Extension (Gluteus maximus)
Abduction (Gluteus medius and minimus,
tensor fascia lata)
Adduction (Adductor longus, brevis and
magnus)
Knee
Flexion (Hamstrings)
Extension (Quadriceps)
Ankle
Plantar flexion (Gastrocnemius, Soleus)
Dorsiflexion (Tibialis anterior)
Small muscles of foot, EHL if needed
Reflexes
Superficial reflexes Right Left
Corneal (Cranial nerve V and VII)
Abdominal
Epigastric (T6−T9)
Mid-abdominal (T9−T11)
Hypogastric (T11−L1)
(Stroke towards umbilicus)
Cremasteric (L1, L2)
Anal reflex (S2, S3)
PlantarReflexogenic zone—S1
Afferent nerve—tibial nerve
Chaddock’s (lateral malleolus), Gordon’s (Calf), Oppenheim’s (anterior
tibia), Schaffer’s (Achilles tendon), Gonda’ s (press down 4th toe),

Stransky’s (adduct little toe), Bing’s (pinprick on dorsolateral foot)
Deep tendon reflexes Right Left
Jaw jerk (afferent and efferent
both 5th nerve, center mid-
pons)
Biceps (C5, C6)
Brachiradial/supinator/radial
periosteal (C5, C6)
Triceps (C6, C7, C8)
Knee jerk/quadriceps/patellar
reflex (L2, L3, L4)
Ankle jerk (L5, S1, S2)
Deep tendon reflexes Right Left
Clonus present/absentPatellar
Ankle
Latent reflexes (suggest
pyramidal lesion if present
unilaterally)
Tromner’s/Finger flexor
reflex/Hoffman’s sign
Wartenburg’s sign
By convention the deep tendon reflexes are graded as follows:
0 = no response; always abnormal
1+ = a slight but definitely present response; may or may not be normal
2+ = a brisk response; normal
3+ = a very brisk response; may or may not be normal
4+ = a tap elicits a repeating reflex (clonus); always abnormal
Please do reinforcement maneuvers before saying DTR’s are absent
Primitive Reflex
Glabellar tap
Palmomental (Both sides)
Sucking
Rooting
Pout and snout
Grasp
Involuntary movements (describe in detail)

Coordination  (described later under cerebellum on page 1216)
Sensory System
Right Left
Primary sensations
Touch
Pain
Temperature
Vibration
Joint, position sense
Any sensory level
Pattern of sensory loss
(graded/dissociative/crossed/hemi)
Cortical sensations
(to be checked only if primary
sensations intact)
Tactile localization
(Topognosis)
Two point discrimination
Stereognosis
Graphesthesia (figure
identification)
Sensory extinction
Cerebellum
Upper extremity Right Left
Limb ataxia
Out sreched arm test
Finger nose test
Nose-finger-nose test
Finger-finger test
Rapid alternating movements
Rapid hand tapping
Pronation−supination
Thigh slapping
Pointing and past pointing
Writing (Macrographia)
Rebound phenomenon (Arm)
Tremors (intention)

Lower limbs Right Left
Heel knee test
Pendular knee jerk
Finger toe test
Rapid alternating movements—
foot tapping
General Signs of Cerebellar DiseaseTitubation
Nystagmus
Tremors
Hypotonia
Truncal ataxia
Tandem walking
Gait
ROMBERG’S TEST
Gait
Base—wide or narrow
Slow/rapid
Falling to sides
Look which part of foot touches ground first (toe/heel)
How high foot lifted above ground
Hand swing
Turning around
Position of hip, sound produced while foot touches ground
Signs of Involvement of Autonomic Nervous System
Dryness of skin/excessive sweating/spoon test
Postural hypotension
Heart rate—baseline, on respiration, on standing
Palpable bladder
Pupillary reactions
Valsalva

Meningeal Signs of Irritation
Neck stiffness
Kernigs sign
Brudzinski’s sign—neck, leg and pubis
Skull and Spine
Deformities
Tenderness
Short neck
Soft Neurological Signs
Pronator Drift
Pyramidal drift  describes a tendency for the hand to move upward and
supinate if the hands are held outstretched in a pronated position (palms
downward), or to pronate downward if the hands are held in supination.
Cerebellar drift is generally upward, with excessive rebound movements if
the hand is suddenly displaced downward by the examiner.
Parietal drift is an outward movement on displacing the ulnar border of the
supinated hand
Other Systems
Cardiovascular system
Respiratory system
Per abdomen/gastrointestinal system
Final Clinical Diagnosis

Bibliography
1. Daroff RB, Jankovic J, Mazziotta JC, et al. Bradley’s Neurology in
Clinical Practice. 7th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2015.
2. Dooley JS, Lok A, Burroughs AK, et al. Sherlock’s Diseases of the Liver
and Biliary System. 12th ed. New Jersey: Wiley-Blackwell; 2015.
3. Farrar J, Hotez P, Junghanss T, et al. Manson’s Tropical Diseases. 23rd ed.
USA: Elsevier Health Science; 2013.
4. Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ. Sleisenger and Fordtran’s
Gastrointestinal and Liver Disease. 10th ed. USA: Elsevier Health; 2015.
5. Firestein GS, Budd RC, Gabriel SE, McInnes IB, O’Dell JR. Kelley’s
Textbook of Rheumatology. 10th ed. USA: Elsevier Health; 2017.
6. Fuster V, Harrington RA, Narula J, Eapen ZJ. Hurst’s The Heart. 14th ed.
New York: McGraw-Hill Education; 2017.
7. Goldman L, Schafer AI. Goldman-Cecil Medicine. 25th ed. Philadelphia:
Elsevier; 2015.
8. Grippi MA, Elias JA, Fishman JA, et al. Fishman’s Pulmonary Diseases
and Disorders. 5th ed. United States: McGraw-Hill Education; 2015.
9. Jameson, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, Hauser SL, Longo, Loscalzo. Harrison’s
Principles of Internal Medicine. 20th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill
Medical Publishing Division; 2018.
10. Kaushansky K, Lichtman MA, Prchal JT, et al. Williams Hematology. 9th
ed. New York: McGraw-Hill Education; 2015.
11. Kumar P, Clark ML. Kumar and Clark’s Clinical Medicine. 9th ed.
Edinburgh: Saunders; 2015.
12. Kumar V, Abbas AK, Aster JC, et al. Robbins and Cotran Pathologic Basis
of Disease. 9th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2014.
13. Mann DL, Zipes DP, Libby P, et al. Braunwald’s Heart Disease: A
Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine. 11th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders;
2018.

14. Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR, et al. Williams Textbook of
Endocrinology. 13th ed. USA: Elsevier Health; 2015.
15. Munjal YP. API Textbook of Medicine. 10th ed. In: Sharma KS, Agarwal
AK, Singal RK, et al (Eds). New Delhi: Jaypee Brothers Medical
Publishers (P) Ltd; 2015.
16. Nayak R, Rai S. Essential in Hematology and Clinical Pathology. 2nd ed.
New Delhi: Jaypee Brothers Medical Publishers (P) Ltd; 2017.
17. Nayak R. Exam Preparatory Manual for Undergraduates in Pathology. 2nd
ed. New Delhi: Jaypee Brothers Medical Publishers (P) Ltd; 2017.
18. Papadakis MA, McPhee SJ. Current Medical Diagnosis and Treatment
2018. 57th ed. In: Rabow MW (Ed). New York (Lange Current Series):
McGraw Hill Professional; 2016.
19. Ralston SH, Penman ID, Strachan MWJ, Hobson RP. Davidson’s
Principles and Practice of Medicine. 23rd ed. Edinburgh: Churchill
Elsevier; 2018.
20. Seaton A, Seaton D, Leitch AG. Crofton and Douglas’s Respiratory
Diseases. 5th ed. Willey India; 2008.
21. Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL, et al. WHO Classification of
Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. 4th ed. IARC: Lyon;
2008.
22. Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Pileri SA, et al. WHO Classification of Tumours
of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. Updated revision of the 4th ed.
IARC: Lyon; 2016.
23. Warrell DA, Cox TM, Firth JD. Oxford Textbook of Medicine. 5th ed.
UK: Oxford University Press; 2016.

Index
A
α1-antitrypsin deficiency
α-fetoprotein
α-thalassemia
β-adrenoceptor
antagonists
blocker therapy
β-hemolytic streptococci
β-lactam antibiotics
β-thalassemia
intermedia
major
minor
syndromes
Abacavir
Abaloparatide
Abatacept
Abciximab
Abdominal distension, causes of
Abdominal pain
recurrent episodes of
severe
Abdominal paracentesis
complications of
indication of
procedure of
Abdominal tuberculosis
complications of
differential diagnosis of
etiology of
investigations of
treatment of
Abetalipoproteinemia

ABO blood group compatibility
Abortus fever
Abscess
aspiration
crypt
drainage of
epidural
intra-abdominal
intracardiac
metastatic
myocardial
pancreatic
psoas
pyogenic
rupture of
therapeutic aspiration of
Absorption atelectasis
Acanthocytosis
Acanthosis nigricans
skin lesions of
Acebrophylline
Acetabular dysplasia
Acetaminophen
metabolism
poisoning
Acetazolamide
Acetic acid test
Acetoacetic acid
Acetyl salicylic acid
Acetylation
Achalasia cardia
Achilles tendinitis
Achilles tendon
Achondroplasia
Acid load test
Acid peptic disease
etiology of
investigations of
management of
Acid regurgitation
Acid-base balance
maintenance of
physiology of

regulation of
Acid-base disorders
chronic
classification of
Acid-base disturbances
Acid-base imbalance
Acid-base status
Acid-fast bacilli
Acid-fast organisms and structures
Acidic urine
Acidosis
correction of
lactic
metabolic
respiratory
Acitretin
Acne
aestivalis
conglobata
excoriée
fulminans
rubeosis steriodica
venenata
vulgaris
management of
Acoustic neuroma
Acoustic reflex
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
epidemiology of
etiology of
management of
stages of
Acquired ventricular septal defect, causes of
Acral vitiligo
Acrochordons
Acrofacial vitiligo
Acropustulosis
Actigraphy
Actinomyces israelii
Actinomycetoma
Actinomycosis
abdominal
pulmonary

Activated partial thromboplastin time
Active anti-retroviral therapy
Acute alcoholic intoxication, treatment of
Acute asthma, severe
Acute attack, treatment of
Acute bacillary dysentery
diagnosis of
etiology of
management of
Acute breathlessness, respiratory causes of
Acute cardiogenic pulmonary edema, treatment of
Acute coronary syndrome
complications of
management of
Acute diarrhea, management of
Acute dyspnea, causes of
Acute eosinophilic pneumonia, idiopathic
Acute hepatitis
causes of
Acute ischemic colitis, left-sided
Acute kidney injury
causes of
classification of
complications of
etiology of
network classification
types of
Acute leukemias
diagnosis of
management of
Acute liver failure, classification of
Acute lung abscess
diagnosis of
management of
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia, WHO classification of
Acute lymphocytic leukemias, management of
Acute mania
Acute mitral regurgitation, causes of
Acute myeloid leukemia
diagnosis of
management of
WHO classification of
Acute myocardial infarction

complications of
emergency management of
management of
Acute onset dyspnea, differential diagnosis of
Acute pancreatitis
causes of
classification of
complications of
diagnosis of
etiology of
interstitial edematous
management of
severe
treatment of
Acute pneumothorax, management of
Acute post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis, complications of
Acute pulmonary edema
diagnosis of
management of
treatment of
Acute pyelonephritis
diagnosis of
etiology of
investigations of
management of
Acute radiation sickness, mild
Acute renal failure
causes of
classification of
diagnosis of
investigations of
management of
Acute respiratory syndrome, severe
Acute rheumatic carditis, features of
Acute rheumatic fever
diagnosis of
management of
Acute serum sickness, treatment of
Acute severe
aortic regurgitation, management of
asthma, management of
mitral regurgitation, management of
Acute stroke, complications of

Acute tubulointerstitial nephropathy, etiology of
Acute upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage, causes of
Acute urinary infection
diagnosis of
symptoms of
treatment of
Acute variceal bleeding, management of
Acute viral hepatitis
complications of
diagnosis of
management of
prevention of
Adalimumab
Adam’s triad
Adams-Stokes attacks
Addison’s disease
etiology of
Addison’s syndrome
Addisonian pernicious anemia
diagnosis of
etiology of
management of
Adenocarcinoma
Adenoma
bronchial
pituitary
sebaceum
Adenosine
deaminase
deficiency
pleural concentration of
diphosphate
ordobutamine
reuptake inhibitors
Adenosylcobalamin
Adenovirus
Adie’s pupil
Adipokines
Adiponectin
Adipose tissue
Adjuvant chemotherapy
Adrenal adenomas
Adrenal androgen deficiency

Adrenal autoantibodies
Adrenal carcinomas
Adrenal cortex
Adrenal crisis, acute
Adrenal disorders
Adrenal enzyme inhibitors
Adrenal gland
disorders
Adrenal hyperplasia
congenital
primary
Adrenal insufficiency
autoimmune
primary
Adrenal tumors
Adrenal vein catheterization
Adrenalectomy
bilateral
medical
Adrenaline
Adrenocortical insufficiency
causes of
classification of
primary
secondary
Adrenocorticotropic hormone
Adriamycin
Adult polycystic kidney disease, complications of
Adult stem cells
Adult T-cell lymphoma
Adult-onset Still’s disease
diagnosis of
Adverse drug reaction
Aerobic exercise
Afamelanotide
Afebrile periods
Agammaglobulinemia, X-linked
Agenesis, pituitary
Agnosia
Agonal gasps
Agoraphobia
Agranulocytosis
Agraphia

AIDS
diagnosis of
etiology of
Air embolism
Air space pneumonia
Airflow limitation, reversibility of
Airflow obstruction, reversal of
Airway disease
chronic obstructive
Airway hyperresponsiveness
Airway inflammation
Airway obstruction
measurement of
Akathisia
Akinesia
Akinetic mutism
Alabaster skin
Alanine aminotransferase
Alarm symptoms
Albendazole
Albright’s hereditary osteodystrophy
Albumin
cytological dissociation
Albuminuria
Alcohol
abuse
consumption
metabolism
misuse, chronic
percentage content
use disorder
withdrawal syndrome, management of
Alcoholic cirrhosis
treatment of
Alcoholism, sign of
Aldolase reductase inhibitors
Aldosterone
antagonist
receptor
antagonists
blockers
Alefacept
Alemtuzumab

Alexia
Algid malaria
Alkaline phosphatase
Alkaloids, natural
Alkalosis
metabolic
respiratory
Alkaptonuria
Allantoin
Allergen immunotherapy
Allergic angiitis
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
management of
Allergic contact eczema
Allergic dermatitis
Allergic reaction
Allergic status, measurement of
Allergy
Allogeneic
bone marrow transplantation
hematopoietic cell transplantation
stem cell transplantation
Alloimmunization
Allopurinol
All-trans retinoic acid
Almotriptan
Alogia
Alogliptin
Alopecia
areata
stages of
causes of
classification of
Alpha cell tumor
Alpha glucosidase inhibitors
Alpidem
Alport’s syndrome
Alprazolam
Aluminum phosphide poisoning
management of
Alveolar
arterial O 2 tension gradient
edema

hemorrhage
macrophages, bactericidal action of
proteinosis, pulmonary
ventilation, reduce
wall, destruction of
Alveolitis, cryptogenic fibrosing
Alveolo-capillary junction
Alzheimer’s disease
diagnostic criteria for
Alzheimer’s pathology
Amantadine
Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring
uses of
Amebiasis
complications of
intestinal
treatment of
Amebic colitis, non-dysenteric
Amebic dysentery
complications of
diagnosis of
etiology of
investigations of
treatment of
Amebic fluorescent antibody test
Amebic liver abscess
aspiration of
diagnosis of
management of
Ameboma
Amenorrhea
hypothalamic
primary
American Academy of Sleep Medicine
American College of Rheumatology
American Diabetes Association
Amikacin
Amiloride
Amino acid
Aminocaproic acid
Aminophylline
Aminosalicylates
Amiodarone

Amitriptyline
Amlodipine
Ammonium
Amniocentesis
Amoxicillin
Amoxyclav
Amphotericin B
Ampicillin
Amplified mycobacterium tuberculosis direct test
Amylin
agonist
Amyloid deposition
Amyloid precursor protein
Amyloidosis
cardiac
classification of
cutaneous
familial
generalized
hemodialysis-associated
heredofamilial
Amylophagia
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
diagnosis of
differential diagnosis of
Amyotrophy, diabetic
Anakinra
Anal cancer
Analgesia
Analgesics
nephropathy
poisoning
Anaphase lag
Anaphylactoid reaction
Anaphylaxis
management of
Anasarca
Anastrozole
Ancillary tests
Ancylostoma
braziliense
duodenale
infestation

Ancylostomiasis
treatment of
Androgen
action, defects of
deficiency symptoms
Androstenedione
Anemia
aplastic
causes of
classification of
diagnosis of
etiology of
hemolytic
hypochromic microcytic
hypoproliferative
immunohemolytic
macrocytic
management of
megaloblastic
macrocytic
myelophthisic
normochromic normocytic
pernicious
severe
signs of
treatment of
Anesthesia
Aneuploidy
Aneurysm, carotid
Angelman syndrome
Angina
classification of
decubitus
management of
microvascular
nocturnal
pectoris
diagnosis of
exertional
management of
refractory
treatment of
types of

unstable
Angioedema
hereditary
Angiography
coronary
pulmonary
Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors
Angiotensin receptor
antagonist
blockers
Angiotensinogen
Angular cheilitis
Angular stomatitis, causes of
Anion gap
metabolic acidosis, normal
Ankle edema
Ankylosing spondylitis
extra-articular manifestations of
Ankyrin
Ann-Arbor staging classification, Cotswold revision of
Ann-Arbor classification
Annular atrophic panniculitis
Anomia
Anorectal gonorrhea
Anorexia
causes of
nervosa
Anosmia, causes of
Anosognosia
Anoxia
Antacids
Antepartum necrosis, diabetic
Anthracyclines
Anthrax
cutaneous
inhalational
Antiachr antibodies
Antianxiety drugs
Antiapoptotic kinase inhibitors
Antiarrhythmic drugs
Antibiotics
chemoprophylaxis
prophylaxis

regiment
therapy
duration of
parenteral
Antibody
against streptococcal antigens
antithyroglobulin
deficiencies
selective
dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity
detection
monoclonal
structure
types of
Anticardiolipin antibody
Anticholinergic
drugs
symptoms
syndrome, causes of
toxidrome
causes of
Anticitrullinated peptide antibody
Anticoagulants
classification of
therapy
contraindications for
Anticoagulation
methods of
therapy
Anticomplement therapy
Anticonvulsants
Anticyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies
Antidepressant
drugs
Anti-diarrheal drugs
Antidiuretic hormone secretion
Antidote
treatment
Antiepileptic drugs
newer
Antiestrogen therapy
Antiflatulence therapy
Antifungal drugs

classification of
Antigen
detection
Antiglobulin test
indirect methods of
Antihistaminic agents
Antihyaluronidase
Antihypertensive drugs
types of
Antihypertensive treatment
Anti-infective therapy
Anti-insulin antibodies
Antileptic drugs, selection of
Antimalarial antibodies
Antimalarial drugs
Antimicrobial combination therapy
Antimicrosomal antibody
Antimitochondrial antibodies
Antimotility drugs
Antimuscarinic bronchodilators
Antimuscarinic drugs
Anti-musk antibodies
Anti-myeloperoxidase
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies
Antinuclear antibody
Antioxidant
Antiphospholipid antibody
syndrome
types of
Antiphospholipid syndrome
primary
secondary
Antipityrosporal agents
Antiplatelet
agents
antibodies
drugs
therapy
intravenous
Antipsychotic drugs, classification of
Anti-reflux surgery
Antiretroviral protease inhibitor drugs
Antiretroviral therapy

highly active
indications for
Antisaccharomyces cerevisiae antibodies
Anti-snake venom
indications for
therapy, indications for
Antistreptolysin O
antibodies
Antistreptozyme test
Antithrombotic therapy
Antithymocyte globulin
Antithyroid drugs
advantages of
Antithyroid peroxidase
antibody
Antitoxin
Antitubercular drugs,
classification of
first line
newer
second line
Antituberculous therapy, goals of
Anti-tumor necrosis factor therapy
Antiviral therapy
Anuria
causes of
Anxiety
disorder
classification of
management of
treatment of
types of
neurosis diagnosis and treatment
signs of
Anxiolytic medications
Aorta
aneurysm of
hourglass constriction of
left shift of
Aortic aneurysm
classification of
Aortic component
Aortic dilation, ascending

Aortic diseases
Aortic dissection
classification of
Aortic regurgitation
acute
causes of
chronic
peripheral signs of
signs of
treatment of
Aortic root dilation
Aortic sclerosis
Aortic stenosis
classification of
congenital
etiology of
triad of
Aortic valve replacement
Aortic valvular disease
Apex beat
Aphasias
nonfluent
types of
Aphthous ulcer, causes of
Apical impulse, abnormal
Apical pansystolic murmur
Apixaban
Apla syndrome
Aplastic anemia
causes of
etiology of
investigations of
management of
severe
Aplastic crisis
Apnea
hypopnea index
test
procedure of
Apomorphine
Apoplexy, pituitary
Apoptosis
Appendix

Appetite
control of
inhibitors
loss of
stimulators
Apraxia
constructional
Arboviruses
classification of
Arenaviridae
Arginine vasopressin
Argyll-Robertson pupil
causes of
Aripiprazole
Aromatase inhibitors
Arrhythmias
cardiac
types of
Arsenic
Arshall-Marchetti-Krantz procedure
Artemisinin-based combination therapy
Arterial blood gas
analysis
levels
Arterial blood pH
Arterial carbon dioxide
Arterial disease
Arterial hypertension, pulmonary
Arterial obstruction
Arterial oxygen
saturation
tension
Arterial pulse
assessment of
peripheral
rhythm abnormalities, types of
Arteriole, glomerular
Arteriovenous malformation, pulmonary
Arteritis
coronary
inflammatory granulomatous
pulmonary
Artery

gastroepiploic
pulmonary
Arthralgia
Arthritis
acute nonpurulent
enteropathic
initial clinical characterization of
mutilans
peripheral
poststreptococcal reactive
psoriatic
reactive
rheumatic
rheumatoid
severe
Arthropathy neuropathic
Arthropod-borne viruses
Artificial pancreas project
Asbestos
Ascaris
bronchopneumonia
lumbricoides
Ascites
causes of
differential diagnosis of
five signs of
malignant
mechanism of
pancreatic
praecox
signs of
theories of
Ascitic fluid
evaluation of
examination
findings
infection, classification of
nature of
Ascitic tap
Ascorbic acid
Asenapine
Ashrafian sign
Asimadoline

Askanazy cells
Aspartate aminotransferase
Aspergilloma
air crescent sign of
Aspergillosis
bronchopulmonary
invasive
pulmonary
Aspergillus fumigatus
Aspiration
abscess, features of
Aspirin
overdose, management of
toxicity
Asplenia
Assist control mode ventilation
Astemazole, metabolism of
Asthma
acute
aspirin induced
atopic
bronchial
cardiac
characteristic triad of
chronic
classification of
complications of
control, assessment of
differential diagnosis of
drugs induced
episodic
exacerbations of
long-term complications of
non-atopic
occupational
pathogenesis of
severity of
stepwise management of
Ataxia
classification of
telangiectasia syndrome
types of
Atazanavir

Ateatohepatitis, non-alcoholic
Atelectasis
compression
neonatal
obstructive
theory
Atelectatic region
Atenolol
Atheroembolism
Atheroma, carotid
Atheromatous plaque
complications of
Atherosclerosis
advanced
coronary
lesions of
pathogenesis of
premature
treatment of
Atherothrombotic coronary plaque
Athetosis
Atmospheric pollution
Atopic dermatitis, skin lesions of
Atopic eczema, complications of
Atopy
Atorvastatin
Atresia, biliary
Atrial contraction, active
Atrial fibrillation
causes of
complications of
long-term management of
mechanism of
non-valvular
Atrial premature
beat
complexes
Atrial septal defect
Atrioventricular blocks
management of
second degree
Atrioventricular node
Atrioventricular septal defects

Atrium, empting of
Atrophic gastritis, chronic
Atrophy, multiple system
Atropine
administration of
bolus
infusion
test
toxicity
Attack termination of
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
Atypical mycobacterium, groups of
Audiological tests
Auer rods
Aura, duration of
Auscultation
Auspitz sign
Austin Flint murmur
Autism
Autoantibody
formation
Autoimmune disease
Autoimmune disorder
classification of
severe
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia, classification of
Autoimmune hepatitis
classification of
treatment of
Autoimmune rheumatic diseases, pulmonary
Autonomic nervous system, activation of
Autosomal dominant
disorder
inheritance
method
Autosomal recessive
disease
disorder
mode
transmission
Autosplenectomy
Autotopagnosia
Auxiliary partial orthotopic liver transplantation

Avian influenza
Axilla
Axis deviation, causes of
Azapirones
Azathioprine
toxicity of
Azithromycin
Azoles
Azotemia
causes of
prerenal
Aztreonam
Azure lunula
B
Babinski’s sign
Bacillary dysentery
complications of
Bacille Calmette-Guerin
Bacillus cereus
Backwash ileitis
Baclofen
Bactec radiometric method
Bacteremia, massive
Bacteria, eradication of
Bacterial aspiration pneumonia
Bacterial infection, anaerobic
Bacterial meningitis, complications of
Bacterial peritonitis
acute
chronic
Bacterial vaginitis associated organisms
Bacteriuria
Bad prognostic signs
Bagassosis
Bag-of-worms appearance
Baker’s cysts
Ball valve thrombus
Ballet sign
Ballismus
Balloon
dilatation

tamponade
valvotomy, percutaneous
Balneophototherapy
Balonophostitis
Balthazar, grading system of
Bamboo spine
Bambuterol
Bancroftian filariasis
Barber’s chair syndrome
Barbiturate
blister
classification of
coma
poisoning
management of
treatment of
Bare-metal stents
Bariatric surgical techniques
Barium
enema
meal
radiography
swallow
Barlow’s disease
Barrett’s esophagus
Bartonella
Bartter’s criteria
Basal cell carcinoma
types of
Basket cells
Basophils
Bat wing appearance
Bateman, herpes iris of
Bazedoxifene
Bazett’s formula
Bazex syndrome
B-cell
dysfunction
failure
lymphoblastic leukemia
origin
BCG vaccination
Beau’s lines

Beck’s triad of hypotension
Becker’s muscular dystrophy
Becker’s sign
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome
Beclomethasone dipropionate
Bedford sign
Beevor’s sign
analysis of
causes of
Behavioral disorder
Behavioral therapy
Behçet’s disease
diagnosis of
symptoms of
treatment of
Behçet’s syndrome
Bekhterev-Strümpell-Marie disease
Bell’s palsy
differential diagnosis of
management of
medical treatment of
sequelae of
Bell’s phenomenon
Bence-Jones proteins
Benedict’s syndrome
Benzbromarone
Benzene
Benzodiazepines
overdose and management
poisoning
use of
Benzothiapines
Benztropine
Berger’s disease
Beriberi
dry
infantile
treatment of
wet
Bernheim effect
Berry aneurysm
intracranial
Berylliosis

Beryllium disease, chronic
Beta adrenergic blockers
Beta cell tumor
Betahistine
Beta-lactam antibiotics
adverse effects of
classification of
types of
Betamethasone
Bicarbonate
arterial
renal excretion of
therapy
Bickerstaff’s brainstem encephalitis
Bicuspid aortic valve disease
Bigeminy
Biguanides
Bilateral ptosis, causes of
Bile acid
binding resins
sequestrants
Bile duct obstruction
Biliary cholangitis, primary
Biliary cirrhosis, secondary
Bilirubin
metabolism
Bilirubinuria
Binet staging
Binocular diplopia
Biochemical tests
Biologic therapy
Biomycin
Bioprosthetic valves
Biopsy
bronchial
cardiac
Biot’s breathing
Bipolar disorder
Bird Fancier’s lung
Bird’s Beak’ appearance
Birdshot retinochoriodopathy
Bisferiens pulse
Bisphosphonates

intravenous
Bitot’s spot
Bivalirudin
Black measles
Black water fever
Bladder
atonic
dysfunction
Blalock-Taussig shunt
Blast cells
Blast crisis
features of
phase
Blastomyces dermatitidis
Bleeding
disorders
congenital
investigations of
management of
nature of
tendencies
time
Bleomycin
Bleuler’s criteria
Blinding, types of
Blindness
causes of
Blistering diseases, types of
Blood
ammonia
component transfusion
count
complete
full
cultures
glucose
fasting
level
postprandial
group
lipids and lipoproteins, disorders of
loss, amount of
passage of

pressure
diastolic
maintenance of
regulation of
product transfusions
stained sputum
sugar
tests
transfusion
complications of
urea
nitrogen
vessels
erosion of
Blowing pansystolic murmur
Blue nails
Blue sclera
Blumer’s shelf
Bode index
Body irradiation, total
Body lice
Body mass index
Boerhaave’s syndrome
Bone
absorption of
anabolic agents
biopsy
cartilage dysplasia
chronic infarcts of
density
disease
metabolic
pathogenesis of
infections of
invasion of
involvement
marrow
aspirate
aspiration, complications of
biopsy
cellular
depression
examination

failure
iron
study
transplantation
matrix, impaired mineralization of
metabolism
mineral density
mineralization of
necrosis
pain
radionuclide studies of
reabsorption of
resorption, markers of
scan
sclerosis of
Bony deformity
Borderline leprosy
treatment of
Borderline tuberculoid
Borrelia burgdorferi
Borrelia recurrentis
Bortezomib
Botulinum toxin
Bouchard’s nodes
Bourneville disease
Boutonniere deformity
Bowel disease, inflammatory
Bozzolo sign
Brachial plexus, lesions of
Brachytherapy
Bradyarrhythmias
Brady-asystolic rhythm
Bradycardia
causes of
Bradykinesia
Brain
abscess
biopsy
contusion
death
diagnosis of
significance of
glucose deprivation of

injury
natriuretic peptide
tumor
Brainstem
infarction
reflexes
Break bone fever
Breast
carcinoma, risk of
development
enlargement of
pain
Breath
fruity odor of
sounds
bronchial
types of
tests
Breathing
acidotic
apneustic
ataxic
cavernous
cluster
mouth-to-mouth
mouth-to-nose
restoration of
Breathlessness
Bretazenil
Brexpiprazole
Bridge therapy
Broad-spectrum antibiotics
Brock’s syndrome
Bromocriptine
Bronchi
Bronchial asthma
acute attack of
complications of
diagnosis of
investigations of
management of
treatment of
Bronchial breathing, causes of

Bronchial carcinoma
complications of
diagnosis of
etiology of
investigations of
management of
neurological manifestations of
Bronchial dilation, shape of
Bronchial disease
Bronchial lumen, total obstruction of
Bronchial obstruction, causes of
Bronchial tumors, primary
Bronchial wall
elastic tissue of
thickness of
Bronchiectasis
causes of
classification of
complications of
dry
etiopathogenesis of
focal
investigations of
management of
middle lobe
morphological types of
postobstructive
post-tuberculous
proximal
sicca
theories of
Bronchioles
Bronchiolitis obliterans
Bronchitis
acute
chronic
Bronchoalveolar lavage
Bronchodilator
therapy
Broncholith
Bronchopneumonia
chest X-ray of
Bronchopulmonary aspergillosis, classification of

Bronchorrhea
Bronchoscopy
indications of
Bronchospasm, recurrent episodes of
Bronze diabetes
Brown’s syndrome
Brown-Sequard syndrome
Brucella
abortus
agglutination test
canis
melitensis
suis
Brucellosis
acute
chronic
subacute
treatment of
Brugada syndrome
Bruits
Bruns ataxia
Bruns-Garland syndrome
Brushfield spots
Bruton agammaglobulinemia
Bruton tyrosine kinase
Budd-Chiari syndrome
causes of
Budesonide
Buerger’s disease
Buffalo hump
Bulbar paralysis
Bulimia
nervosa
Bull’s eye lesions
Bullae
pulmonary
Bullet injury
Bull-neck’ appearance
Bullous myringitis
Bullous pemphigoid
treatment of
Bundle branch block
Bunyaviridae

Bupropion
Burkholderia cepacia
Burkitt lymphoma
categories of
Burns
Bursitis
types of
Buspirone
Busulphan
Button-hole deformity
Butyrophenones
Butyryl cholinesterase
C
Cabergoline
Cabot-Locke murmur
Cachexia
cardiac
HIV associated
Cadaver donor
selection and exclusion
Café-au-lait macules
Calcification, causes of
Calcineurin inhibitors
Calcitonin
Calcium
absorption
acetate
angiography
antagonists
carbonate
channel antagonists
channel blockers
indications of
distribution of
gluconate
homeostasis
levels, regulation of
metabolism
mobilization of
oxalate
phosphate

crystal deposition, basic
phosphorus balance
pyrophosphate dihydrate deposition disease
stimulates intestinal absorption of
stones
urinary excretion of
Calculate alveolar-arterial O 2 gradient
Caloric test
Calotropis
Calymmatobacterium granulomatis
Campylobacter jejuni
infection
Cancer
bronchial
cell growth, regulation of
chemotherapeutic drugs
chemotherapy
hallmarks of
pancreatic
stem cells
treatment
Candesartan
Candida albicans
Candida balanitis
Candidiasis
chronic mucocutaneous
cutaneous
esophageal
treatment of
Canefield fever
Cannon waves
Capillary
leak syndrome
obstruction of
Caplan’s syndrome
Capreomycin
Capsaicin
Captopril
Caput medusae
Carbacrylamine resins
Carbamate
classification of
poisoning

management of
Carbamazepine
Carbapenem
resistant enterobacteriaceae
Carbimazole
Carbohydrate
absorption
markers
Carbon dioxide
narcosis
partial pressure of
Carbon monoxide
transfer test
Carcinogenesis
Carcinogens
Carcinoid
syndrome
tumor
classification of
metastatic
Carcinoma
adenosquamous
breast
bronchial
bronchioloalveolar
bronchogenic
colon
esophageal
hepatocellular
intramucosal
large cell
lung
metastatic
pancreas
staging of
Cardiac anomalies, congenital
Cardiac arrest
causes of
management of
Cardiac disease
Cardiac disorders
Cardiac failure
congestive

Cardiac injury, biochemical markers of
Cardiac pacemakers, types of
Cardiogenic pulmonary edema, management of
Cardiogenic shock
causes of
management of
Cardiomyopathy
alcoholic
clinical classification of
hypertrophic
obliterative
peripartum
primary
restrictive
secondary
types of
Cardiopathy syndrome
Cardiopulmonary exercise testing
Cardiorenal syndrome
Cardiotoxic plant poisons
Cardiotoxicity, management of
Cardiovascular disease
Cardiovascular system
Cardioversion
Cardioverter defibrillator
Carditis
leaves sequelae
rheumatic
Carey Coombs murmur
Cariprazine
Carnitine
palmitoyltransferase
Carotenemia
Carotenoids
Carotid artery, low grade stenosis of
Carpal tunnel syndrome
Carpopedal spasm, characteristic triad of
Carvedilol
Casal’s necklace and dermatitis
Casoni’s skin test
Castleman’s disease
Catacrotic pulse
Cataplexy

Cataract
Catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome
Catatonia, severe
Catecholamines
Catechol-O-methyltransferase
Catheterization, cardiac
Cauda equina
syndrome
Caudal angina
Cefadoxil
Cefixime
Cefotaxime
Ceftabiparole
Ceftaroline
Ceftazidime
Ceftriaxone
Cefurixime axetil
Celiac axis nerve block
Celiac disease
complications of
management of
Cell
adhesion molecules
carcinoma, small
count
cycle regulators
growth, control of
infections of
lung cancer, small
mediated immunity
mediated immunodeficiency
tropism
Cellophane tape test
Cell-to-cell interaction, regulation of
Cellular rejection, acute
Cellulitis
Central cord syndrome
Central nervous system disease, primary
Cephalexin
Cephalic tetanus
Cephalosporins
Cerebellar ataxia
hereditary

progressive
Cerebellar
degeneration
dysarthria
function, disorders of
lesions
signs
tremor
Cerebellopontine angle tumors
Cerebral
amyloidosis
blood flow
edema
features of
high altitude
signs of
symptoms of
hemispheres
functions of
infarction
massive
ischemia, features of
leukostasis
malaria
treatment of
perfusion pressure
salt wasting
toxoplasmosis
venous thrombosis
causes of
Cerebrospinal
fever
fluid
Cerebrovascular
accidents
disease
Cerebrum
Certolizumab
Ceruloplasmin
Cervical
cancer
carcinoma, invasive
cord

lesions
tumor
disk prolapse
rib
spine
syringomyelia
venous hum
Cestodes
Chagas disease
Chalmydia trachomatis
Chancre, primary
Chancroid
treatment of
Chandra-Khetarpal syndrome
Charcot’s joints
Charcot’s triad
Chédiak-Higashi syndrome
Cheese reaction, features of
Chelation therapy
Chemical
aspiration pneumonia
mast cell degranulation
pleurodesis
pneumonitis
Chemokine receptors
Chemoprophylaxis
Chemotherapy
antituberculous
neoadjuvant
postoperative
Cherry red spots
Chest
barrel-shaped
compressions
adequacy of
complications of
computed tomography
examination
movements, reduce
pain
causes of
differential diagnosis of
episodes of

syndrome, acute
Cheyne-Stokes breathing
Cheyne-Stokes respiration
Chiari malformation
Chickenpox
complications of
exanthema
management of
treatment of
Chikungunya
Childhood periodic syndromes
Child-Pugh classification, modified
Child-Pugh score
Child-Turcotte-Pugh score
Chimerism
Chipmunk facies
Chlamydia
pneumonia
psittaci
strain of
trachomatis
Chlamydial infections
Chlamydophila pneumoniae
Chlorambucil
Chloramphenicol
side effects of
Chlordane
Chlordecone
Chlordiazepoxide
Chloroquine
uses of
Chlorothiazide
Chlorozocin
Chlorpromazine
Chlorpropamide
Chlorthalidone
Choanal atresia, bilateral
Cholangiocarcinoma
Cholangiopancreatography, endoscopic retrograde
Cholangitis
Cholelithiasis
signs of
Cholera

pancreatic
sicca
treatment of
Cholestasis
signs of
symptoms of
Cholesteatoma
Cholesterol
crystals
synthesis, controls rate of
Cholinergic crisis
Cholinergic syndrome, acute
Chondrocalcinosis
Chopra’s antimony test
Chordate tendinae
Chorea
causes of
rheumatic
Choreiform gait
Chorioamnionitis
Chorionic villous sampling
Chorioretinitis
Choroidal artery occlusion syndrome, anterior
Christmas disease
Chromoendoscopy
Chromogranin A
Chromosomal abnormality, types of
Chromosomal disorders
classification of
Chromosome, structural abnormalities of
Chronic alcohol misuse
complications of
consequences of
Chronic asthma, stepwise management of
Chronic blood
causes of
loss, anemia of
Chronic bronchial
acute exacerbation of
asthma, treatment of
complications of
etiology of
investigations of

treatment of
types of
Chronic cor pulmonale, management of
Chronic diarrhea, causes of
Chronic disease
anemia of
Chronic dyspnea, causes of
Chronic heart failure, management of
Chronic hepatitis
B infection
classification of
complications of
management of
prevention of
C, treatment of
causes of
present classification of
risk of
stage of
Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy
Chronic kidney disease
causes of
classification, revised
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia, management of
Chronic myeloid leukemia
complications of
diagnosis of
treatment of
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
complications of
etiology of
investigations of
treatment of
Chronic pancreatitis
causes of
complications of
Chronic pyelonephritis
investigations of
management of
Chronic renal failure
complications of
management of
Chronic stable angina

investigations of
treatment of
Chronic vomiting, complications of
Churg-Strauss syndrome
Chvostek’s sign
Chylomicrons
Chylothorax
Chylous ascites
Cicatricial alopecia
Ciclesonide
Ciclosporin
complex of
Ciliary dysfunction syndrome
diagnosis of
treatment of
Ciliary dyskinesia, primary
Ciliospinal reflex
Ciprofloxacin
Circinate balanitis
Circle of Hebra
Circle of Willis
Circulation, restoration of
Cirrhosis
alcoholic
biliary
cardiac
causes of
classification of
complications of
end stage of
features of
investigations of
macronodular
main causes of
management of
micronodular
mixed
morphological classification of
of liver, signs of
pathogenesis of
treatment of
Cisplatin
neuropathy

toxicity of
Citrullinated peptide antigens
Civatte bodies
Cladribine
Clarithromycin
Claude’s syndrome
Clavulanate
Claw hand, bilateral
Cleistanthus collinus
Clicking pneumothorax
Climatotherapy
Clindamycin
Clobetasol propionate
Clodronate
Clofibrate
Clonazepam
Clonidine
Clopenthixol
Clopidogrel
Clostridial myonecrosis
Clostridium
botulinum
difficile
perfringens
Clotrimazole
Clozapine
Clubbing
causes of
eliciting signs of
grades of
signs of
Cluster headache
diagnostic criteria for
management of
Coagulation, disorders of
Coal-worker’s pneumoconiosis
Coarctation of aorta
Cobalamin
deficiency
Cobblestone appearance
Coccidioides immitis
Cockayne’s syndrome
Cock-up deformities

Coffee worker’s lung
Cogan’s syndrome
Cognitive behavioural therapy
Cold abscess
Cold agglutinin
autoimmune hemolytic anemia
Cold hemoglobinuria, paroxysmal
Cole-Cecil murmur
Colicky flank, severe
Colitis
amebic
antibiotic associated
extensive
ischemic
ulcerative
Collagen
diseases
formation of
Collapsing pulse
Collar rash
Colles’ fractures
Colloid
Colonoscopy
Color vision
Colorectal cancer
Coma
causes of
classification of
diabetic
hypoglycemic
management of
onset of
prognosis of
severity of
stages of
Combination antiretroviral therapy, goals of
Community acquired bacterial meningitis, causes of
Comorbid disorders
Compartment syndrome
Complement fixation test
Complement system
Complete cord transection
syndrome

Complex partial seizures
Comprehensive geriatric assessment, components of
Compressive myelopathies, causes of
Concomitant drug therapy
Condyloma acuminatum
Condylomata lata
Confirmatory aldosterone suppression test
Confusion
Congenital heart diseases, classification of
Congenital hyperbilirubinemia, causes of
Congenital rubella syndrome, classical triad of
Congestion
Congestive heart failure, management of
Conjunctiva
palpebral
Conjunctivitis
Conn’s syndrome
Connective tissue
diseases
hereditary
disorders
nevus
Consciousness
depresses level of
Consolidation, signs of
Constipation
causes of
functional
management of
Constrictive pericarditis, causes of
Contact dermatitis
treatment of
Continuous murmurs, causes of
Continuous positive airway pressure
Conus medullaris syndrome
Convulsions
Coombs test
direct
negative
Copper sulfate
Cor pulmonale
acute
causes of

chronic
types of
Cor triatriatum
Corneal smear test
Corona virus
Coronary artery
atherosclerosis
bypass grafting
disease
Coronary syndrome, acute
Corpulmonale
Corrigan’s sign
Cortical bone, subperiosteal resorption of
Corticobasal ganglionic degeneration
Corticospinal tracts
Corticosteroids
high dose
indications of
low dose
parenteral
therapy
complications of
side effects of
Corticotropin
Cortisol
Cortisone acetate
Corynebacterium
diphtheriae
parvum
Coryza
Costophrenic angle, blunting of
Cotrimoxazole
Cough
chronic
dry
reflex, suppression of
refractory
Courvoisier’s law
Coxiella burnetii
Coxsackie
B virus
Crab lice
Cradle cap

Crampy abdominal pain
Cranial arteritis
Cranial nerve
diseases of
involvement
Craniopharyngioma
Craniotabes
Craniovertebral junction anomalies
classification of
C-reactive protein
Creatinine phosphokinase
Crepitations
Crescentic glomerulonephritis
Crest syndrome
Cretinism
Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease
Cricoarytenoid joint
Crigler-Najjar syndrome
Crocodile tears
Crohn’s colitis
Crohn’s disease
etiology of
investigations of
local complications of
management of
severity of
Cromones
Crowe’s sign
Crush injury
Cruveilhier-Baumgarten
murmur
syndrome
Cryoglobulinemia
Cryoprecipitate
Cryptitis
Cryptococcus neoformans
Cryptococosis
Cryptosporidium
parvum
Crystal deposition disease
Crystalline silicon dioxide
Culex tritaeniorhynchus
Cullen’s sign

Curb 65 rule
Curling ulcers
Cushing’s disease
Cushing’s syndrome
causes of
features of
investigations of
management of
Cushing’s triad
Cyanide
exposure of
poisoning
clinical manifestations of
management of
Cyanocobalamin
Cyanosis
causes of
central
cyclical
mixed
peripheral
types of
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate
Cyclodienes
Cyclooxygenase
inhibitors
pathway
Cyclophilin inhibits
Cyclophosphamide
toxicity of
Cycloserine
Cyclosporine
toxicity of
Cyclothymia, features of
Cyclothymic disorder
Cystatin C
Cystic disease, medullary
Cystic fibrosis
complications of
Cysticercosis
Cystine stones
Cystinuria
Cystoscopy

Cystourethroscopy
Cysts
Cytarabine
Cytochrome
B5 reductase deficiency
oxidase
Cytomegalovirus
infection
Cytopenias, autoimmune
Cytotoxins
D
Dabigatran
etexilate
Dacarbazine
Dactylitis
Dahl sign
Dalrymple sign
Danazol
Dapsone
Darbepoietin alpha
Darunavir
Dasatinib
Datura
poisoning
stramonium
Daunorubicin
Daytime sleepiness, excessive
De Musset’s sign
De Quervain’s thyroiditis
Deafness
Debakey classification
De-Carvallo’s sign
Deep brain stimulation
Deep reflexes, loss of
Deep tendon reflex
loss of
Deep vein thrombosis
Deep venous thrombosis, treatment of
Deep wedge biopsy
Defibrillation
Dehydration

degree of
severity of
Dehydroemetine
Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate
Dehydrogenase, lactic
Dejerine-Roussy syndrome
Delavirdine
Delirium
causes of
management of
tremens
Delta cell tumor
Delta hepatitis
epidemiology of
etiology of
Delusions
types of
Dementia
alcoholic
causes of
classification of
diagnostic criteria for
frontotemporal
modifiable causes of
reversible causes of
Dengue
classic
complications of
fever
diagnosis of
management of
hemorrhagic fever
management of
infections, prevention of
management of
phases of
severe
shock syndrome
syndrome, expanded
Dennie-Morgan infraorbital fold
Dense lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate
Dental
caries

extraction
fluorosis
Deoxythymidylate monophosphate synthesis
Deoxyuridine suppression test
Depression
postpartum
reactive
severe
treatment of
Depressive stupor
Dermatitis
atopic
exfoliative
herpetiformis
intertriginous
Dermatofibroma
Dermatomyositis
amyopathic
idiopathic
Dermatopathy
Dermatophytes
Dermis, infiltration of
Dermopathy
Descemet’s membrane of cornea
Desferrioxamine
Desirudin
Desmopressin
Devic’s disease
Device therapy
Dexamethasone
suppression test
Dextrocardia
Dextrose
intravenous
Diabetes
cardiovascular complications of
classical triad of
complications of
insipidus
causes of
central
congenital nephrogenic
nephrogenic

treatment of
types of
mellitus
acute complications of
causes of
chronic complications of
classification of
dermatological complications of
development of
diagnosis of
dietary management of
etiology of
gestational
management of
ophthalmologic complications of
pathogenesis of
type 1
type 2
types of
musculoskeletal complications of
specific types of
Diabetic autonomic neuropathy
Diabetic coma, hyperosmolar non-ketotic
Diabetic ketoacidosis, management of
Diabetic nephropathy, management of
Diabetic neuropathy
classification of
management of
Diabetic retinopathy
lesions of
moderate nonproliferative
proliferative
Dialysis
disequilibrium syndrome
indications of
Diaphragm sellae, stretching of
Diarrhea
acute
causes of
chronic
inflammatory
osmotic
postantibiotic

types of
watery
Diastolic murmur, high-pitched
Diatheses, hemorrhagic
Diazepam
Diazoxide
Dichlorodiphenyl methane
Dicobalt edetate
Didanosine
Dieldrin
Dietary proteins
Dietary salt restriction
Diethylcarbamazine
provocation test
Diffuse cutaneous systemic sclerosis
Diffuse parenchymal lung disease
DiGeorge syndrome
Digital gangrene
Digital ulcers, control of
Digoxin
antibodies
toxicity
management of
Dihydropyridine calcium antagonists
Diloxanide furoate
Diltiazem
Dimercaptosuccinic acid
Dimorphic anemia
Dip stick tests
Dipeptidyl peptidase 4 inhibitors
Diphtheria
antitoxin
clinical manifestations of
complications of
cutaneous
diagnosis of
laryngeal
management of
pharyngeal
respiratory
Diploid
Diplopia
Dipsomania

Dipyridamole
Direct antiglobulin test
Direct thrombin inhibitors
Direct valvular damage
Directly observed treatment, short course
Disease modifying antirheumatic drugs
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Dissociative disorder
Distal acinar emphysema
Distal interphalangeal joints, non-weight bearing
Distal muscular dystrophy
Distal phalangeal distance
Distal renal tubular acidosis
Distal symmetric sensorimotor polyneuropathy
Distal urethra and introitus, colonization of
Distress
respiratory
syndrome, postprandial
Diuresis
Diuretic therapy
Divalproex
Dobutamine
Dock’s murmur
Dock’sign
Dolutegravir
Dominant transmission, X-linked
Donath-Landsteiner test
Donepezil
Dopamine
antagonists
facilitator
receptor agonists
transporter imaging
Doripenem
Dorsal root ganglia
Down syndrome
clinical features
screens
Doxophylline
Doxorubicin
Doxycycline
D-penicillamine
Dreisbach’s classification

Dressing apraxia
Dressler’s syndrome
Droperidol
Droplet infection
Drowning
pathophysiology of
stages of
wet
Drug-induced liver disease, clinicopathologic classification of
Drugs resistant malaria
Drugs sensitivity testing
Drugs therapy
Drummond sign
Dubin-Johnson syndrome
Duchenne muscular dystrophy
Duckett Jones criteria
Duke criteria, modified
Dumping syndrome
Duodenal ulcer
Duodenum
diseases of
Dupuytren’s contracture
Duroziez’s sign
D-xylose absorption test
Dysarthria
Dyselectrolytemia
Dysentery
amebic
Dyshormonogenesis
Dyskinesia
Dyslipidemia
Dyspepsia
causes of
chronic
differential diagnosis of
flatulent
functional
nervous
nonorganic
nonulcer
symptoms of
Dysphagia
causes of

esophageal
high-grade
management of
oropharyngeal
Dyspnea
acute
causes of
chronic
differentiation index
exertional
paroxysmal nocturnal
progressive
severity of
Dysrhythmia
Dyssomnias
Dyssynergia
Dysthymic disorder
Dystonia
Dystrophic calcification
Dystrophy, myotonic
Dysuria
E
Ear
Early HIV infection, Fiebig stages of
Eastern equine encephalitis
Eater deprivation test
Eating disorders
Ebola virus
disease
management of
Ebstein’s anomaly
Ecallantide
Ecchymoses
Echinococcus granulosus
life cycle of
Eclampsia
Ectoparasites
Ectopic thyroid tissue, detection of
Eculizumab
Eczema
atopic

classification of
Edema
bilateral
cardiac
cardiogenic pulmonary
formation, mechanism of
generalized
interstitial
nonpitting
periorbital
pulmonary
special forms of
treatment of
Edinburgh classification of coma
Edrophonium test
Edward’s syndrome
Efalizumab
Efavirenz
Egg-shell calcification
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome
Eisenmenger’s complex
Eisenmenger’s syndrome
Ejection systolic murmur
differential diagnosis of
Elapid bite
Electrocardiogram
Electrocardiographic monitoring, continuous
Electroconvulsive therapy
indications for
Electroencephalography
Electrolytes
Elephantiasis
Eletriptan
Elevated serum aminotransferases, causes of
ELISA test
Elliptocytosis, hereditary
Embolism, pulmonary
Embryonic stem cells
Emetine
Emphysema
centriacinar
features of
irregular

mediastinal
obstructive
pulmonary
types of
Emphysematous pyelonephritis
Empty sella
MRI image of
syndrome
Empyema
aspiration of
complications of
necessitans
nontuberculous
thoracis
complications of
etiology of
investigations of
management of
Emtricitabine
Enalapril
Encephalitic stage, acute
Encephalitis
Encephalomyelitis, myelopathy
Encephalopathy
hypertensive
metabolic
portosystemic
Endocardial involvement, evidence of
Endocarditis
acute
bacterial
culture negative
infective
nonbacterial thrombotic
noninfective
postoperative
prophylaxis of
rheumatic
subacute
Endocardium
Endocrine
cells
complications

diseases
disorders
myopathies, causes of
Endomyocardial fibrosis
Endoscopy
Endosulfan
Endothelial
cells
injury
Endotracheal intubation
Endovascular mechanical thrombectomy
End-stage renal
disease
failure, development of
Energy
Enfuvirtide
Enophthalmos
Entamoeba histolytica
Enteral nutrition, methods of
Enteric fever
Enterobacter cloacae
Enterobius vermicularis
Enterococcal endocarditis
Enterococcus faecalis
Enterovirus
Enzyme
cardiac
induction
supplements
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
Eosinophil
chemotactic factor
Eosinophilia
asthmatic pulmonary
causes of
pulmonary
Ephelide
Epicardial coronary artery, focal spasm of
Epidermal cell proliferation
Epidermoid carcinoma
Epidermolysis bullosa
Epididymis
Epididymitis

Epigastric
pain
pulsations
tenderness
Epilepsia partialis continua
Epilepsy
syndromes
Epinephrine
Epiphyseal growth plate
Epipodophyllotoxins
Episcleritis
Epistaxis
Epithelioid cells, aggregate of
Epitope
Epitrochlear nodes
Eplerenone
Epstein-Barr virus
Eptifibatide
Epworth sleepiness scale
Erectile dysfunction
organic causes of
Erlotinib
Erosion
Erotomanic delusions
Ertapenem
Erysipelas
Erythema gyratum repens
Erythema marginatum
Erythema multiforme
classification of
management of
treatment of
Erythema nodosum
diagnosis of
etiology of
leprosum
treatment of
Erythrocytapheresis
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
Erythroid hyperplasia
Erythromycin
Erythropoiesis, megaloblastic type of
Erythropoietic porphyrias

Erythropoietin
deficiency, anemia of
Escherichia coli
Esmolol
Esophageal diseases
Esophageal dysphagia, causes of
Esophageal variceal bleeding, management of
Esophageal varices
banding of
Esophagitis
erosive
infectious
Esophagus
achalasia of
diseases of
gastroesophageal junction of
rupture of
squamous carcinoma of
Estrogens
Etanercept
Ethacrynic acid
Ethambutol
Ethanol
therapy
Ethionamide
Ethosuximide
valproate
Ethylene glycol poisoning
Etomidate, intravenous
Etopophosphamide
Etoposide
Etravirine
Eumycetes
Eumycetoma
Euphoria
Euploid
Euro score
European League Against Rheumatism
Eustachian tube dysfunction
Euthyroidism
Eutos score
Euvolemic hyponatremia, causes of
Evan’s syndrome

Everolimus
Ewing’s sarcoma
Exacerbation
causes of
mild-to-moderate
Exenatide
Exercise tolerance test
Exocrine
function tests
pancreatic
defects
insufficiency
Exophthalmos
signs
Expansion disorders, triplet repeat
Extensor plantar
reflex
response, causes of
Extractable nuclear antibodies
Extraglomerular mesangium
Extramedullary spinal cord compression, causes of
Extraocular muscles, infiltration of
Extraosseous plasmacytoma, solitary
Extrathoracic metastasis, manifestations of
Extrinsic allergic alveolitis
Exudative pleural effusion, causes of
Eye
conditions
damage
diseases
dry
inflammation
movements
abnormal
and position
signs
Eyeball, abnormal protrusion of
Eyelid, partial ptosis of
Ezetimibe inhibits
F
Fab classification of acute leukemias, revised

Fabry’s disease
Facial angiofibromas
Facial nerve
anatomy
palsy, causes of
Facial palsy
Facial skin
Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy
Factitious disorder
Faine’s criteria, modified
Falciparum malaria
complications of
Fallot’s spell
Fallot’s tetralogy
Familial amyloidotic neuropathies
Familial mediterranean fever
Fanconi’s anemia
Fanconi’s syndrome
Farmer’s lung
Fasting glucose, impaired
Fat
metabolism, abnormal
Fatigue
extreme
Fat-soluble vitamins
Fatty acid
binding protein, heart-type
oxidation
Fatty diarrhea
Fatty liver
alcoholic
causes of
disease
non-alcoholic
simple
Fatty streaks
Fava beans
Febrile non-hemolytic transfusion reactions
Febuxostat
Fecal calprotectin
Fecal lactoferrin
Fecal microbiota transplantation
Feco-oral autoinfection

Felbamate
Felodipine
Felty’s syndrome
Female hypogonadism
Feminizing tumors
Fenoterol
Ferric carboxymaltose
Ferritin
Ferumoxytol
Festinant gait
Fetal hemoglobin
Fetor hepaticus
Fever
chronic rheumatic
high-grade
hysterical
neutropenic
periodic
psychogenic
recurrent
rheumatic
types of
virus
yellow
Fiberoptic endoscopy
Fibersensory neuropathy, small
Fibreoptic bronchoscopy
Fibril protein
Fibrin degradation
Fibrinogen
Fibrinoid necrosis
Fibrinolysis
Fibrinolytic
agents
fibrin-specific
system
Fibrocavitary tuberculosis
Fibromyalgia syndrome
Fibrosing strictures
Fibrosis
extensive
focal
interstitial

lymphatic
pulmonary
retroperitoneal
Fibrothorax
causes of
Fibrous cap, superficial
Fibrous pleuritis, obliterative
Filariasis
diagnosis of
life cycle of
lymphatic
treatment of
Fine-needle aspiration cytology
Finger
clubbing of
sweep
Fingernails, spooning of
Fistula
arteriovenous
bronchopleural
formation
Fitz-Hugh-Curits syndrome
Flaccid paraplegia, causes of
Flag sign
Flagella
Flaky paint appearance
Flapping tremor
Flea, control of
Flecainide
Flesch test
Flexion abduction external rotation maneuver
Flexor spasms
Flow volume loops
Flu syndrome
Fluconazole
Fludarabine
Fludrocortisone
Fluent aphasias
Fluid
management
replacement
restriction
resuscitation

retention
therapy
thrill
Flumazenil
Flunisolide
Fluorine
Fluoroquinolones
Fluorosis
Flupenthixol
Fluphenazine
Flurazepam
Fluroquinolones
Fluticasone
Folate deficiency
Folic acid
deficiency
role of
metabolism
prophylactic
role of
Follicle stimulating hormone
Follicular canal
Fomepizole
Fondaparinux
Food
borne botulism
poisoning
causes of
diagnosis of
management of
thermic effect of
Foot drop
Forefoot, broadening of
Formoterol
Fosamprenavir
Fosfomycin
Fothergill’s disease
Foul-smelling
purulent, large amounts of
Fourth heart sound
causes of
significance of
Fox’s sign

Fractional exhaled nitric oxide
Fracture
dislocations
risk of
Fragility fracture
Fragmentation syndromes
Frailty syndrome
Framingham risk score
Frank diabetes over time
Fredriachs ataxia
Free fatty acids
Freeze-dried bacteria
Fresh frozen plasma
Frey’ syndrome
Friedlander’s bacillus
Friedlander’s pneumonia
Friedreich’s ataxia
Friedreich’s sign
Frog sign
Froin’s syndrome
Frontotemporal dementia
Frovatriptan
Frozen red blood cells
Fulminant hepatic failure
causes of
complications of
investigations of
management of
Fundic gas shadow
Fundoscopy
Fundus fluorescein angiography
Fungal
disorders
infections
Fungi
cutaneous
Funicular pain
Furosemide
Fusion inhibitors
Fusobacterium necrophorum
G

Gabapentin
Gaenslen’s maneuver
Gaisböck syndrome
Gait
abnormalities
apraxia
ataxia
changes
circumduction
extrapyramidal
hemiplegic
hyperkinetic
myopathic
pyramidal
Galactomannan
Galactorrhea
Galactosemia
Galantamine
Gallavardin phenomenon
Gallbladder
Galloping vitiligo
Gallstones
Gamekeepers thumb
Gamma hydroxybutyrate
Gamma knife
Gammaglobulin, intravenous
Gangrene, diabetic
Gardner’s syndrome
Gardos channel inhibitor
Garland sign
Garland triad
Gas exchange function
Gastrectomy, subtotal
Gastric
antral vascular ectasia
biopsy
bypass surgery
carcinoma, higher incidence of
contents, aspiration of
electrical stimulation
emptying, defective
erosions
hyperacidity

lavage
complications of
lymphoma, primary
mucosa, heterotopic
outflow obstruction
outlet obstruction
causes of
differential diagnosis of
ulcer
chronic non-healing
Gastrinoma
Gastritis
acute
atrophic
chronic
Gastroenterology
Gastroesophageal reflux disease
complications of
development of
etiopathogenesis of
management of
treatment of
Gastrointestinal
adenocarcinomas
anthrax
bleeding
disease
disorders
infections
malignancies
motor abnormalities
mucosal toxicity
procedures
toxic plant poisons
Gastrointestinal tract
functional disorders of
procedure
psychosomatic disorders of
Gastrointestinal tuberculosis
Gastroparesis
Gatifloxacin
Gaucher’s disease
Gaze apraxia

Gefitinib
Gell and Coomb’s classification
Gemcitabine
Gemifloxacin
Gemtuzumab ozogamicin
Gene mutation analysis
Gene therapy
Generalized lymphadenopathy, differential diagnosis of
Generalized osteoporosis, causes of
Genetic
disease, prevention of
disorders
syndromes
Genital herpes
Genital lesion
Genital tract
Genital ulcer disease
causes of
Genital warts
Genitalia, external
Genitourinary system, diseases of
Genitourinary tract
Genome detection assays
Gentamicin
Geophagia
Gepirone
Gerhardt’s sign
Germ cell tumors
German measles
Germline gene therapy
Gerstmann’s syndrome
Gestational diabetes mellitus, diagnosis of
Gestational trophoblastic tumors
Ghon complex
fate of
Ghrelin
Giant A-wave
Giant cell arteritis
Giant metamyelocytes
Giant platelets
Giardia
intestinalis
lamblia

Giardiasis
acute
chronic
diagnosis of
treatment of
Gibson’s murmur
Gigantism, pituitary
Gilbert syndrome
Gingival hypertrophy
Gingivitis, ulcerative
Glabella
Glands
Glandular fever
Glatiramer acetate
Glaucoma
Gliadin
Global sensory loss
Globin synthesis
Glomerular basement membrane
Glomerular disease
causes of
idiopathic
syndromes of
Glomerular filtration rate
Glomeruli, inflammation of
Glomerulonephritis
acute
proliferative
causes of
focal segmental
poststreptococcal
primary
Glossitis
atrophic
causes of
Glucagon
release of
Glucagonoma
Glucocorticoids
adverse effects of
deficiency
equivalent doses of
receptor antagonists

Glucokinase activators
Glucose
6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency
absorption, reduce
control
dependent insulinotropic peptide
hepatic production of
intolerance
tolerance test
Glucuronidation
Glutathione conjugation
Gluten-sensitive enteropathy
Glyceryl trinitrate
Glycine conjugation
Glycogen storage diseases
Glycolysis, reduce
Glycopyrronium bromide
Glycosaminoglycans
Glycoside, cardiac
Glycosuria
alimentary
differential diagnosis of
Glycosylphosphatidylinositol
Goblet cells
Goiter
classification of
endemic
investigations of
multinodular
nodular
simple
treatment of
Goitrogens
Goldman’s test
Golfer’s elbow
Golimumab
Gonadal
disorders
dysfunction
dysgenesis
Gonadotroph adenoma
Gonococcal infection
Gonococcal urethritis, acute

Gonorrhea
ocular
pharyngeal
treatment of
Goodpasture’s syndrome
Gottron’s papules
Gout
acute attack of
chronic tophaceous
clinical manifestations of
diagnosis of
etiology of
intercritical
management of
Gouty arthritis, acute
Gower’s maneuver, use of
Graft versus host disease
Graham Steell murmur
Granules
Granulocyte
colony stimulating factor
concentrates
Granuloma
causes of
inguinale
noncaseating
telangiectaticum
Granulomatosis
Granulomatous disease
Grattage test
Graves’ disease
diagnosis of
etiopathogenesis of
hyperthyroidism of
investigations of
management of
severe
treatment modalities of
Grey Turner’s sign
Grocco’s sign
Grocco’s triangle
Groove sign
Growth hormone

deficiency
therapy
side effects of
Growth retardation
Guadeloupean parkinsonism
Guaiac test
Guanylatecyclase stimulant
Guillain-Barré syndrome
management of
Guilt
Gum
hyperplasia, phenytoin-induced
inflammation
Gustatory lacrimation
Gustatory sweating
Gut hormones
Gut mucosal edema
Gynecomastia
causes of
H
H1N1 influenza virus
Haemophilus ducreyi
Haemophilus influenzae
Hailey-Hailey disease
Hair
disorders
loss of
Hairy cell leukemia
management of
Half-and-half nails
Hallucinations
hypnagogic
Hallucinogen
Hallux valgus deformity
Haloperidol
Ham’s acidified serum test
Hamman-Rich syndrome
Hampton’s hump
Hand-foot syndrome
Hansen’s disease
diagnosis of

etiology of
management of
Haploid
Hapten
Haptoglobin
Harrison’s sulcus
Hartnup’s disease
Harvey sign
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis
investigations of
treatment of
Head
injuries
lice
trauma
Headache
classification of
cluster
red flags of
severe
types
Headlight sign
Hearing
loss
sensorineural loss of
Heart
block
causes of
complete
treatment of
catheterization
conduction system of
disease
acyanotic congenital
chronic
complex congenital
congenital
coronary
cyanotic congenital
ischemic
rheumatic
failure
acute

advanced
biventricular
causes of
chronic
congestive
diastolic
four stages of
Framingham criteria for diagnosis of
high-output
left-sided
low-output
management of
mechanism of
nonpharmacological treatment of
pathophysiology of
progresses
signs of
symptoms of
types of
rate
determination of
sounds
transplantation
valves, endocardium of
Heartburn
Heat
cramps
edema
exhaustion
injury, exertional
loss, impaired
production
Heatstroke
differential diagnosis of
first aid for
types of
Heberden’s nodes
Heel pain
Heerfordt-Waldenström syndrome
Heimlich maneuver
Heinz body preparation
Helicobacter pylori
eradication regimens

infection
management of
persistent
role of
Heliotrope rash
Heller’s operation
HELLP syndrome
Hemagglutinin disease
Hemarthrosis
Hematemesis, causes of
Hematochezia
Hematocrit
Hematological diseases
Hematological disorders
Hematolymphoid disorders, primary
Hematomas
psoas
resorption of
Hematopoiesis
extramedullary
nonclonal
Hematopoietic cell transplantation
complications of
types of
Hematopoietic growth factors
Hematopoietic stem cell
origin of
transplantation
Hematuria
evaluation of
microscopic
Heme iron
Heme synthesis
disorders of
Hemetemesis
Hemiballismus
Hemicraniectomy
Hemidesmosomes
Hemimedullary syndrome
Hemiplegia
causes of
Hemochromatosis
hereditary

Hemodialysis
complications of
Hemofiltration, principles of
Hemoglobin
defects, classification of
disease, unstable
electrophoresis
hereditary disorders of
levels
production
structure
Hemoglobinuria
malarial
paroxysmal nocturnal
Hemolysis
causes of
features of
intravascular
Hemolytic
anemia
acquired
acute
autoimmune
causes of
chronic nonspherocytic
classification of
diagnosis of
evidence of
features of
hereditary
management of
microangiopathic
crisis
disease
transfusion reaction, acute
uremic syndrome
Hemophilia
A
classification of
diagnosis of
etiology of
management of
B

Hemopneumothorax
Hemopoietic system
Hemoptysis
causes of
investigations of
management of
massive
treatment of
Hemorrhage
consequences of
diffuse pulmonary
epidural
hemispheral
intracerebral
intracranial
perifollicular
postpartum
pulmonary
retrobulbar
treatment of
Hemorrhagic
complications, treatment of
infarction, acute
pleural effusion, causes of
Hemosiderin
Hemosiderosis
pulmonary
Hemostasis
components of
mechanism of
Hemothorax
causes of
Henoch-Schönlein purpura
Heparin
antidote of
therapy
complications of
unfractionated
Heparinization, low dose
Hepatic amebiasis
diagnosis of
management of
Hepatic aminotransferases

Hepatic coma
causes of
diagnosis of
treatment of
Hepatic dysfunction
Hepatic elastography
Hepatic encephalopathy
acute
causes of
chronic
etiology of
features of
investigations of
management of
pathogenesis of
treatment of
types of
Hepatic failure
acute fulminant
fulminant
hyperacute
subacute
Hepatic fibrosis
Hepatic granulomas
Hepatic lymph, percolation of
Hepatic osteodystrophy
Hepatic porphyrias
Hepatic vasculature, distortion of
Hepatic venous outflow tract obstruction
etiology of
investigations of
management of
Hepatitis
A
A infection
features of
investigations of
management of
treatment of
B
antigen
chronic
core antigen

extrahepatic manifestations of
B infection
complications of
management of
treatment of
B surface antigen
B virus
infection
C
C virus
infection
C, chronic
D
E
E antigen
E infection
management of
transmission of
acute
alcoholic
anicteric
autoimmune
chronic
drugs and toxin-induced
fulminant
grades of
ischemic
types of
Hepatobiliary system
Hepatojugular reflux test
Hepatolenticular degeneration
progressive
Hepatoma
Hepatopulmonary syndrome
Hepatorenal syndrome
diagnosis of
Hepatosplenomegaly, causes of
Hepatotropic viruses
Hepcidin
actions of
role of
Hereditary coagulation disorders
Hereditary disorders

Hereditary hemochromatosis
etiology of
investigations of
management of
Herniation
syndromes
types of
Herpes simplex
encephalitis
virus
infections
Herpes zoster
complications of
diagnosis of
management of
treatment of
Herpetic penile ulcer
Hertoghe’s sign
Hess test
Heterozygotes
Hexachlorocyclohexane
Hexokinase deficiency
Hexosamine pathway
Hiatus hernia
types of
Hiccough
causes of
symptomatic treatment of
treatment of
Hide Porter’s disease
High anion gap metabolic acidosis, causes of
High creatinine phosphokinase, causes of
High dose dexamethasone suppression test
Hilar lymphadenopathy, bilateral
Hill’s sign
Hip
Hippocampal sclerosis
Hippocrates fingers
Hirsutism
His bundle
Histamine
H2-receptor antagonists
receptor antagonists

Histidine, metabolism of
Histone deacetylase inhibitor
Histoplasma
capsulatum
Hitchhiker’s thumb
HIV
classification of
clinical staging
disease progression
epidemiology of
etiology of
genome
infection
diagnosis of
primary
treatment of
WHO clinical staging classification of
management of
myelopathy
postexposure prophylaxis of
syndrome, acute
testing
Hodgkin lymphoma
classification of
clinical staging of
management of
Rye classification of
treatment of
WHO classification of
Hodgkin’s cells
Hodgkin’s disease
Hodgkin’s lymphoma
Holme’s tremor
Holter monitoring
Homan’s sign
Homocystinuria
Homoharringtonine
Honeymoon cystitis
Hookworm disease
etiopathogenesis of
management of
prevention of
Hoover’s sign

Hormone
deficiencies, isolated
melanin-concentrating
pituitary
replacement therapy
secretion of
therapy
Horner’s syndrome
causes of
components of
Horseshoe-shaped dullness
Host cell
cytoplasm of
genome of
Hot dry skin
Housemaid’s knee
HPV vaccines
Hughes syndrome
Human chorionic gonadotropin
Human diploid cell strain vaccine
Human genome
components of
project
Human herpes virus
Human immunodeficiency virus
stages of
structure of
Human immunoglobulins
Human insulin analogs
Human leukocyte antigen
Human metapneumovirus
Human normal immunoglobulins
Human papillomavirus
Human rabies immunoglobulin
Human T-cell lymphotropic virus
Human tetanus immunoglobulin
Human tissue plasminogen activator
Human vector contact, interruption of
Humanized monoclonal antibody therapy
Humidifier cooling systems
Humoral rejection, acute
Hunger pain
Huntington’s disease

Hurlers syndrome
Hürthle cells
Hutchinson’s teeth
Hutchinson’s triad
Hydatid cyst
gross appearance of
rupture of
Hydatid disease
medical management of
Hydralazine
nitrate combination
Hydrocalyx
Hydrocephalus
Hydrocortisone
sodium succinate
Hydrogen breath test
Hydronephrosis
Hydropneumothorax
physical signs of
Hydrops fetalis
Hydrothorax
Hydroxocobalamin
Hydroxyapatite
Hydroxycarbamide
Hydroxychloroquine
Hydroxyurea
Hygiene hypothesis
Hymenoptera
Hyperacusis
Hyperacute rejection
Hyperaldosteronism
primary
secondary
Hyperalgesia
Hyperbaric oxygen
therapy
Hyperbilirubinemia
congenital nonhemolytic
conjugated
Hypercalcemia
causes of
treatment of
Hypercalciuria

familial
Hypercapnia
causes of
permissive
signs of
Hypercholesterolemia
familial
Hypercoagulable state
Hypercortisolism, medical therapy of
Hyperdynamic precordium
Hypereosinophilic syndrome, idiopathic
Hyperesthesia, zone of
Hyperfractionation
Hyperglycemia
effects of
severe
symptoms of
Hyperglycemic hyperosmolar state
characteristic triad of
management of
Hyperinflation, features of
Hyperkalemia
causes of
diagnosis of
management of
severe
treatment of
urgent treatment of
Hyperketonemia
Hyperlipidemia
primary
secondary
Hypermetabolic state, symptoms of
Hypernatremia
diagnosis of
management of
Hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state
Hyperosmolar therapy
Hyperoxaluria, primary
Hyperoxia test
Hyperparasitemia
Hyperparathyroidism
causes of

classification of
primary
secondary
tertiary
treatment of
Hyperphosphatemia
treatment of
Hyperpigmentation
mucocutaneous
Hyperplasia
Hyperprolactinemia
causes of
investigations of
treatment of
Hyperpyrexia
Hyper-reactive malarial splenomegaly syndrome
Hypersecretory syndromes
Hypersensitivity
pneumonitis
diagnosis of
management of
reactions
features of
Hypersplenism
Hypertension
aggressive treatment of
capillary
causes of
chronic thromboembolic pulmonary
classification of
complications of
control of
essential
free of
management
nonpharmacological treatment of
paradoxical
paroxysmal
passive pulmonary
portal
portopulmonary
post-transplant
primary

pulmonary
regional venous
renovascular
secondary
Hypertensive retinopathy, grades of
Hyperthermia
causes of
control
malignant
Hyperthyroid crisis
causes of
treatment of
Hyperthyroidism
amiodarone induced
apathetic
cardiac complications of
causes of
complications of
etiology of
investigations of
iodine induced
management of
primary
secondary
signs of
subclinical
Hypertriglyceridemia
Hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy
Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, primary
Hypertrophy
Hyperuricemia
asymptomatic
causes of
classification of
clinical manifestations of
etiology of
investigations of
management of
metabolic triad of
Hyperventilation
central neurogenic
hysterical
Hyperviscosity syndrome

Hypervitaminosis
treatment of
Hypervolemic hyponatremia, causes of
Hyphae, visualization of
Hypoalbuminemia
Hypocalcemia
causes of
treatment of
Hypochloremic alkalosis
Hypochlorhydria
Hypochromic microcytic anemias, differential diagnosis of
Hypocomplementemia
Hypocortisolemia
Hypoglycemia
causes of
daytime
management of
mechanism of
nocturnal
Hypogonadism
hypogonadotropic
Hypokalemia
causes of
Hypokinetic pulse
Hypomagnesemia
Hypomelanosis of Ito
Hypomelanotic macules
Hyponatremia
causes of
euvolemic
hypervolemic
hypovolemic
severe
signs of
symptoms of
treatment of
types of
Hypoparathyroidism
causes of
chronic
functional
general management of
idiopathic

surgical
treatment of
Hypophosphatemia
Hypophysitis
autoimmune
lymphocytic
Hypopigmentation
causes of
Hypopigmented cutaneous lesions
Hypopituitarism
Hypopnea
Hypoproteinemia
Hypotension
postural
Hypothalamic pituitary
disorders
tumors
Hypothalamus
arcuate nucleus of
infiltrative lesions of
neoplastic lesions of
Hypothermia
clinical symptoms of
mild
moderate
secondary
severe
Hypothyroidism
causes of
etiology of
goitrous
primary
secondary
subclinical
treatment of
Hypotonia
causes of
Hypoventilation
Hypovolemia
management of
Hypovolemic
hypernatremia, treatment of
hyponatremia, causes of

Hypoxanthine guanine phosphoribosyl-transferase
Hypoxemia
acute
causes of
chronic
Hypoxia
cellular
persistent
reversal of
Hypromellose eye drops
Hysteria
I
Iatrogenic diseases
Ibandronate
Ibuprofen
Ibutilide
Ice pack test
Idarucizumab
Idiopathic interstitial pneumonias, classification of
Idiopathic Parkinson’s disease, causes of
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
investigations of
treatment of
Idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura
Idraparinux
Iliac fossa
Iloperidone
Imatinib
mesylate
Imidazenil
Imipenem
Imipramine
Immotile cilia syndrome
Immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome
Immune thrombocytopenic purpura
Immunodeficiency
diseases, primary
severe combined
Immunoglobulins
human specific
Immunosuppressive

drugs
therapy
Immunotherapy
Impaired glucose intolerance, phase of
Impotence
In vitro fertilization
Incontinentia pigmenti
Indapamide
Indinavir
Indirect fluorescent antibody test
Indolent carditis
Indomethacin
Infarctions
crisis
evidence of
pulmonary
Infection
bacterial
hepatobiliary
intestinal
prevention of
sites of
source of
spread of
superficial
Infectious mononucleosis
complications of
etiology of
investigations of
treatment of
Infective endocarditis
complications of
consequences of
diagnosis of
management of
prevention of
signs of
subacute
Inferior vena cava obstruction
Infertility
Infiximab
Inflammatory arthritis, acute
Inflammatory bowel disease

complications of
etiology of
investigations of
management of
systemic complications of
Inflammatory diseases
Inflammatory myopathies, idiopathic
Infliximab
Influenza
A virus
B virus
complications of
etiology of
investigations of
management of
Inguinal hernia, diagnosis of
Inherited hypopigmentation disorders
Innocent murmurs
Inotropic therapy
Insect stings
Insecticide poisoning
Insomnia
causes of
Insulin
absolute deficiency of
analogs
and insulin analogs, amino acid structure of
aspart
deficiency
consequences of
degludec
delivery
device, newer
systems
detemir
functions of
glargine
glulisine
pen
preparations
pump therapy
recommendations
regimens

requirement
resistance
causes of
consequences of
syndrome
secretagogues
syringes
therapy
complications of
conventional
goals of
management of
tolerance test
treatment
Insulinoma
Integrase strand transfer inhibitors
Interferon
features of
gamma release assays
Internal jugular vein, advantages of
International staging system
Interosseous membrane, calcification of
Interphalangeal joint
proximal
Interstitial fibrosis
causes of
diffuse
Interstitial inflammation
granulomatous
non-granulomatous
Interstitial lung disease
causes of
etiology of
respiratory bronchiolitis associated
Interstitial nephritis, treatment of
Interstitial pneumonia
acute
idiopathic
non-specific
Interstitium
Intertrigo
Intestinal amebiasis, treatment of
Intestinal biopsy, small

Intestinal disease, chronic
Intestinal tuberculosis, complications of
Intestine
diseases of
small
tuberculosis of
Intra-aortic balloon pumping
Intra-arterial angiography
Intracavitary aspergilloma
diagnosis of
etiology of
management of
Intracellular fluid compartment
Intracranial hemorrhage, causes of
Intracranial pressure
control of
Intraepidermal immunobullous diseases
Intrarenal reflux
Intraspinal tumors
Intrathecal therapy
Intrauterine contraceptive devices
Intrauterine growth retardation
Intravascular hemolysis, evidence of
Intravenous antibiotic therapy
Intrinsic sphincter deficiency
Invasive intestinal amebiasis
Invasive pulmonary aspergillosis
diagnosis of
etiology of
management of
Iodine, deficiency of
Ionized calcium, importance of
Ionizing radiation
Ipsapirone
Iris
lesions
nodules
Iritis
Iron
absorption
balance, regulation of
daily requirement of
deficiency

deficiency anemia
causes of
complications of
diagnosis of
severe
treatment of
distribution of
functions of
homeostasis, regulator of
important dietary sources of
isomaltoside
metabolism
overload
classification of
poisoning, acute
preparations and dose
sucrose
therapy, parenteral
transport
protein transferrin
utilization, impaired
Irritable bowel syndrome
management of
Irritant contact eczema
Ischemia
acute
chronic
Ischemic heart disease, spectrum of
Ischemic stroke
acute
etiology of
pathophysiology of
Ishihara color plates
Isochromosomes
Isolated systolic hypertension, causes of
Isoniazid
preventive therapy
Isopropyl alcohol
Isoproterenol
Isosorbide
dinitrate
mononitrate
Isotonic normal saline

Isotope liver scans
Isotretinoin
Itching
Itraconazole
Ivabradine
Ivermectin
Ixekizumab
J
Jack-in-the-box sign
Jacksonian epilepsy
Janeway lesions
Janus kinase 2 mutations
Japanese encephalitis
Jarisch-Jerxheimer reaction
Jaundice
anicteric
causes of
cholestatic
classification of
deep
diagnosis of
etiology of
hemolytic
hepatocellular
latent
mild
neonatal
obstructive
painless obstructive
prehepatic
progressive
types of
Jaw claudication
Jaw thrust method
Jejunal mucosal biopsy, abnormal
Jejunum, proximal
Jerk nystagmus
Jerky pulse
Jet lag disorder
Job syndrome
Jod-Basedow phenomenon

Joffroy’s sign
Joint
ankylosis
diseases, degenerative
fluid microscopy
involvement
pattern of
pain
clinical syndrome of
Jones criteria
modified
Jug handle appearance
Jugular vein
external
internal
prominent
Jugular venous
distension
pressure
reduce
pulsations
pulse
Juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Juxtaglomerular apparatus
components of
K
Kala-azar
Kallikrein inhibitor
Kallikrein kinin system
Kallmann syndrome
Kanamycin
Kaposi’s sarcoma
Kartagener’s syndrome
Katz Watchtel sign
Kayser-Fleischer ring
Kearns-Sayre syndrome
Keratitis
exposure
interstitial
Keratoconjunctivitis
sicca

Keratoderma blennorrhagica
Keratomalacia
Keratosis pilaris
Kerion
Kerley’s lines
Kernig’s sign
Kernohan Woltman sign
Ketoacidosis
diabetic
Ketoconazole
Ketone bodies
generation of
Ketonemia
Ketonuria
Ketosis
Ketotifen
Key-Hodgkin murmur
Kidney
biopsy
cystic diseases of
disease
chronic
intrinsic
function
deterioration of
functional anatomy of
infiltration of
injury, acute
intrinsic diseases of
solitary
stones
Kikuchi’s disease
Kimmelstiel-Wilson lesions
Kingella kingae
Kinin, activation of
Kissing’ ulcers
Klebsiella
pneumoniae
diagnosis of
treatment of
Kleptomania
Klinefelter’s syndrome
complications of

Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber syndrome
Knodell-Ishak score
Knuckles, pigmentation of
Kobberling-Dunnigan syndrome
Koch’s disease
Kocher sign
Koebner phenomenon
Koilonychia
Koplik’s spot
Korsakoff’s psychosis
Kreb’s cycle metabolism
Kussmaul’s respiration
Kussmaul’s sign
Kveim test
Kveim-Siltzbach test
Kwashiorkor
Kyphosis
L
La Ortner’s syndrome
Labetalol
Labyrinthine disorders
Lacrimal gland enlargement
Lactate dehydrogenase
Lactitol
Lactoferrin
Lactose tolerance test
Lactotroph adenoma
Lactulose
therapy
Lady Windermere syndrome
Laennec’s cirrhosis
Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome
Lamina propria
Lamivudine
Lamotrigine
Lancisi’s sign
Landolfi’s sign
Langerhans’ cell histiocytosis, pulmonary
Language aura
Lanreotide
Lapatinib

Larva currens
Larva migrans, cutaneous
Laryngoscopy
Laser photocoagulation
Laser therapy
Late onset hereditary ataxia
Late-night salivary cortisol
Latent autoimmune diabetes
Latent infection, reactivation of
Lathyrism
Laurence-Moon and Bardet-Biedl syndromes
Laurence-Moon-Biedl syndrome
Lawson’s sign
Lead
poisoning
types of
Lectin pathway
Leflunomide
Left ventricular end-diastolic volume
Legs
bowing of
ulcer
causes of
chronic
Legg-Calvé-Perthes disease
Legionella pneumoniae
Legionella pneumophila
Legionnaire’s disease
Leiomyosarcoma
Leishmaniasis
life cycle of
Leishmanin skin test
Lemierre syndrome
Lenalidomide
Lennox-Gastaut syndrome
Lentiginosis
Lepidopterism
Lepirudin
Lepra reactions
treatment of
Lepromatous leprosy
complications of
lesions of

management of
treatment of
Lepromin test
Leprosy
classification of
diagnosis of
treatment of
Leptin
actions of
Leptospira biflexia
Leptospira interrogans
Leptospiral antigen
Leptospirosis
complications of
etiology of
investigations of
severe
treatment of
Leriche’s syndrome
Lethargy
Letrozole
Leucocyte count
Leucopenia
Leukemia
acute
lymphoblastic
lymphocytic
lymphoid
promyelocytic
aleukemic
chronic
lymphocytic
myeloid
classification of
cutis
etiology of
traditional classification of
Leukemoid reaction
types of
Leukocyte
alkaline phosphatase
casts
counts

infiltration
number of
Leukocytoclastic angiitis, cutaneous
Leukocytosis
causes of
Leukoerythroblastosis
Leukopenia
causes of
Leukostasis
Leukotriene receptor antagonists
Levamisole
Levetiracetam
Levine’s sign
Levodopa
therapy, complications of
Levofloxacin
Levosalbutamol
Levothyroxine
sodium
Lewy body
disease
Lhermitte’s sign
Libido, loss of
Libman-sacks endocarditis
Lice infection
Lichen planopilaris
Lichen planus
clinical features
complications of
etiology
Lid lag sign
Lid retraction
Lidocaine
Ligase chain reaction
Light’s classification
Light’s criteria
Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy
Limbic encephalitis
Linagliptin
Lincoln sign
Lindsay’s nails
Linear sebacious nevus syndrome
Lipase inhibitors

Lipid metabolism, regulation of
Lipiduria
Lipoatrophia annularis
Lipodystrophies, classification of
Lipodystrophy
syndromes
total
Lipohypertrophy
Lipolysis
Lipomastia
Lipoprotein
high density
low density
types of
Lipotoxicity
Lip-tip vitiligo
Liraglutide
Lisch nodules
Listeria monocytogenes
Lithium
carbonate
side effects of
Live attenuated vaccine
Livedo reticularis
Liver
abscess
amebic
bacterial
amyloidosis of
biochemistry
biopsy
complications of
contraindications of
indications of
significance of
cell failure, features of
cirrhosis of
damage, severe
disease
alcoholic
chronic
drugs induced
metabolic

severe
disorder
drugs used in
dysfunction
failure
acute
fulminant
function tests
abnormal
functions of
important functions of
injury, drugs induced
mass
produces
transplantation
complications of
Living donor liver transplantation
Lixisenatide
Lobar pneumonia
complications of
Local injection therapy
Localized edema, types of
Locomotor brachii
Loeffler’s medium
Loeffler’s syndrome
Löfgren’s syndrome
Loop diuretics
Loop of Henle
Lopinavir
Lorazepam
Lorcaserin
Losartan
Lou Gehrig’s disease
Loud harsh murmur
Louis-Bar syndrome
Low back pain, causes of
Low grade fever
Low molecular weight heparin
Low plasma concentration
Low tidal volume ventilation
Lowenstein Jensen culture
Lower esophageal sphincter
abnormalities of

endoscopic dilatation of
Lower gastrointestinal bleeding, causes of
Lower motor neuron
Lown-Ganong-Levine syndrome
Lugol’s iodine
Lumbar cord
Lumbar lordosis
Lumbar puncture
complications of
procedure of
Lumbar spine
Luminal gastrointestinal tract
Lung
abscess
causes of
complications of
diagnosis of
etiology of
investigations of
large
management of
secondary
biopsy
cancer
clinical subgroups of
evidence of
capacity, total
collapse, signs of
diffusing capacity of
disease
chronic obstructive
diffuse parenchymal
granulomatous
interstitial
occupational
suppurative
unilateral
disorders, restrictive
function of
function tests
fungal infections of
incomplete expansion of
injury

interstitium of
involvement
lesions
parenchyma
parenchymal disease of
primary
tuberculosis of
tumors of
protective mechanical ventilation
secondary tuberculosis of
single segment of
transplantation
tuberculosis of
tumor
volume
measurement of
reduction surgery
Lupus anticoagulant antibody
Lupus erythematosus
cutaneous
Lupus nephritis, proliferative forms of
Lurasidone
Luteinizing hormone
Lutembacher’s syndrome
Lyell’s syndrome
Lyme disease
Lymph node
areas
biopsy
groups
hyperplasia, angiofollicular
Lymphadenitis
regional
Lymphadenopathy
generalized
painless
massive
painless
persistent generalized
progressive
regional
Lymphangioleiomyomatosis
Lymphangitis

acute filarial
Lymphatic obstruction
Lymphatic pathology, chronic
Lymphedema
causes of
complications of
control of
Lymphocyte
count
Lymphocytosis
causes of
Lymphogranuloma venereum
Lymphohistiocytosis, hemophagocytic
Lymphoid follicles
Lymphoid interstitial pneumonia
Lymphoid leukemia
Lymphoid neoplasm, WHO classification of
Lymphoid tissue lymphoma, mucosa-associated
Lymphoma
Lymphopenia
Lysosomal storage
diseases
disorders
classification of
M
MacCallum patch
Macrocytic anemia
causes of
non-megaloblastic
Macrocytosis, causes of
Macroglossia
Macrographia
Macrolides
Macrophages
Macula densa
Macular edema, diabetic
Macular lesions, causes of
Madelung deformity
Magnesium
sulfate
Major depressive disorder

Malabsorption
demonstration of
signs of
symptoms of
Malabsorption syndrome
causes of
classification of
etiology of
investigations of
management of
treatment of
Malabsorptive procedures
Malaise
Malar rash, classic
Malaria
antigens
chemoprophylaxis of
chronic complications of
complications of
diagnosis of
epidemiology of
etiology of
investigations of
management of
radical treatment of
vaccines
Malarial parasite, life cycle of
Malassezia furfur
Male hypogonadism
causes of
classification of
Male infertility, causes of
Malignancy
Malignant melanoma, diagnosis of
Malignant skin tumors
Malignant syndrome, meuroleptic
Mallory bodies
Mallory-Weiss syndrome
Malnutrition
severe
signs of
Malt worker’s lung
Malta fever

Mammosomatotroph adenoma
Mania
acute
treatment of
Manic episode
diagnostic criteria for
Manson-Barr point
Mantle cell lymphoma
Mantoux test
Marantic endocarditis
Marasmus
Marble’s criteria
Marfan’s syndrome
features of
Marie-Foix syndrome
Marrow hypoplasia
Marrow infiltration
Martel sign
Mask, non-rebreathing
Massage, cardiac
Masses
Massive fibrosis, progressive
Massive hemoptysis, causes of
Massive pulmonary embolism, acute
Mastocytosis
Maturity onset diabetes of young
features of
types of
Mayan’s sign
McCune-Albright syndrome
McDonald criteria
Mean arterial blood pressure
Mean arterial pressure, reduce
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration
Measles
complications of
etiology of
prevention of
vaccine, contraindications for
Mebendazole
Mechanic’s hand
Mechanical ventilation
indications of

types of
Mechlorethamine
Meclizine diphenhydramine
Meconium ileus
Medial medullary syndrome
Mediastinal mass, causes of
Mediastinal tumors
investigations of
management of
Mediastinitis
Mediastinoscopy
Mediastinum
diseases of
Medical nutrition therapy
Medical therapy
Mediterranean fever
Medulla
Medullary sponge kidney
Mees’ lines
Mefenamic acid
Megakaryocytic disorders
Megakaryopoiesis
Megaloblastic anemia
causes of
diagnosis of
etiology of
neurological complications of
pathogenesis of
Megaloblastic macrocytic anemia, management of
Megaloblasts
Megltinides, advantages of
Meigs’ syndrome
features of
Meiosis
Melanocytic nevi
Melanoma, malignant
Melanosis, neurocutaneous
Melatonin
Melena
Melioidosis
Melphalan
Memantine
Membranous nephropathy, causes of

Memory
disturbances
impairment
loss
Mendelian disorders
Mendelson’s syndrome
Ménière’s disease
Meningeal syphilis
Meninges
Meningiomas, multiple
Meningitis
acute
aseptic
bacterial
classical sign of
classification of
cryptococcal
meningococcal
noninfective causes of
physical signs of
pyogenic
Meningococcal infections
Meningococcemia
fulminant
Menorrhagia
Menstrual irregularities
Mental confusion
Mental retardation
causes of
degree of
Mepolizumab
Meralgia paresthetica
Merkel cell
carcinoma
polyoma virus
Meropenem
Mesenteric infarction
Mesenteric lymph nodes, tuberculosis of
Mesial temporal lobe epilepsy syndrome
Mesothelial cells
Mesothelioma
Metabolic acidosis
causes of

management of
Metabolic disease
Metabolic disorders
Metabolic syndrome
Metabolism, inborn errors of
Metacarpophalangeal joint
Metatarsophalangeal joint
Metformin
contraindications for
Methacholine bronchial provocation test
Methanol
poisoning
antidote of
management of
Methemoglobin
reductase deficiency
Methemoglobinemia
causes of
severe
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
community-acquired
treatment of
Methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus
Methimazole
Methotrexate
high dose
toxicity of
Methyl salicylate
Methylation
Methylcellulose
Methylcobalamin
Methyldopa
Methylmalonic acid, urinary excretion of
Methylmalonyl CoA metabolism
Methylprednisolone
Methylxanthines
Methysergide treatment
Metoclopramide
Metolazone
Metoprolol
Metronidazole
uses of
Meyers-Kouwenaar syndrome

Miconazole
Microalbuminuria
causes of
Microaneurysms
Microcomedone
Microcytic hypochromic
anemia
causes of
blood picture, differential diagnosis of
Microfilariae, demonstration of
Micronormoblastic maturation
Micturating cystourethrogram
Middle cerebral artery syndrome
Middle east respiratory syndrome
Middle lobe syndrome
Mifepristone
Migraine
aura-triggered seizure
basilar
catamenial
classification of
complications of
headache
hemiplegic
management of
ophthalmoplegic
pathogenesis of
retinal
treatment of
Migratory venous thrombophlebitis
Mild airway obstruction
Miliary tuberculosis
classical
cryptic
management of
non-reactive
pathogenesis of
types of
Milkmaid’s grip
Milkmaid’s sign
Millard-Gubler syndrome
Miller’s lung
Milrinone

Miltefosine
Mineralocorticoid
deficiency
Minimal change disease
etiology of
investigations of
treatment of
Minimally invasive operative procedures
Mini-mental state examination tests
Minocycline
Minor neurocognitive disorder
Miosis
Mithramycin
Mitochondrial inheritance
Mitochondrial respiration, inhibition of
Mitomycin
Mitosis
Mitral opening snap
Mitral regurgitation
acute
causes of
chronic
complications of
murmur
sever
severity of
Mitral stenosis
acquired
causes of
complications of
congenital
grades of
murmur of
obstructs
opening snap of
radiological features of
rheumatic
severe
severity of
Mitral valve
apparatus
calcification of
orifice size

prolapse
replacement
Mitral valvotomy, open
Mixed connective tissue disease
Mixoploidy
Möbius sign
Modafinil
Molecular adsorption reversibility system
Mollaret’s meningitis
Molluscum contagiosum
virus
Monge’s disease
Moniliasis
Monitor vital signs
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Monoarthritis
acute
chronic
Monocular diplopia
Monocytes
Monogenic disorders
Mononeuritis multiplex
Mononucleosis, infectious
Monosomy
Monotherapy
Monozygotic twins
Montenegro skin test
Montoxic goiter, diffuse
Mood disorder
classification of
spectrum of
Mood stabilizing agents
Moon facies
Moraxella catarrhalis
Morganella amorganii
Morning hyperglycemia
Morphine sulfate
Morquio syndrome
Morvan’s syndrome
Mosaicism
Moses test
Mosquito cycle
Mosquito vectors, control of

Motilin receptor agonists
Motility disorders
Motor diabetic neuropathy, asymmetrical
Motor neuron
disease
types of
upper
Motor paralysis
Mountain sickness
acute
chronic
Movement disorders
diagnosis of
Movement syndromes
Moxifloxacin
Mucociliary apparatus
Mucolipidoses
Mucopolysaccharides, accumulation of
Mucopolysaccharidoses
types of
Mucopurulent sputum
Mucormycosis
rhinocerebral
Mucosal damage, drugs induced
Mucous membrane
Muehrcke’s lines
Müller’s maneuver
Müller’s sign
Multibacillary leprosy
management of
Multidrug resistant pathogens
Multidrug resistant strains
Multidrug resistant tuberculosis
management of
Multidrug therapy
Multifocal leukoencephalopathy, progressive
Multi-infarct dementia
Multiorgan dysfunction syndrome
Multiorgan failure
Multiple myeloma
diagnosis of
immunopathology of
investigations of

management of
renal failure of
treatment of
Multiple organ disease, symptomatic
Multiple retinal nodular hamartomas
Multiple sclerosis
Multiple sleep latency test
Multisystem disease, chronic
Multisystem inflammatory disease
Mumps
clinical manifestations of
complications of
Munchausen’s syndrome
Munro microabscesses
Mural endocarditis
Mural endocardium
Murmur
continuous
diastolic
early diastolic
mid-diastolic
pansystolic
presystolic
accentuation of
Muromonab
Muscle
disease
inflammatory
primary
fasciculation
hematomas
pain
rigidity
stiffness
weakness
Muscular atrophy
neurogenic
progressive
Muscular dystrophies
features of
Musculoskeletal
complications
manifestations

system
Mushroom worker’s lung
Mustine hydrochloride
Mutilomania
Myalgia
Myasthenia gravis
drugs used in
pathogenesis of
Myasthenic crisis
treatment of
Mycetoma
Mycobacteria
atypical
characteristic triad of
classification of
growth indicator tube
nontuberculous
Mycobacterial infection
atypical
Mycobacterium
avium complex
avium intracellulare
kansasii
leprae
marinum
tuberculosis
complex
hominis
ulcerans
Mycophenolate mofetil
Mycoplasma
genitalium
hominis
pneumoniae
treatment of
Mycoses
superficial
treatment of
Mycotic aneurysms
Mydriasis
Myeloablative regimens
Myeloblastic leukemia, acute
Myelodysplastic syndromes

classification of
diagnosis of
etiology of
treatment of
Myelofibrosis
primary
Myeloid
leukemia, acute
metaplasia
proliferation
sarcoma
series
Myeloma
multiple
osteosclerotic
Myelopathy, compression
Myelophthisis
causes of
Myeloproliferative diseases
Myeloproliferative disorders
Myeloproliferative neoplasm
WHO classification of
Myocardial hypertrophy, asymmetric
Myocardial infarction
acute
causes of
risk of
types of
Myocardial necrosis, evidence of
Myocardial perfusion scanning
Myocardial pump failure
Myocarditis
acute
causes of
chronic
active
persistent
fulminant
Myocardium
diseases of
hibernating
Myoclonic epilepsy, juvenile
Myoclonic jerks

Myoclonic seizures
Myoclonus
Myocytes, loss of
Myofascial pain syndrome
Myoneural junction
Myopathic disorders
Myopathy
hereditary
surgical
Myotonia
causes of
Myxedema
coma
management of
facies
madness
pretibial
Myxoma
N
N-acetylcysteine
Naffziger’s sign
Nail
beds
changes
involvement
psoriatic
white
yellow
Naloxone
Naltrexone
Napier’s aldehyde test
Naproxen
Naratriptan
Narcolepsy
Narcosis
Narcotics
Narst-nalidixic acid resistant Salmonella typhi
Nasal
cannula
catheter
diphtheria

discharge
involvement
secretions
sinus
Nasogastric tube
Nateglinide
Natriuretic peptide
Nausea
causes of
Necator americanus
Neck
pain, anterior
stiffness, causes of
veins, distension of
Necrolytic migratory erythema
Necrosis
fibrosis theory
pancreatic
Necrotizing acute pancreatitis
Necrotizing fasciitis
Necrotizing granulomas
Necrotizing pneumonia
Nedocromil sodium
Negri bodies, classic
Neisseria gonorrhoea
Neisseria meningitides
Nelfinavir
Nelson’s syndrome
Neoangiogenesis
Neoplasms
Nephritic syndrome
acute
management of
signs of
Nephritis
hereditary
interstitial
Nephrocalcinosis
Nephrolithiasis
Nephron
different components of
Nephronophthisis, juvenile
Nephropathy

diabetic
HIV associated
membranous
Nephrotic syndrome
causes of
characteristic triad of
etiology of
Nephrotoxic drugs
Nerve
compression palsies
conduction study
involvement
stimulation test, repeated
swelling of
Nervous system
autonomic
central
infections of
tumors of
Nettle rash
Neural cell adhesion molecule
Neural leprosy
Neuralgia, postherpetic
Neurilemmoma
Neuritic pain
Neuritis, retrobulbar
Neuroblastoma
Neurocognitive disorders, HIV associated
Neurocutaneous syndromes
Neurocysticercosis
treatment of
Neurodegenerative
diseases
disorders
Neurofibromatosis
Neurogenic bladder
causes of
dysfunction
Neurogenic theory
Neuroglycopenia
Neuroichthyosis
Neurologic disorder
Neurologic syndromes

Neuromuscular junction disorder
Neuromyelitis optica
Neuronal cells
Neuropathy
ataxic
autonomic
causes of
diabetic
peripheral
sequelae of
types of
Neuropsychiatric
disorder
syndrome
Neurosis
Neurosyphilis
asymptomatic
management of
symptomatic
Neurotoxic plant poisons
Neurovisceral syndrome, acute
Neutropenia
causes of
febrile
Neutrophils
alkaline phosphatase
hypersegmented
Neutrophilia, causes of
Nevirapine
Niacin deficiency
management of
Nicardipine
Nicorandil
Nicotinamide
Nicotine
Nicotinic acid
Nifedipine
Night sweats
Nikolsky’s sign
NIPAH virus encephalitis
Nitazoxanide
Nitrates
reduction assays

Nitrazepam
Nitrazoxanide
Nitric oxide
exhaled
Nitrofurantoin
Nitroglycerin
Nocardia asteroides
Nocardiosis
Nocturia
Nocturnal hypoglycemic episodes
Nodular goiter, enlarged
Nodule
autonomous
cutaneous
rheumatoid
Non-dihydropyridine calcium antagonists
Nonfatal disorder
Nongonococcal urethritis, causes of
Non-healing leg ulcer, causes of
Nonheme iron, absorption of
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
development of
grading of
Noninfectious disorders
Non-megaloblastic macrocytic anemia, causes of
Non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors
Nonobstructive atelectasis
Nonpitting edema, treatment of
Non-pitting pedal edema-myxedema
Nonpoisonous snake
Non-proliferative glomerulonephritis, causes of
Non-pulsatile neck veins
Nonshockable rhythms
Non-small cell
carcinoma
staging of
TNM staging of
lung cancer
treatment of
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs
Nonsulfonylureas-meglitinides
Nonsyncopal attacks, causes of
Nonthyroid diseases

Nontranfusion therapy
Non-tuberculous empyema, management of
Nonulcer dyspepsia
investigations of
management of
Noonan’s syndrome
Noradrenaline
Norepinephrine
Normochromic anemia, causes of
Normocytic anemia
causes of
management of
Norwalk virus
Norwegian scabies
Nosocomial infection
classification of
main groups of
reduce
types of
Nucleic acid
amplification technique
amplification tests
detection of
probe tests
Nucleocapsid
protein
Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors
Number connection test
Nutritional therapy
Nyctalopia
Nystagmus
causes of
optokinetic
rotatory
types of
vertical
Nystatin
O
Obesity
causes of
central

classification of
complications of
endocrine manifestations of
management of
mechanical complications of
metabolic complications of
pathologic consequences of
reversible causes of
severity of
treatment of
types of
Obestatin
Obiltoxaximab
Obsessive-compulsive disorder
Obstruction, degree of
Obstructive jaundice
causes of
features of
Obstructive sleep apnea, degree of
Ochronosis
Ocrelizumab
Octreotide
Ocular palsies, external
Ocular signs
Oculomotor dysfunction
Odynophagia
causes of
Ofloxacin
Olanzapine
Olestra
Olfactory nerve
Oligoarthritis, asymmetrical inflammatory
Oligomenorrhea
Oligosaccharidoses
Oliguria
causes of
severe
Olmesartan
Omacetaxine
Omalizumab
Omega-3 fatty acid
Omenn syndrome
Onchocerca volvulus

Onchocerciasis
Oncofetal antigens
Oncogenes, classification of
Ondine’s curse
Oniomania
Onycholysis
Onychomadesis
Ophthalmopathy
Ophthalmoplegia
internuclear
Opioid
agonists
poisoning
tolerance
toxicity
treatment of
Opisthotonus
Optic atrophy
Optic chiasma
Optic nerve
Oral
anticoagulant drugs
captopril test
carbohydrate
cervicofacial actinomysosis
colchicine
corticosteroids
endothelin receptor antagonists
glucose tolerance test
hypoglycemic drugs
iron therapy
duration of
methylene blue
rehydration solution
salt loading test
signs
therapy
thrush
ulcer
causes of
Orchitis
Organ toxicity
Organic brain syndrome

Organic disorders
Organism, isolation of
Organochlorine
classification of
poisoning
acute
chronic
Organophosphate
classification of
management of
poisoning
chronic
diagnosis of
Organophosphorus poisoning
acute
clinical signs of
mechanism of
Oropharyngeal dysphagia, causes of
Oropharynx swab
Orphenadrine
Orthocyanosis
Orthodeoxia
Orthopnea
Orthostatic hypotension, neurogenic
Orthostatic tremor
Orthotopic liver transplantation
Ortner’s syndrome
Oseltamivir
Osler nodes
Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome
Osmotic demyelination syndrome
Osteitis fibrosa cystica
Osteoarthritis
causes of
diagnostic features of
management of
primary
secondary
signs of
symptoms of
types of
Osteoarthropathy
hypertrophic

pulmonary
pulmonary hypertrophic,
Osteoblasts
Osteodystrophy, hereditary
Osteogenesis imperfecta
Osteomalacia
causes of
investigations of
treatment of
Osteomyelitis
Osteopenia
Osteoporosis
classification of
generalized
post-transplant
treatment of
Osteosclerosis
Ostial stenosis, coronary
Ostium primum defects
Ostium secundum defects
Otelixizumab
Otitis media
Otto Veraguth sign
Ova, ingestion of
Oval typhoid ulcers
Ovalocytes
Ovarian failure, primary
Ovarian tumors, benign
Overlap syndromes
Overnight dexamethasone suppression test
Overweight, classification of
Oxazepam
Oxcarbazepine
Oxidative stress theory
Oxygen
high concentration of
intoxication
partial pressure of
saturation
therapy
hazards of
long-term domiciliary
role of

types of
Oxyntic cells
Oxyphil cells
Oxytocin
P
Pacemakers, cardiac
Pad sign
Paget’s disease
Pagophagia
Pain
abdominal
central abdominal
characteristic triad of
duration of
episodic
intractable
radicular
Painful crisis, acute
Painful neuropathy, acute
Painless hematuria, causes of
Palatal palsy
Paliperidone
Palliative therapy
Pallidotomy
Palmar click
Palmar erythema
Palms, pigmentation of
Palpebral conjunctiva, Pallor of
Palpitation
causes of
evaluation of
Pamidronate
Pan retinal laser photocoagulation
Panacinar emphysema
Pancarditis
Pancoast’s syndrome
Pancoast’s tumor
Pancolitis
Pancreas
endocrine tumors of
Pancreatectomy

Pancreatic enzymes, activation of
Pancreatic substance, autodigestion of
Pancreaticobiliary disorders
Pancreaticogastric anastomosis
Pancreatitis
acute
alcoholic
autoimmune
chronic
causes of
chronic
calcific
severity of acute
signs of acute
symptoms of acute
Pancreatopathy, fibrocalculous
Pancretojejunostomy
Pancytopenia
causes of
Pandigital clubbing
Panic disorder
Panniculitis
Pansystolic murmur, causes of
Papillary muscle, rupture of
Papillary necrosis
Papilledema
causes of
Papilloma
Papular lesions, causes of
Para-aminosalicylic acid
Paracentesis
Paracetamol
poisoning
toxicity, mechanism of
Parachute mitral valve
Paracoccidioides brasiliensis
Paraesophageal hernia, mixed
Paraganglioma
Parainfluenza virus
Paraldehyde
Paralysis
agitans
rapid onset of

respiratory
Paralytic polio
Paramyxoviridae
Paraneoplastic syndromes
Paranoid schizophrenia
Paraplegia
complications of
management of
Paraproteinemia
Parasites
malarial
Parasitic disorders
Parasomnias
features of
types of
Parathormone
Parathyroid disorders
Parathyroid hormone
production
Parathyroidectomy
Paratyphoid fever
Parenchymal liver disease, consequences of
Parenteral iron
preparations, toxicity of
preparations, types of
therapy, indications of
Parenteral nutrition
advantages of
complications of
disadvantages of
peripheral
total
Paresthesia
Parietal cells
Parietal lobe, functions of
Parinaud’s syndrome
Parkinson’s disease
diagnosis of
drugs used in
Hoehn and Yahr stage of
idiopathic
management of
stages of

Parkinson’s plus syndromes
Parkinsons’s disease, nonmotor symptoms of
Paromomycin
Paroxetine
Paroxysmal disorder
Paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia, causes of
Partial lipodystrophy, progressive
Pasireotide
Patent ductus arteriosus
Patent foramen ovale
Pathergy test
Patrick’s test
Patterson-Brown-Kelly syndrome
Paucibacillary leprosy
Peak expiratory flow rate
Pedal edema
Pediculosis capitis
Pediculosis corporis
Pediculus humanus capitis
Pel-Ebstein fever
Pellagra
Pelvic vascular insufficiency
Pemphigoid
Pemphigus
benign familial
paraneoplastic
Pemphigus vulgaris
diagnosis of
etiology of
treatment of
Pendred syndrome
Pendular knee jerk
Penicillamine
nephropathy
Penicillin
intermediate
resistant
sensitive
Penis, anatomic defects of
Pentamidine
Pentostatin
Penumocystis jirovecii
Peptic ulcer

complications of
disease
diagnosis of
etiology of
investigations of
management of
medical management of
pathogenesis of
sites of
Percutaneous coronary intervention
Perianal itching
Pericardial biopsy
Pericardial friction rub
Pericardial inflammation
Pericardial pain
Pericardial rub
Pericardial tamponade
management of
signs of
Pericarditis
causes of
chronic constrictive
constrictive
early
fibrinous
management of
purulent
rheumatic
suppurative
Pericardium
diseases of
tuberculosis of
Perihepatitis, acute
Perinuclear antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies
Periodic acid-Schiff
Periodic limb movement disorder
Peripancreatic fluid collections, acute
Peripheral arteries, diffuse vasculopathy of
Peripheral blood
film
findings
smear
examination

stem cell transplantation
Peripheral dopamine decarboxylase inhibitors
Peripheral nerve
entrapment syndromes
lesions of
thickening, causes of
Peripheral nervous system, diseases of
Peripheral neuropathy, investigations of
Peripheral smear
Peritoneal dialysis
indications for
principles of
Peritoneum
biopsy of
gross appearance of
inflammation of
Peritonitis, bacterial
Pernicious anemia, neurological complications of
Peroral endoscopic myotomy
Perphenazine
Persistent ductus arteriosus
Persistent vomiting, causes of
Pertussis, complications of
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome
Peyer’s patches
Pharyngitis, episode of
Phenazopyridine
Phenformin
Phenothiazines
Phentermine
Phenyl alkylamines
Phenylbutazone
Phenylephrine
Phenylketonuria
Phenytoin
Pheochromocytoma
diagnosis of
familial
signs of
symptoms of
treatment of
Philadelphia chromosome
Phlebotomy

Phlegmon
Phobias
specific
Phobic disorder
classification
Phosphatase calcineurin
Phosphate
depletion
retention
stones
Phospholipids
Phosphorus repletion
Photosensitivity
cutaneous
Phototherapy
Phrenic nerve
Phthiriasis pubis
Phthirus pubis
Physiotherapy
Physostigmine
Pick’s disease
Pickwickian syndrome
Pigeon breast deformity
Pill-induced injury
Pimavanserin
Pinpoint pupil, causes of
Pinworm infection
Pioglitazone
side effects of
Piperazine citrate
Pistol shot femorals
Pitolisant
Pitting edema, treatment of
Pituitary apoplexy, management of
Pituitary dependent bilateral adrenal hyperplasia
Pituitary dysfunction, anterior
Pituitary function, anterior
Pituitary gland
functional assessment of
infarctions of
Pituitary hormones, anterior
Pituitary tumors
clinical manifestations of

investigations of
management of
treatment of
Pityriasis alba
Pityriasis rotunda
Pityriasis versicolor
skin lesions of
Pityrosporum ovale
Pizza pie’ appearances
Placental alkaline phosphatase
Plague
cutaneous
types of
Plantar fascia
Plantar fasciitis
Plantar keratoderma
Plantar response/reflex
Plaque, central necrotic area of
Plasma
aldosterone concentration
bicarbonate
cardiac biomarkers
cell
leukemia
neoplasms
proliferative disorders, classification of
exchange
therapy
fibrinogen
glucose
insulin
iron concentrations, absorption
iron-binding capacity, total
lactate dehydrogenase
noradrenaline
potassium levels
proteins
Plasmacytoma
extraosseous
solitary
Plasmapheresis
indications for
Plateau pulse

Platelet
activating factor
concentrate
transfusion, indications for
count
disorders of
enzyme cyclooxygenase, aspirin inhibits
function
disorders, classification of
test
functional disorders of
role of
transfusion
Platypnea
Pleiotropy
Pleocytosis, lymphocytic
Plethoric appearance
Pleural effusion
diagnosis of
etiology of
investigations of
pleural fluid analysis of
Pleural fluid
parameters, interpretation of
therapeutic aspiration of
Pleuritic pain
Pleuritis
Pleurodesis
Plummer’s disease
Plummer-Vinson syndrome
treatment of
Pluripotent hematopoietic stem cell
Pneumatoceles
Pneumococcal infections
treatment of
Pneumococcal meningitis
Pneumococcal peritonitis
Pneumococcal pneumonia
complications of
diagnosis of
etiology of
investigations of
management of

treatment of
Pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine
Pneumococcal vaccinations
Pneumoconiosis
causes of
rheumatoid
Pneumocystis carinii
Pneumocystis jirovecii
infection
life cycle of
pneumonia
Pneumocystis prophylaxis
Pneumonia
acute eosinophilic
alba
aspiration
atypical
bacterial
chronic eosinophilic
classification of
community-acquired
complications of
cryptogenic organizing
desquamative interstitial
eosinophilic
etiology of
general complications of
general management of
health care associated
hospital-acquired
hypostatic
interstitial
investigations of
lymphocytic interstitial
noninfective
nonresolving
nosocomial
primary
progressive
recurrent
secondary
suppurative
treatment of

ventilator-associated
Pneumonic plague
Pneumonitis
aspiration
granulomatous
interstitial
Pneumothorax
catamenial
classification of
closed
complications of
etiology of
investigations of
management of
open
spontaneous
primary spontaneous
recurrent spontaneous
treatment of
types of
Poems syndrome
Poison, types of
Poisoning
organochlorine
severity of
Poisonous snake
classification of
Poliomyelitis
Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
Polyangiitis
microscopic
Polyarteritis nodosa
classic
diagnosis of
management of
Polyarthritis
acute
causes of
chronic
migrating
symmetrical
Polychondritis, relapsing
Polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia

Polycystic kidney
disease
Polycystic liver disease
Polycystic ovary syndrome
Polycythemia
causes of
classification of
pathophysiologic classification of
secondary
vera
diagnosis of
management of
Polydipsia
Polygenic disorder
Polyglandular autoimmune syndrome
Polyglutamine, number of
Polymerase chain reaction
Polymyositis
idiopathic
Polyneuropathy
causes of
types of
Polyploidy
Polyposis coli, familial
Polysomnography
Polysplenia
Polyuria
causes of
Pontain’s murmur
Pontiac fever
Pontine myelinolysis, central
Poor coital technique
Popliteal cysts
Popliteal nodes
Poppy seeds
Porphyria
Porphyrins, structure of
Portal fibrosis, noncirrhotic
Portal hypertension
classification of
complications of
diagnosis of
etiology of

investigations of
management of
pathogenesis of
treatment of
Portal systemic shunts, types of
Portal venous pressure
measurement of
reduction of
Portosystemic shunts, complications of
Positive airway pressure ventilation, noninvasive
Positive end expiratory pressure
Posterior cerebral artery, acute bilateral
Posterior column
demyelination of
disease, causes of
syndrome
Posterior pituitary hormones
Posterolateral column disease, causes of
Posterolateral cord syndrome
Postexposure, management of
Post-kala-azar dermal leishmaniasis
Postmyocardial infarction syndrome
Post-primary tuberculosis
complications of
diagnosis of
etiology of
Post-remission therapy
Post-thrombotic syndrome
Post-transfusion purpura
Post-transplantation lymphoproliferative disorders
Postvaccinal syndromes
Potassium
balance
disorders of
chloride
depletion
distribution of
iodide
loss
perchlorate
repletion
sparing diuretics
sulfide

supplementation
Pott’s disease
Prader’s orchidometer
Prader-Willi syndrome
Pralidoxime
Pramipexole
Pramlintide
Prasugrel
Praziquantel
Prazosin
Precordium, palpation of
Prednisolone
Prednisone
Preeclampsia
Pre-erythrocytic vaccines
Pregnancy, acute fatty liver of
Premature ovarian failure
Pressure hydrocephalus, normal
Pressure, central venous
Pressure, intra-abdominal
Presyncope
Priapism
Primaquine
Primary biliary cholangitis
etiology of
investigations of
management of
Primary bronchial tumors, classification of
Primary ciliary dyskinesia
Primary hyperaldosteronism
diagnosis of
etiology of
management of
Primary hyperparathyroidism
classical symptoms of
hallmarks of
investigations of
management of
Primary hypogonadism, treatment of
Primary hypothyroidism
diagnosis of
etiology of
investigations of

management of
Primary immunodeficiency diseases, classification of
Primary myelofibrosis
investigations of
management of
Primary pulmonary tuberculosis
clinical manifestations of
diagnosis of
pathogenesis of
pathology of
Primary subarachnoid hemorrhage, treatment of
Primary tuberculosis, features of
Primary tumor, location of
Primary vasculitides, classification of
Primidone
Prinzmetal’s angina, treatment of
Prinzmetal’s variant angina
causes of
Procainamide
Procaine
Procarbazine
Proctitis
ulcerative
Proctoscopy
Proctosigmoiditis
ulcerative
Prodromal dementia
Progeria
Progestogen
Proguanil
Proinsulin level
Prolactin
Prolactinoma
Proliferative glomerulonephritis, causes of
Prolonged hypothyroidism, consequences of
Promethazine
Pronator sign
Propafenone
Propanolol
Prophylaxis
Propionibacterium acnes
Propranolol
Propylthiouracil

Prosopagnosia
Prosopalgia
Prostaglandin
analogs
Prostatic disease
Prosthetic cardiac valves
Prosthetic valve
endocarditis
types of
Prostrate
Protamine sulfate
Protease inhibitors
Proteasome inhibitors
Protein
absorption
acute phase
C system
calorie malnutrition
energy malnutrition
kinase C, activation of
losing enteropathy
loss, consequences of
metabolism
monoclonal
nuclear-regulatory
restriction
secrets variety of
synthesis, impaired
Proteinuria
classification of
control of
mild
moderate
Proteoglycans
Proteome
Proteus vulgaris
Prothrombin time
Protodiastolic sound
Proton pump inhibitors
Protoporphyria, X-linked
Protozoal parasite, demonstration of
Protozoan infections
Provocation tests

Proximal muscle weakness, symmetrical
Prurigo nodularis
Pruritus
ani
dermatological causes of
systemic causes of
Pseudo-allergic reactions
Pseudoarthrosis
Pseudobronchiectasis
Pseudobulbar palsy
Pseudochylothorax
Pseudochylous thorax
Pseudoclubbing
causes of
Pseudocoma
Pseudocyanosis
Pseudocyst
pancreatic
Pseudogout
Pseudohallucinations
Pseudohyphae
Pseudohyponatremia
causes of
Pseudohypoparathyroidism
Pseudomembrane
Pseudomembranous colitis
endoscopic appearance of
Pseudomembranous enterocolitis
Pseudomonas
aeruginosa
Pseudoparalysis
Pseudoporphyria
Pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism
Pseudo-pulsus paradoxus
Pseudotumor cerebri
Psittacosis
Psoriasis
chronic plaque
clinical manifestations of
diagnosis of
etiology of
features of
investigations

management of
plaque
skin lesions of
types of
vulgaris
treatment of
Psoriatic arthropathy, psoriatic
Psychiatric diseases
Psychiatric disorders
Psychosis
classification of
functional
organic
puerperal
Psychosomatic disorder
Psychotic disorders
Pterygium formation
Ptosis
acquired
bilateral
causes of
congenital
partial
unilateral
Pubic lice
Puddle sign
Puerperal disorders
Pulmonary arterial hypertension, idiopathic
Pulmonary disease
Pulmonary disorders
Pulmonary edema
acute
causes of
classification of
high altitude
noncardiogenic
Pulmonary embolism
causes of
diagnosis of
management of
Pulmonary emphysema
complications of
etiology of

investigations of
management of
Pulmonary eosinophilia, simple
Pulmonary eosinophilic syndromes
drugs and toxin-induced
Pulmonary fibrosis
idiopathic
types of
Pulmonary function tests
Pulmonary hemosiderosis, idiopathic
Pulmonary hypertension
causes of
obliterative
severe
treatment of
types of
WHO classifications of
Pulmonary infection, acute
Pulmonary nodule, solitary
Pulmonary restrictive disorders, severe
Pulmonary sarcoidosis, staging of
Pulmonary sulcus tumor, superior
Pulmonary syndrome
Pulmonary tuberculosis
complications of
diagnosis of
investigations of
management of
progressive
radiological features of
symptoms of
Pulmonary valve
closure
incompetence
stenosis, severe
Pulmonary valvular stenosis
Pulsatile liver, causes of
Pulse
asymmetry of
deficit
grading of
methylprednisolone
rate

therapy
volume
Pulseless
electrical activity
ventricular tachycardia
Pulsus alternans
Pulsus bigeminus
Pulsus bisferiens
Pulsus dicroticus
Pulsus paradoxus
reverse
Pulsus parvus et tardus
Pupillary reactions, interpretation of
Pure motor paraplegia, causes of
Pure neuritic leprosy
Pure red cell aplasia
Purkinje fibers
Purkinje system
Purtscher retinopathy
Pyelonephritis
acute
atrophic
chronic
obstructive
reflux-associated
Pygmies
Pyoderma gangrenosum
Pyogenic liver abscess
investigations of
management of
Pyogenic meningitis, treatment of
Pyopneumothorax
causes of
Pyothorax
Pyrantel pamoate
Pyrazinamide
Pyrexia of unknown origin
etiology of
investigations of
types of
Pyridoxine
deficiency
Pyrimethamine

Pyromania
Pyrophosphate arthropathy
Pyruvate kinase deficiency
Q
Q fever
Quadriplegia, causes of
Quadruple therapy
Queckenstedt’s test
Quetiapine
Quinapril
Quincke’s sign
Quinidine
Quinine
Quinolones
side effects of

R
Rabies
etiology of
postexposure prophylaxis of
prevention of
treatment of
Rabson-Mendenhall syndrome
Rachycardia, resting
Radial artery
Radiation exposure
effects of
management of
Radiation injury
Radiation necrosis
Radiation pneumonitis
Radiation sickness
acute
Radiation therapy
Radiation, types of
Radioactive iodine
therapy
uptake, uses of
Radioisotope
Radiometric methods
Radionuclide lymphoscintigraphy
Radionuclide ventilation
Radiotherapy
Raised intracranial pressure
causes of
features of
Raised intracranial tension
treatment of
Raloxifene
Ramsay Hunt syndrome
Ranke complex
Ranolazine
Ransglutaminase
Ranson scoring system
Rapamycin
Rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis

causes of
investigations of
treatment of
Rash
discoid
erythematous
generalized
maculopapular
malar
nevirapine-induced
Rasmussen’s aneurysm
Rat
control of
flea bite
Rat-bite fever
Raxibacumab
Raymond-Cestan syndrome
Raynaud’s disease
Raynaud’s phenomenon
causes of
primary
Raynaud’s syndrome, control of
Reactions, withdrawal
Reactive airways viral syndrome
Rebeitz-Kolodny-Richardson syndrome
Recessive disease, X-linked
Recessive disorders, X-linked
Recessive traits, X-linked
Recessive vasopressin receptor mutation, X-linked
Recklinghausen disease
Rectal bleeding
Rectal varices
Recurrent variceal bleeding, prevention of
Red blood cell
disorders of
saline-washed
Red cell
casts
concentrates
count
destruction
disorders
distribution width

enzyme deficiencies
factors
indices
protoporphyrin
Red colored urine, causes of
Red flag signs
Red Man syndrome
Reed-Sternberg cells
Refeeding syndrome
treatment of
Reflex
tachycardia
Reflux esophagitis
severe
Reflux nephropathy
Reflux, esophageal
Refractory epilepsy
surgical treatment of
treatment of
Rehydration
Reid index
Reidel’s thyroiditis, treatment of
Reitan’s number connection
Reiter’s syndrome
classical triad of
Renal abscess
Renal amyloidosis
Renal artery
stenosis
bilateral
thrombosis
Renal azotemia
Renal biopsy
complications of
Renal calculi, recurrent
Renal calculus formation
Renal disease
diabetic
management of
Renal disorder
Renal dysfunction
hepatic encephalopathy, progressive
Renal failure

acute
chronic
Renal function tests
Renal glycosuria
diagnosis of
Renal hypertrophy
Renal hypoperfusion
Renal osteodystrophy
Renal parenchymal disease
Renal replacement techniques, aim of
Renal replacement therapy
options of
Renal stones
causes of
types of
Renal syndrome
pulmonary
Renal transplantation
Renal tuberculosis
Renal tubular acidosis
types of
Renal tubular disorder
Renal tubular epithelial cell injury
Renal vessel diseases
Renin hypertension
high
normal
Renin, mechanism of action of
Renin-angiotensin
aldosterone system
Repaglinide
Reperfusion, signs of
Reserpine
Reslizumab
Respiratory acidosis
causes of
Respiratory alkalosis, causes of
Respiratory distress syndrome, acute
Respiratory disturbance index
Respiratory failure
acute
features of
management of

perioperative
types of
Respiratory function tests
Respiratory system
Respiratory tract
Restiform body
Resting basal metabolic rate
Restless leg syndrome
Resuscitation, cardiopulmonary
Resynchronization therapy
Retching
Reticulocyte
count
production index
Reticulocytopenia
Reticulocytosis, causes of
Retina
Retinal arteries, corkscrew-shaped
Retinal complications
Retinal disease
Retinal hemorrhage, high altitude
Retinal injury
Retinal-neuro-cutaneous cavernous hemangioma syndrome
Retinoic acid
Retinoids
Retinol binding protein
Retinopathy
diabetic
hypertensive
pigmentary
Retrograde ejaculation
Retroperitoneal fibrosis, diagnosis of
Retroviruses
Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
Reye’s syndrome
Rhabdomyolysis
Rhabdomyoma
cardiac
Rheumatic aortic
regurgitation
stenosis
Rheumatic fever
acute

attack of
categories of
diagnosis of
prevention of
prophylaxis of
treatment of
Rheumatic heart disease, chronic valve lesions of
Rheumatism, nonarticular
Rheumatoid arthritis
articular manifestations of
clinical manifestations of
complications of
diagnosis of
etiology of
extra-articular manifestations of
investigations of
juvenile
management of
pleuropulmonary manifestations of
treatment of
Rhinitis
Rhinosinusitis
Rhyroid storm
Rhyrotoxicosis
Rib notching
Riboflavin
deficiency
Rice-Field fever
Rice-water stool
Ricinus communis
Rickets
investigations of
prevention of
treatment of
Rickettsial diseases
Riddoch’s sign
Riedel’s thyroiditis
Rifabutin
Rifampicin
Rifampin
uses of
Rifapentine
Rifle criteria

Rilpivirine
Riluzole
Rimonabant
Ring abscess
Ring chromosome
Risperidone
Ristocetin aggregation test
Risus sardonicus
Ritonavir
Rituximab
Rivaroxaban
Rivastigmine
River blindness
Rizatriptan
Robertsonian translocation
Rodent ulcer
Roger’s murmur
Romberg’s sign
Romberg’s test
Romhilt-Estes point score system
Romiplostim
Root pain
Ropinirole
Rosai-Dorfman disease
Rose Bengal staining
Rose spots
Rosenbach’s sign
Rosenberg-Patterson criteria
Rotavirus
Roth spots
Rothmund-Thomson syndrome
Rotigotine
Rotor syndrome
Roundworm
infection
infestations
Rubella syndrome
congenital
Rugger Jersy appearance
Rumination syndrome
features of
Russell-Silver
dwarfism

syndrome
Rusty’ sputum
Rye classification
Rytand’s murmur
S
Saber shin
Sabin-Feldman methylene blue dye test
Saccharin, nasal clearance of
Saccharomyces boulardii
Saccular aneurysm
Sacroiliac joint
involvement of
Sacroiliitis
Saddle nose
deformity
Safe transfusion procedures
Saint vitus dance
Salbutamol
Salicylate poisoning
Salivary gland
infection
involvement
tumor
S-allylcysteine
Salmeterol
Salmonella enteriditis
Salmonella osteomyelitis
Salmonella paratyphi
Salmonella typhi
Salt absorbing epithelia
Salt-and-pepper appearance
Sanguineous sputum
SAPHO syndrome
SAPPORO classification criteria, revised
Saquinavir
Sarcoidosis
investigations of
management of
pulmonary
Sarcomatoid carcinoma
Sarcoptes scabiei

Sausage digits
Sausage-shaped digit
Saxagliptin
Scabies
diagnosis of
management of
systemic complications of
Scarlet fever
Scarring alopecia
Schilling test
stages of
Schirmer tear test
Schistocytes
Schizoaffective disorder
Schizophrenia
acute
catatonic
course of
diagnosis of
diagnostic criteria for
investigations of
management of
psychosis
symptoms of
syndrome
treatment of
types of
Schizophrenic disorders, types of
Schizophreniform disorder
Schmidt syndrome
Schneider’s first rank symptoms of schizophrenia
Schober test, modified
Sciatic nerves
Scissoring gait
Scleritis
Scleroderma
diagnosis of
systemic sclerosis
Sclerosing cholangitis, primary
Sclerosing encapsulating peritonitis
Sclerosing thyroiditis
Sclerosis
amyotrophic lateral

capillary
cutaneous systemic
Sclerotherapy
complications of
Scoliosis
Scorbutic rosary
Scorpion bite
Scorpion sting bite
diagnosis of
treatment of
Scorpion venom
Scrofula
Scrofuloderma
Scrotal tongue
Scrotum, edema of
Scurvy
deficiency of
types of
Seasonal influenza virus
Seborrheic dermatitis
treatment of
Second heart sound, abnormalities of
Secondary bacterial infections, treatment of
Secondary hyperaldosteronism, causes of
Secondary hyperlipidemia, causes of
Secondary hypertension
causes of
investigations of
Secondary hypogonadism, treatment of
Secondary infection, features of
Secondary myelofibrosis, causes of
Secondary parkinsonism, causes of
Secondary polycythemia, causes of
Secondary tuberculosis
complications of
diagnosis of
etiology of
fate of
Secretory diarrhea
Sedation
Sedative drug poisoning
Segmental glomerulosclerosis
Segmental proliferative glomerulonephritis

Segmental vitiligo
Seizure
atonic
causes of
classification of
febrile
generalized
management of
new classification of
recurrence of
types
withdrawal
Seminal plasma
Seminal vesicle disease
Semisynthetic derivatives
Senile degenerative aortic stenosis
Sensory
ataxia
aura
loss
upper border of
upper level of
nerve involvement
polyneuropathy
Sentinel trauma
Sepsis
etiology of
management
principles of
neutropenic
puerperal
severe
severity of
syndrome
Septic abortion
Septic embolism
Septic infarcts/abscess
Septic joint
Septic shock
Septicemia
meningococcal
Septicemic plague
Sequestration crisis

Serological test
Seronegative arthritis
Seronegative spondyloarthropathies
Serositis
Serotonin pathways, abnormal
Serotonin receptor antagonists
Serotonin reuptake inhibitors, selective
Serotonin specific reuptake inhibitors
Serotonin syndrome
Serous pericarditis
Serratia marcescens
Serum
albumin
alkaline phosphatase
aminotransferases
amylase
angiotensin converting enzyme
ascites albumin gradient
aspartate transferase
autoantibodies
bicarbonate
bilirubin
biochemistry
calcium
concentrations, correction of
cholesterol
chromogranin
creatine kinase
creatinine
electrolytes
enzymes
ferritin
globulins
glucose
homocysteine levels
immunoglobulins
iron
profile
lipase
methylmalonic acid
phosphate
protein
electrophoresis

retinol level
sickness
acute
sodium
thyroid stimulating hormone/thyrotropin
thyroxine, total
transaminases
transferrin
receptor
saturation
triiodothyronine, total
tumor markers
uric acid
vitamin B 12
Severe acute asthma, treatment of
Severe anemia, chronic compensated
Severe dengue, mechanism of
Severe depression, management of
Severe exacerbation, treatment of
Severe hypercalcemia, management of
Severe hyperkalemia, management of
Severe malaria, treatment of
Severe pulmonary stenosis, features of
Sex hormone-binding globulin
Sexual dysfunction
Sexual impulses
Sexual transmission
Sexually transmitted infections
Sézary syndrome
Shagreen patch
Shawl sign
Sheehan’s syndrome
treatment of
Shelley sign
Sherman sign
Shigella dysenteriae
Shigellosis
Shingles, complications of
Shock
anaphylactic
anaphylactoid
cardiogenic
causes of

classification of
electric
hypovolemic
management of
neurogenic
pathogenesis of
stages of
types of
Shockable rhythms
Shone’s complex
Short course chemotherapy, advantages of
Short stature
causes of
constitutional
differential diagnosis of
familial
genetic
Short-course chemotherapy
Short-term memory
disturbances of
Shoshin beriberi
Shoulder impingement syndrome
Shuffling gait
Sibutramine
Sicca complex
Sick euthyroid syndrome
Sick sinus syndrome
Sickle cell
anemia
complications of
long-term complications of
crises
disease
trait
Sickle solubility test
Sickling test
Sideroblastic anemia
classification of
hereditary
Sigmoidoscopy
Sildenafil
Silicosis
Simple coal-worker’s pneumoconiosis, grading of

Simultanagnosia
Single best test
Single organ disease, symptomatic
Sinus
arrhythmia
bradycardia
cavernous
histiocytosis
node
rhythm
tachycardia
tract formation
venosus defects
Sinusitis
acute
chronic
Sinusoidal obstruction syndrome
Sirolimus
toxicity of
Sister Mary Joseph’s node
Sitagliptin
Situs inversus
totalis
Six minute walk test
Sjögren’s syndrome
classification of
clinical manifestations of
diagnosis of
management of
Sjögren-Larsson syndrome
Skeletal fluorosis
Skeletal system
Skeleton, tetracycline labeling of
Skin
acute spreading infection of
appendages, disorders of
benign lesions of
biopsy
blackish discoloration of
blistering disorders of
changes
dry
hardening of

hemangioma of
hyperpigmentation, generalized
infiltration of
lesion
malignancy
etiology of
pathogenesis of
malignant melanoma of
manifestations
necrosis
nodules, erythematous
pigmentary disorders of
pigmentation
premalignant lesions of
prick tests
punch biopsy
rash
scrapings
squamous cell carcinoma of
tags
tumors
ulcers, infections of
wounds, surgical drainage of
xerosis of
Sleep apnea
central
obstructive
syndromes
types of
Sleep disorders
circadian rhythm
Sleep hypopnea syndrome
Sleep maintenance insomnia
Sleep offset insomnia
Sleep onset insomnia
Sleep paralysis
Sleep-related movement disorders
Sling procedure
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis
Slit-skin smears
Small cell carcinoma
diagnosis of
staging of

treatment of
Small muscle wasting, causes of
Smallpox
prophylaxis of
treatment of
Smudge cells
Snake bite
complications of
management of
severity of
Snake venom
Social phobia
Sodium
absorption of
balance
disorders of
bicarbonate
channels, cardiac
concentration
cromoglycate
dietary restriction of
excretion
regulation of
ferric gluconate
fluoride
fractional excretion of
intake
iopodate
ipodate
nitrite
nitroprusside
oxybate
retention
thiosulfate
tungstate
valproate
Soft tissue calcification
Sokal score
Solid tumors
Solitary pulmonary nodule, chest X-ray of
Somatic delusions
Somatoform disorder
types of

Somatostatin
analogues
receptor ligands
Somatostatinoma
Somatotrope pituitary adenoma
Somatotroph adenoma
Somogyi phenomenon
confirmation of
Sorafenib
Sore throat
Spastic paraplegia
causes of
Spectrin
Speech
abnormal
and language deficits
and swallowing
language pathologists
Spermatic cord
Spermatogenesis
Spherical cysts
Spherocytes
Spherocytosis
hereditary
Sphingolipidoses
Spider naevi
Spina bifida
Spinal arachnoiditis, chronic
Spinal cord
compression
causes of
signs of
symptoms of
disease
patterns of
subacute
injury
involvement of
lesions of
syndrome, noncompressive
Spinal epidural hematoma
Spinal muscular atrophy
Spinal pain

types of
Spinal root, lesions of
Spine
Spinocerebellar ataxia
Spiramycin
Spirometry interpretation
Spironolactone
Splanchnic vasodilation
Spleen
amyloidosis of
functions of
Splenectomy
indications of
mechanism of action of
Splenic rupture
atraumatic
causes of
Splenomegaly, mechanism of
Splinter hemorrhage
Split hand phenomenon
Split’ livers
Spondylitis
psoriatic
rheumatoid
Spondyloarthritides
Spondyloarthritis
Spondyloarthropathies
Spongiform pustules
Spontaneous atrophic hypothyroidism
diagnosis of
etiology of
management of
Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
management of
Spontaneous hemorrhages
Spontaneous mast cell degranulation
Spontaneous pneumothorax
secondary
types of
Sporadic goiter
Sporothrix schenckii
Sports abuse
Spotty perifollicular pigment

Spurious polycythemia
Sputum
direct microscopic examination of
tests
Squamous cell carcinoma
Square root sign
ST elevation myocardial infarction
St Louis encephalitis
Stable angina
management of
pectoris
Stable plaques
Staghorn calculi
Stair climbing test
Stanford anatomical classification
Staphylococcal endocarditis
Staphylococcal infections, treatment of
Staphylococcal pneumonia
Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome
Staphylococcal septicemia
Staphylococcus aureus
Staphylococcus epidermidis
Starry sky appearance
Starry sky pattern
Stasis
Statin
therapy
Status anginosus
Status asthmaticus
management of
Status epilepticus
complications of
etiology of
generalized convulsive
management of
nonconvulsive
Status migrainosus
Stavudine
Steatorrhea
Steatosis
alcoholic
non-alcoholic
Steeping method

Stellwag’s sign
Stem cell
suppression of
transplant
transplantation, autologous
Stenosis
mild pulmonary
pulmonary
Stenotic anterior mitral valve leaflet
Stenotic valvular heart disease, moderate
Sterile pyuria
causes of
Sterile thrombus, formation of
Sternal contact sign
Sternal tenderness
Steroid
contraindications of
indication of
methyl prednisolone
psychosis
sparing agents
therapy
role of
types of
Stevens-Johnson syndrome
signs of
symptoms of
Stierlin sign
Stiff-Man syndrome
Still’s disease
Still’s murmur
Stokes-Adams-Morgagni attacks
Stomach
diseases of
fundus of
Stomatitis, angular
Stomatocytosis
Stomping gait
Stones
triple
Stony dullness
Stool antigen detection tests
Stool-bulking agents

Straight back syndrome
Streptococcal antibody tests
Streptococcal antigens
Streptococcal bacteremia
Streptococcal gangrene
Streptococcal impetigo
Streptococcal infections
Streptococcal myositis
Streptococcal pharyngitis
Streptococcal super antigens
Streptococcal toxic shock syndrome
Streptococcus agalactiae
Streptococcus gallolyticus
Streptococcus milleri
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Streptococcus pyogenes
Streptococcus viridans
Streptokinase
Streptomyces mediterranei
Streptomycin
Streptozotocin
Stress
disorder, post-traumatic
echocardiography
incontinence
testing
ulcer
prophylaxis
Stridor
String sign
String test
Stroke
classification of
differential diagnosis of
hemorrhagic
ischemic
localization, clinical features
mimickers, functional
prevention of
progressing
secondary prevention of
types of
Strongyloides stercoralis

Strongyloidiasis
diagnosis of
management of
treatment of
Strontium ranelate
Struvite stones
Stupor
Sturge-Weber syndrome
Stuttering hemiplegia
Subaortic stenosis, idiopathic
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
causes of
differential diagnosis of
treatment of
Subclinical hyperthyroidism
causes of
etiology of
Subclinical hypothyroidism, causes of
Subconjunctival hemorrhage
Subcutaneous emphysema
Subcutaneous nodules
Subcutaneous tissue
Subcutaneous tophus
Subdural empyema
Subdural hemorrhage
Subependymal giant cell astrocytoma
Subependymal nodule
Subepidermal immunobullous diseases
Subepidermal vasculature leads
Subfulminant hepatic failure
Subhyaloid hemorrhage
Subleukemic leukemia
Submammary folds
Subperiosteal hemorrhage
Substance abuse
signs of
symptoms of
Substance intoxication
Substance misuse disorder
Substitution therapy
Subungual hemorrhages
Subvalvular aortic stenosis
Sucralfate

Sucrose hemolysis test
Sudden cardiac death
causes of
Suicidal impulses
Sulcus tumor syndrome, superior
Sulfameathoxazole
Sulfasalazine
Sulfatidoses
Sulfation
Sulfonamides
Sulfonylureas
Sulfur grains
Sulphonamides, side effects of
Sulphonylurea
Sumatriptan
Sun exposure
Sunitinib
Sunstroke, first aid for
Superior vena cava
obstruction, causes of
syndrome
causes of
management of
Suprabasal blister
Supranuclear palsy, progressive
Supratentorial herniation
Supravalvular aortic stenosis
Suredone
Suzman’s sign
Swamp fever
Swan-neck deformity
Sweat electrolytes
Sweat glands, abnormal
Sweet’s syndrome
Swelling
Swine flu
Swine influenza virus
Swineherd’s disease
Swollen extremities, bilateral
Sydenham’s chorea
treatment of
Sympathomimetic amine
Synchronized intermittent mandatory ventilation

Syncope
cardiac
causes of
exertional
Syncytial virus, respiratory
Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone
causes of
secretion, diagnosis of
types of
Synkinesis
Synovial cysts
Synovial fluid analysis
Syphilis
benign tertiary
cardiovascular
classification of
congenital
course of
diagnosis of
infantile congenital
late congenital
latent
management of
meningovascular
primary
acquired
secondary
stage of
Syphilitic aortic regurgitation
Syphilitic osteochondritis
Syphilitic periostitis
Syringobulbia
Syringomyelia
pathogenesis of
Systemic acidosis, correction of
Systemic amyloidosis
Systemic anaphylactic reactions, causes of
Systemic anaphylaxis, mechanism of
Systemic anthrax
Systemic antibiotics
Systemic corticosteroids
Systemic disease, acute
Systemic glucocorticoids

Systemic inflammatory response syndrome
Systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
classification of
management of
Systemic Lupus International Collaborating Clinics
Systemic mastocytosis
Systemic metabolic ketoacidosis
Systemic miliary tuberculosis
Systemic nocardia infection
Systemic sclerosis
clinical manifestations of
diagnosis of
management of
signs of
symptoms of
Systemic secondary amyloidosis
Systemic thromboembolism
Systemic vasculitis
Systemic venous hypertension
Systolic blood pressure
reduction of
Systolic diastolic murmur
Systolic dysfunction
Systolic heart failure
Systolic murmurs
causes of
T
T wave inversions, causes of
Tabes dorsalis
Tachyarrhythmias
Tachycardia
causes of
supraventricular
Tachycardiac palpitations
Tachykinins
Tachypnea
extreme
Tacrine
Tacrolimus
toxicity of

Taenia echinococcus
Taenia solium
eggs of
life cycle of
Takayasu’s arteritis
Talc granulomatosis
Tall stature, causes of
Tamiflu
Tamm-Horsfall mucoprotein
Tamm-Horsfall protein
Tamponade, cardiac
Tangiers disease
Tapeworm
drugs treatment of
Target organ damage
Tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase
Taynaud’s phenomenon, secondary
T-cell
depletion, mechanism of
lymphoblastic leukemia
Telangiectasia
oculocutaneous
periungual
Telithromycin
Telmisartan
Temazepam
Temporal arteritis
Temporal artery biopsy
Temporal lobe
anteromedial
seizures
Temporary oliguria
Tenderness, abdominal
Tendinitis
types of
Teneligliptin
Tenesmus
Tennis elbow
Tenofovir
Tensilon test
Tension pneumothorax
etiology of
investigations of

signs of
treatment of
Tension type headache
Teratogenicity
Terbutaline
Terfenadine
Teriparatide
Terry’s nails
Tesofensine
Testicular atrophy
Testicular disorders
Testicular tumors, nonseminomatous
Testis
Testosterone
enanthate
replacement
Tetanospasmin, actions of
Tetanus
generalized
management of
neonatal
treatment of
Tetany
causes of
Tetracycline
side effects of
Tetrahydrofolate, formation of
Tetralogy of Fallot
Tetrazepam
Thalassemia
genetic of
intermedia
major
syndrome
classical
Thalassemic facies
Thalassemic syndromes
Thalidomide
Thallium
Theophylline
Thermogenesis
Thermoplasty, bronchial
Thiacetazone

Thiaminase
Thiamine
deficiency
causes of
clinical syndromes of
consequences of
pyrophosphate
Thiazide
diuretics
Thiazolidinediones
Thienopyridines
Thimble bladder
Thionamides
Thioridazine
Thioxanthenes
Third degree atrioventricular block
Third degree heart block
Third heart sound
causes of
significance of
Third lumbar space
Thoracotomy, exploratory
Threadworm infection
Throat swab culture
Thrombi, microvascular
Thromboangiitis obliterans
Thrombocytopenia
autoimmune
causes of
heparin induced
management of
persistent
Thrombocytosis
causes of
Thromboembolic disease
Thromboembolism
pulmonary
Thrombolysis
Thrombolytic agents
Thrombolytic therapy
complications of
Thrombophlebitis
Thrombopoietin

Thrombosis
Thrombotic episodes
Thrombotic occlusion
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
Thrombus
formation
Thumb sign
Thymic aplasia, congenital
Thyroglobulin
Thyroid
acropachy
antibody
autoantibody tests
cancer
crisis
disease
subclinical
disorders
dysfunction
evaluation, basic
function tests
indications for
gland
ultrasound of
hormone
deficiency of
nodule, solitary
ophthalmopathy
treatment of
peroxidase enzyme
stimulating
hormone
immunoglobulin
storm
ultrasound of
Thyroidectomy
preparation for
subtotal
Thyroiditis
autoimmune
causes of
granulomatous
invasive fibrous

ligneous
postpartum
subacute
Thyrotoxic crisis
Thyrotoxicosis
causes of
complications of
etiology of
eye signs of
factitia
investigations of
management of
primary
signs of
subclinical
Thyrotroph adenoma
Thyrotropin releasing hormone stimulation test
Thyroxine
Tiagabine
Tic
douloureux
Ticagrelor
Ticlopidine
Tidal dialysis
Tigecycline
Tinea corporis
Tinea cruris
Tinea manuum
Tinea versicolor
Tinidazole
Tiotropium
Tipranavir
Tirofiban
Tissue
hypoxia
nature of
Tizanidine
Tobacco Grower’s lung
Todd’s paralysis
Toes
clubbing of
subluxation of
Tofacitinib

Tolosa-Hunt syndrome
Tongue
mucous membrane of
solid tumors of
wasting with atrophy
Tonsillectomy
Topical corticosteroids, classification of
Topiramate
Topoisomerase inhibitors
Torcetrapib
Torsades de pointes
Total leukocyte count
Tourniquet test
Toxic
dilatation of colon
epidermal necrolysis
hepatitis, direct
megacolon
multinodular goiter
shock syndrome
solitary adenoma/nodule
substances
Toxicity
acute
chronic
types of
Toxic-metabolic theory
Toxidrome
cholinergic
Toxin
removal of
specific antidotes
Toxoplasma
choroioretinitis
encephalitis
gondii
life cycle of
Toxoplasmosis
clinical manifestations of
congenital
diagnosis of
etiology of
management of

Trace elements, classification of
Tracheal suction
Tracheobronchial stents
Tracheostomy
Traction theory
Tramadol
Tranexamic acid
Transabdominal ultrasound scan
Transarterial embolisation
Transbronchial biopsy
Transcatheter aortic valve replacement
Transcranial magnetic stimulation, single-pulse
Transcriptase inhibitors, reverse
Transesophageal echocardiography
Transfusion associated hepatitis
Transfusion
medicine
siderosis
therapy
Transient global amnesia
Transient hypogammaglobulinemia
Transient ischemic attacks
Transient myocardial ischemia
Transjugular intrahepatic
portocaval shunt
portosystemic shunt
Transjugular liver biopsy
Transmissible spongiform encephalopathy
Transmural myocardial infarct
Transplacental transmission
Trans-septal balloon mitral valvotomy
Transthoracic electric shock
Transtubular potassium gradient
Transudative pleural effusion, causes of
Transverse myelitis
causes of
Trastuzumab
Traube’s sign
Traube’s space
Trauma
severe
Traumatic pneumothorax
Traumatic splenic rupture

Traveler’s diarrhea
causes of
Tremor
causes of
Trendelenburg gait
Trephine biopsy
Treponema pallidum
demonstration of
Treponemal antibody tests
Trepopnea
Treptococcal pneumonia
Tretinoin
Triamcinolone ointment
Triamterene
Triazolam
Trichomonas vaginalis
Trichophyton schoenleinii
Trichotillomania
Trichrome vitiligo
Trichuriasis
Trichuris trichiura
Tricuspid opening snap
Tricuspid regurgitation
causes of
functional
organic
severe chronic
Tricuspid stenosis
causes of
Tricuspid valve
Tricyclic antidepressants
Trientine dihydrochloride
Trigeminal nerve
Trigeminal neuralgia
causes of
treatment of
Triglycerides
Trihexyphenidyl
Triiodothyronine
Trimethroprim
Triorthocresyl phosphate poisoning
Triptans
Trisomy

mechanism of
Tropheryma whipplei
Trophic pituitary hormones
Trophozoite
Tropical malabsorption syndrome, idiopathic
Tropical pancreatitis
Tropical pulmonary eosinophilia
diagnosis of
differential diagnosis of
management of
treatment of
Tropical splenomegaly syndrome
treatment of
Tropical sprue
treatment of
Troponins, cardiac
Trousseau syndrome
Trousseau’s sign
Trousseau’s syndrome
Truelove and Witts’ severity index
Truncal ataxia
Trypanosoma cruzi
Trypsin, activation of
Trypsinogen
Tubercular meningitis
complications of
Tuberculin
skin test
test -,
Tuberculoid leprosy
lesions of
Tuberculoma
Tuberculosis
abdominal
chemoprophylaxis
chest X-ray of
diagnosis of
endobronchial
endotracheal
extrapulmonary
sites of
infection
latent

intestinal
laryngeal
management of
meningitis
peritoneal
post-primary
primary
pulmonary
severe
sites of primary
solid organ
treatment of
Tuberculous
arthritis
empyema
foci
meningitis
osteomyelitis
peritonitis
Tuberculous pleural effusion
complications of
etiology of
investigations of
management of
Tuberculous pyonephrosis
Tuberous sclerosis
complex
Tubular breathing
Tubular cell injury
Tubular damage
Tubular necrosis, acute
Tubule
proximal
Tubulointerstitial diseases
Tubulointerstitial nephropathy
Tumor
benign
epithelial
cardiac
classification of
hypothalamic
infiltration
lysis

mechanism of
syndrome
markers
mediastinal
metastatic
necrosis factor
neuroendocrine
pituitary
suppressor genes
surgical biopsy of
trans-sphenoidal removal of
types of
Turner’s syndrome
Typhoid
complications of
fever
chronic carriers of
complications of
diagnosis of
etiology of
investigations of
prevention of
treatment of
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors
U
Ulcer
characteristic triad of
dyspepsia
mucosal
multiple
Ulcerative colitis
extraintestinal manifestations of
investigations of
treatment of
Ulnar deviation
Ultrasound, abdominal
Ultraviolet radiation
Umbilical cord blood
Undulant fever
Unilateral ptosis, causes of
Unipolar disorder

Upper gastrointestinal bleeding
causes of
etiology of
investigations of
management of
Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy
complications of
contraindications of
indications of
Upper urinary tract infections
causes of
management of
Uranium
Urate crystal deposition
Urate nephropathy
Urate-lowering drugs, indications for
Ureaplasma urealyticum
Urea-splitting bacteria
Uremia
chronic
Urethral discharge, management of
Urethral hypermotility
Urethritis
chlamydial
nongonococcal
Urethritism, nonspecific
Urge incontinence
Uric acid
levels, measurement of
stones
Uridine diphosphate-glucuronyltransferase
Urinary
alkalinization
amylase
bladder
nerve supply of
casts
types of
catheterization
catheter-related infections
copper
cortisol
incontinence

infection, superimposition of
oxalate stones
potassium loss
sodium
tract
candidiasis of
tuberculosis of
tract infection
acute
anatomic classification of
causes of
female
lower
male
recurrent
upper
tract obstruction
causes of
chronic
urobilinogen
Urine
alkalinization of
analysis
biochemistry
color, interpretation of
protein electrophoresis
tests
urobilinogen
Urogenital
lesions
surgery
Urography
Urokinase
Uropathy, obstructive
Ursodeoxycholic acid
Urticaria
causes of
Urticarial vasculitis
Urticarial, classification of
Uterus, prolapse of
Uveitis

V
Vaccine
types of
Vagal theory
Vagus nerve stimulation
Valproate
levetiracetam
Valproic acid
Valsalva aneurysm, ruptured sinus of
Valsalva maneuver
modified
phases of
Valsartan
Valve
leaflets, closure of
replacement, percutaneous
types of
Valvular aortic stenosis
Valvular disorders
Valvular distortion
Valvular dysfunction
Valvular endocarditis
Valvular heart disease
Valvular lesion
differential diagnosis of
Valvular pneumothorax
Valvuloplasty
Vanadium
Vaptans, mechanism of action of
Varenicline
Variceal bleeding
primary prevention of
Varicella
complications of
zoster immune globulin
zoster virus
infections
Varicocele
Varicose veins
Variola
Vascular dementia
Vascular disease

peripheral
Vascular disorders
Vascular endothelial growth factor inhibitors
Vascular stigmata
Vascular theory
Vascular thrombosis
Vasculitis
classification of
rheumatoid
Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide
Vasoconstrictor therapy
Vaso-occlusive crisis
Vasopressin
Vasovagal syncope, classical
Vaughan-Williams classification
Veins, autologous
Vena cava syndrome, superior
Venezuelan encephalitis
Veno-occlusive disease
Venous hypertension
Venous obstruction
Venous sinus thrombosis
Venous stasis
Venous stroke
Venous thrombosis
treatment of
Venovenous hemodiafiltration, continuous
Venovenous hemofiltration
Ventilation
complications of
noninvasive
Ventilator-associated pneumonia, prevention of
Ventilatory defect
obstructive
restrictive
Ventricular aneurysm
Ventricular arrhythmias
Ventricular assist devices
Ventricular asystole
Ventricular dilation
Ventricular dysfunction
Killip classification of
Ventricular ectopics

Ventricular failure
Ventricular fibrillation
diagnosis of
management of
treatment of
Ventricular free wall, rupture of
Ventricular gallop
Ventricular hypertrophy
Ventricular premature beats
Ventricular pressure curve
Ventricular rate, control of
Ventricular relaxation
Ventricular remodeling
Ventricular septal defect
congenital
Ventricular septal rupture
Ventricular septum, rupture of
Ventricular tachyarrhythmia
Ventricular tachycardia
causes of
Ventricular volume overload, left
Verapamil
metabolism of
Verner-Morrison syndrome
Verrucous endocarditis
Vertebra, lesions of
Vertebral artery dissection
Vertebral diseases
Vertebral pain
Vertigo
benign paroxysmal positional
causes of
Vesicoureteral reflux, congenital
Vesicular breath sounds
Vesiculobullous lesions
Vessel disease
small
triple
Vessel stroke, small
Vestibular migraine
Vestibular schwannoma
Vibrio cholerae
Vigabatrin

Vigouroux sign
Vildagliptin
Vinblastine
Viper bite, management of
Vipoma
Viral core
Viral encephalitis
Viral genome
Viral hepatitis
causes of
epidemiology of
etiology of
treatment of
types of
Viral infections
Viral meningitis
Viral replication
Virchow’s node
Virchow’s triad
Viridans streptococci
Virus
isolation of
types of
Visceral arteries
Visceral hypersensitivity
Visceral leishmaniasis
Vision changes
Visual acuity, loss of
Visual agnosia
Visual aura
Visual field
defect
examination
Visual hallucinations
Visual impairment
Visual loss
Vitamin A
deficiency
causes of
diagnosis of
treatment of
functions of
prophylactic

sources of
supplementation
toxicity
Vitamin B complex
Vitamin B 1 deficiency
Vitamin B 12
absorption
mechanism of
deficiency
levels
metabolism
neuropathy
role of
therapy
Vitamin B 2
Vitamin C
deficiency
causes of
level
prophylaxis
Vitamin D
deficiency
causes of
metabolism of
disorders of
role of
supplementation
two forms of
Vitamin deficiency
Vitamin E
Vitamin K
deficiency
causes of
dependent coagulation factors
Vitamin supplements
Vitamin, water-soluble
Vitiligo
classification of
etiology of
fulminans
gradate
mucosal

quadrichrome
surgical treatment for
systemic treatment for
treatment of
universal
vulgaris
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome
Voice, hoarseness of
Vomiting
causes of
mechanism of
treatment of
von Graefe’s sign
von Hippel-Lindau disease
von Willebrand disease
von Willebrand factor
functions of
Vulvovaginal candidiasis
W
Waardenburg syndrome
Waddling gait
Waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia
Waldeyer’s ring
Walking man sign
Walk-through angina
Warfarin
antidotes of
therapy
reversing
Warm antibody immunohemolytic anemia
Warning signs
Water balance, disorders of
Water depletion, primary
Water deprivation test
Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome
Watermelon’ stomach
Watson’s water hammer pulse
Weakness
severe
Webbed neck
Weber’s syndrome

Weeping erosions
Wegener’s granulomatosis
Weight bearing joints
Weight gain
reversible causes of
Weight loss
causes of
severe
types of
Weil Felix test
Weil’s disease
signs of
symptoms of
Weil’s syndrome
components of
Weingarten syndrome
Wells probability score
Wells scoring system
Wenckebach block phenomenon
Werner syndrome
Wernicke’s aphasia
Wernicke’s disease
Wernicke’s encephalopathy
Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome
Weskamp-Cotlier syndrome
West Nile encephalitis
Western equine encephalitis
Westmark’s sign
Wheeze
causes of
Whipple’s disease
Whipple’s triad
Whipworm infection
White blood cell
disorders of
White cell disorders
White coat hypertension
White dermographism
Whooping cough
complications of
diagnosis of
etiology of
management of

Wickham’s striae
Widal test
Wide pulse pressure
Widened pulse pressure
Wilkins score
Williams syndrome
Willis-Ekbom disease
Wilms tumor
Wilson’s disease
etiology of
investigations of
management of
Wimberger ring sign
Wine glass appearance
Winter bronchitis
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome
Wolf-Chaikoff effect
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome
Wolfram’s syndrome
Wood’s light examination
Woodworker’s lung
Woolsorter’s disease
Work-exacerbated asthma
Worm infestation
Woronoff’s sign
Wound
botulism
care of
surgical debridement of
treatment of
Wyburn-Mason syndrome
X
Xanthelasmas
around eyes
Xanthochromia
Xanthogranulomatous pyelonephritis
Xanthomas
Xeroderma pigmentosum
Xerophthalmia
Xerosis
Xerostomia

Ximelagatran
Y
Y wave
Yamaguchi’s criteria
Yellow nails syndrome
Yersinia
Young’s stroke
Young’s syndrome
Z
Z deformity
Zanamivir
Zidovudine
induced nail pigmentation
monotherapy
Ziehl-Neelsen stain
Zika virus
Zinc acetate
Ziprasidone
Zoledronate
Zoledronic acid
Zollinger-Ellison syndrome
etiology of
treatment of
Zolmitriptan
Zolpidem
Zona fasciculata
Zona glomerulosa
Zona reticularis
Zonisamide
Zopiclone
Zygomycosis
Zygote

